CHRONICLE
ROBERT ALAN BERNSTEIN, 67, is a retired television publicist who never gave up the dream of his youth: to write musical shows.
So on Monday, his children, DOUGLAS, TRACY and JED BERNSTEIN, took over the Roundabout Theater on Broadway, gathered together their father's friends from the theater and some of their own, and put on a show called "Bernstein on Broadway."


William Tapley Bennett Jr., 77, Envoy to Dominican Republic
William Tapley Bennett Jr., a career diplomat who served as Ambassador to the Dominican Republic during that country's 1965 civil war, and who recommended that President Johnson intervene with United States troops, died on Tuesday in Washington after a long illness.
He was 77.
Mr.
Bennett's two-year assignment as Ambassador to the Dominican Republic, in 1964 and 1965, was the stormiest during a career with the Foreign Service that spanned more than 40 years.
In May 1965, when rebel forces in Santo Domingo tried to overthrow the Government of David Reid Cabral, Mr.
Bennett advised President Johnson and members of Congress that the revolt was led by Communists.


G.D.P. Growth Is Raised To 3.9% for 3d Quarter
The economy grew faster during the summer than had been previously estimated, pointing to a strong holiday shopping season, fresh Government figures showed today.
Total output of goods and services expanded at a 3.9 percent annual pace in the third quarter as business investment boomed in the face of progressively higher interest rates.
A month ago, the rise in gross domestic product for the July-September period was put at 3.4 percent.


Garden Q.&amp;A.
Surviving Winter Storage
Q.
Last autumn I carefully uprooted my cold-sensitive plants (like dahlias) for winter storage, but they all died.
How can I prevent that fate this year? -- Nancy L. Feldman, Washington


Salinas Sunset: Triumphs, Setbacks
Barely a day before he is to resign his presidency, Carlos Salinas de Gortari was striking his usual poses on the television news: In one state, he was cutting ribbon on a new bridge; in another, a new hospital; in a third, a new subway line.
"He is working as though it were his first day!" the pro-Government anchor marveled for anyone who might have missed the message.


Economic Scene; A venerable peanut subsidy may be a target of Republicans.
THE new Republicans are on the prowl for spending cuts.
And since some of the juiciest targets -- notably Social Security -- have been ruled off limits, they are making no secret of their wish to save billions on farm subsidies.
Once that political door is opened, though, it is likely that many farm programs will be challenged, including many that offend free marketers more than they drain the Treasury.
And one of them, the half-century-old peanut program, could prove vulnerable once Congress takes aim at higher profile subsidies.


On the Army-Navy Weekend, Don't Forget Air Force
While Army will play Navy for the 95th time on Saturday in Philadelphia in an event that will be televised more by habit than by demand, Air Force will face Hawaii in Honolulu looking for its sixth victory this season in the competitive Western Athletic Conference.
The contrast in these two games -- 4,900 miles apart -- underscores the disparity of fortunes among these three service-academy football programs.
Army and Navy have identical records -- 3 victories, 7 defeats -- against carefully selected opponents, and the outcome is going to have meaning only within the Army and Navy families.
The last time both had winning teams in this game was 1963, when Roger Staubach was the Navy quarterback and the Midshipmen went on to play Texas in the Cotton Bowl.


Postmaster Admits the Theft Of $870,000 From Service
The postmaster of Montvale, N.J., a small borough in Bergen County, admitted in Federal Court today that he had stolen $870,000 from the Postal Service over the last five years.
The postmaster, Edward Hascup, pleaded guilty to one count of embezzlement after a routine audit in July revealed that on more than 200 occasions, he had skimmed money from his post office's sales, the United States Attorney in Newark, Faith S. Hochberg, said.
She said it was the largest embezzlement in New Jersey in the history of the Postal Service.


Violence at Home Drives Mexicans Northward
To the Editor:
I spent America's Election Day in Chiapas, the southernmost Mexican state, as part of a delegation sent by Global Exchange, a San Francisco-based human rights organization.
While California's voters and Gov.
Pete Wilson have spent a great deal of time considering the audacity of those who cross our borders illegally, I wonder how much they've pondered what makes these people leave everyone and everything behind?


From Apple's Chairman, Potshots at the PC Vision
Whoa, there, wide-eyed computer industry executives.
Michael H. Spindler, Apple Computer's chairman, has some words of caution: You have too much vision.


Crist Named To Racing Post
In the latest in a series of sweeping changes at the New York Racing Association, Steven Crist was named yesterday to the newly created post of director of communications and development.
A longtime horse racing fan, writer and commentator, the 38-year-old Crist was a reporter and columnist for The New York Times from 1981 to 1990 and the founding editor-in-chief of the now-defunct The Racing Times from 1990-92.
He was appointed in 1992 to a nine-member bipartisan State Advisory Commission on Racing in the 21st Century, which proposed purse increases, tax reductions and breakage reforms that have since become law.
Crist has also written two books on the sport.


Gingrich's Politics Didn't Follow Fashion
To the Editor:
"Gingrich's Life: The Complications and Ideals" (front page, Nov. 24) leaves the impression that early in his political career Newt Gingrich abruptly shifted his ideological posture from "liberal" to "conservative" because it became fashionable to do so.
In fact, Mr.
Gingrich is a classic neoconservative whose entry point into conservatism was via the "Kemp wing." It should be recalled that Ronald Reagan himself was a trade-union liberal Democrat who switched parties as the Democratic party moved leftward.


Bosnian Serbs Set Free 43 U.N. Troops Held Hostage
Bosnian Serb fighters today released 43 British soldiers of about 450 United Nations peacekeeping troops taken hostage over the last 10 days.
The peacekeeping soldiers were seized in an attempt to deter United Nations commanders from ordering NATO air strikes against Serbian forces surrounding Bihac, one of the United Nations' so-called "safe areas" that has been under siege by Serbs in northwest Bosnia.


Analog Devices Inc.(ADI,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 29


In Photo Class, Even a Real Dog Can Be a Supermodel


Blackman Signs With Athens for $300,000
ROLANDO BLACKMAN, the veteran National Basketball Association player, joined Greece's AEK Athens yesterday after signing a one-year contract worth $300,000, club officials said.


Schools Chief Seizes District In Brooklyn
The New York City Schools Chancellor yesterday took over the management of a Brooklyn school district, and the education of its 28,000 schoolchildren, because its local leadership was paralyzed by political infighting and mismanagement.
The board of the district, No. 17, ceded control to Chancellor Ramon C. Cortines without a fight, the first time this has happened since the system was decentralized 25 years ago.
Several of the nine board members said they welcomed the Chancellor's action.


John Walker, Agricultural Wizard, Dies at 101
John Charles Walker, an agricultural scientist whose pioneering research in disease resistance in plants had a strong impact on world agriculture, died on Friday in Boswell Memorial Hospital in Sun City, Ariz.
Dr.
Walker was 101 and lived in Sun City.
The cause was pneumonia, said David Dixon, a nephew.


Honors Given to the Tall and Short of It
KAREEM ABDUL-JABBAR, the former basketball star, and jockey JULIE KRONE were among those honored last night in Manhattan by the American Sportscasters Association.
Abdul-Jabbar, the leading scorer in N.B.A. history, received the Sports Legend Award in tribute to the 7-foot-2-inch center's 20-year pro career.
Krone won the association's first Comeback Award.
The 4-foot-10-inch jockey returned to racing after a spill in 1993 at Saratoga.


Graphic Industries(GRPH,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


It's Not Quite a Reunion, However . . .


Dresser Industries(DI,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


La Gran Scena Adds a Show
La Gran Scena Opera Company, the all-male opera troupe, has added a show to its run at the Kaye Playhouse.
It will give three performances this weekend, on Friday, Saturday and Sunday at 8 P.M.
The playhouse is at Hunter College, 68th Street between Lexington and Park Avenues.
Tickets are $20 and $25.
Information: (212) 772-4448.


INSIDE
Price of Stamp Rising 3¦
The cost of mailing a letter will rise to 32 cents in January under rates approved by the Postal Rate Commission.
Postage for a post card will rise to 20 cents.
Page B16.
Fighting the Holiday Ad Blitz
Children with $17 billion of their own money to spend are an advertiser's dream but a parent's nightmare.
Parent &amp; Child, page C1.
Push to Raise Speed Limit
Leaders of the New York State Legislature said they would fight next year to increase speed limits along the Thruway by 10 miles an hour, to 65.
Page B1.


John Fearnley, 80, Director of Musicals
John Fearnley, a stage manager and director closely identified with the work of Richard Rodgers and Oscar Hammerstein 2d, died on Tuesday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 80.


Quayle's Blood Clots Are Attributed to His Sitting on Long Flights
The blood clots that lodged in former Vice President Dan Quayle's right lung probably resulted from immobility during long airplane flights, his doctors said yesterday.
The condition of Mr.
Quayle, 47, who is in an intensive care unit in the Indiana University Medical Center in Indianapolis, improved and his vital signs returned to normal.
Mr.
Quayle was reported to be eating a normal diet and was able to get out of bed and walk around his room without assistance for the first time since he was admitted to the hospital late Monday afternoon.
He will begin taking warfarin, an anticoagulant drug that he is expected to take for several months after he leaves the hospital.


Ex-Officer From 30th Precinct Is Arrested
A former New York City police officer who was assigned to the corruption-plagued 30th Precinct in Harlem was arrested yesterday on charges of assault and conspiracy to violate civil rights.
According to court papers, the former officer, Peter Allgor, 30, repeatedly beat a handcuffed man with a flashlight while the man was in custody in the back seat of a police car on Oct. 14, 1992.
Several fellow officers have also accused Mr.
Allgor of illegally searching apartments and stealing cash.


Ralph Stein, 85; Was a Cartoonist
Ralph Stein, a writer, cartoonist and illustrator whose works appeared in dozens of publications, died on Sunday at the Saybrook Convalescent Hospital in Old Saybrook, Conn.
He was 85 and lived in Westbrook, Conn.
He died after a long illness, said his wife, Muriel.


President Of Albania Is Rebuffed On Charter
The voters in what was once the most rigidly Communist country of Europe have dealt a sharp rebuff to their President, to whom they handed a landslide victory in their first democratic elections in 1992.
As a result, Albanians and diplomats fear that the infant democracy has lapsed into a deadlock that puts at risk the political and economic gains achieved since Communism began to crumble in 1991 in Europe's poorest country.


No Headline
"I used to be open about my feelings. Now, everything is just stuck in. There is so much anger and frustration inside I don't know how to take it out. I won't trust anyone, and, I don't know, I'm kind of afraid of everything." -- WILFREDO FELICIANO, who was 14 when he was stabbed outside a Brooklyn housing project.  [ B14:2. ]


After Day as Defendant, Rapper Becomes Victim He Is Shot in Robbery Entering Studio
Tupac Shakur was more than an hour late when he barreled through the lobby of 723 Seventh Avenue, an office building in midtown Manhattan.
Mr.
Shakur, a 23-year-old rap performer, had spent the day in Manhattan Criminal Court, where he has been on trial facing charges of sexual assault and weapons violations.
He wanted to spend the night working in a recording studio upstairs.


10 Immigrant Journalists Slain in U.S. Since '81, Report Says
Ten immigrant journalists have been killed in the United States because of their reporting since 1981 but only two of the cases have been solved, a committee of American journalists said in a report yesterday.
The Committee to Protect Journalists, a nonprofit organization that gets much of its money from large United States news organizations, labeled the killings assassinations and said they were "specifically intended to smother fact finding and silence dissent."


Ending Bosnia's Endgame
I never imagined I would find myself defending Serbian conquests.
Yet the choices the United States and NATO have made throughout the Bosnian conflict have been so bad that there are no good choices left.
It is better to end the carnage, even on unfair terms, than to have it continue for what could be a decade or more.
The Europeans are right.
The West should make the Bosnian Government settle against its wishes.
After the humiliation surrounding the Muslim defeat in the struggle for Bihac, the United Nations is deadly serious about withdrawing its peacekeeping troops, perhaps even this winter, unless the warring parties agree to a cease-fire across Bosnia and a new round of talks aimed at ending the war.
The risks of withdrawal would be great, since NATO forces -- presumably including American ground troops -- would have to provide escort to retreating U.N. personnel.


Man Dies and 21 Are Hurt in Panic as Smoke Sweeps L.I. Building
A man leapt to his death as mothers dropped their children out of windows and others fled in panic this morning when an incinerator fire sent smoke through the hallways of a six-story apartment building.
A 2-year-old suffered a critical head wound in a fall and 20 other people were injured as they tried to escape from the smoke, according to fire officials, who attributed the death and most of the injuries to panic, rather than the fire itself.


Push in Albany To Increase Speed Limit To 65 M.P.H.
Key members of the State Senate and Assembly said today that they would fight next year to increase speed limits along the New York State Thruway to 65 miles per hour.
Senator Joseph L. Bruno, a Republican from Rensselaer County who is expected to be elected Senate majority leader in January, said he wants the change because, "when you slow people down unnecessarily, that is money." He added, "Nobody obeys the speed limit anyway."


College Hockey Report
Maine
Those who regard college hockey as an amateur sport can feel good about Chris Imes.
After a long season with the United States Olympic team, the senior defenseman from Birchdale, Minn., put off a pro career to return to Maine for one final college campaign, and he is making it a good one.


AT HOME WITH: Anne Lamott; Laughter, Death, Lollipops
ACTUALLY I'm borderline," Anne Lamott says. She is talking to a total stranger, but she rushes on, speaking breathlessly into the telephone. "I just got back from Chicago, my mother's in the hospital with a kidney infection and she's sort of the Rainman anyway.
But I'm just so glad to be home, you know?"
A minute with Anne Lamott is like a week with anyone else.
On the telephone, Ms.
Lamott, a writer who has perfected the art of saying the unsayable, is even more intense than she is in print.
Just giving directions offers an opportunity for self-expression: "Go across the Golden Gate Bridge. When you get off the freeway, take all left turns. Because this is a left-wing household." What can she possibly be like in person?


Corrections
An article on Nov. 20 about the debate over business improvement districts misstated the stance of the Council of New York Cooperatives on a proposal for a business improvement district on the Upper East Side of Manhattan.
The council has taken no position; it has not endorsed the plan.


Renovations at 'Good Morning America'
AMERICANS are used to watching renovations on "This Old House." Now, they can see similar work being done on "Good Morning America." Call it "This Old Set."
Week by week, the set of the ABC-TV program is evolving into what is supposed to be a warm and cozy home.
For the last eight years, "Good Morning America" has had the same high-tech look -- glass-brick walls, gray laminate desk and slippery leather sofas -- and it has daily become more tired looking.
Bonsais try to coexist with sprawling ficuses.
Charles Gibson, one of the hosts, has called it "five living rooms in search of a house."


House Panel Says C.I.A. Failed to Disclose Lapses in Mole Case
The Central Intelligence Agency waited eight years to tell Congress that its best secret agents and biggest operations in the Soviet Union were destroyed in the mid-1980's, despite a law requiring the agency to disclose all significant intelligence failures, the House committee overseeing the C.I.A. said today in a report on the Aldrich Ames spy case.
Mr.
Ames, a career C.I.A. official, was the cause of the destruction.
He sold information about at least 10 Soviet agents and dozens of secret operations to Soviet intelligence officials in 1985.
The agents died or disappeared, and the operations were sabotaged.


Vice Chairman For BellSouth
The BellSouth Corporation elevated F. Duane Ackerman, president of its telephone company, to the post of vice chairman yesterday, a move that grooms him as a likely candidate to succeed John L. Clendenin as chairman and chief executive.
Meanwhile, Mr.
Clendenin turned aside speculation that he would soon retire by retaining all his current job titles.
Mr.
Clendenin, who is 60 years old, has been in charge of BellSouth since the company was formed in 1984 in the breakup of the Bell System.


Illustrated for Children: Small Yield, Vintage Year
There were fewer children's picture books to choose from this year than other years, which, one most fervently hopes, reflects some phase of a business cycle rather than the ascendancy of the video culture.
On the other hand, those picture books that were available were of higher quality than usual.
The following works, arranged roughly in order of increasing sophistication, seemed to be the best of a good lot.
THE BEAR, by Raymond Briggs. (Random House. $20.) The artist who produced "The Snowman" and "Father Christmas," among other favorites, is back with an oversize book about a huge and furry polar bear who climbs in the window of a young girl's room and proceeds to make a lovable pest of himself.
The girl's parents are convinced that she is entertaining an imaginary creature, but as Mr.
Briggs makes graphically clear, the bear is very, very real.


F.A.A. Reorganizes With Eye Toward Privatizing Air Control
The Federal Aviation Administration yesterday announced a reorganization intended in part to make it easier to turn over the agency's air traffic control functions to a semiprivate corporation, an aim of the Clinton Administration.
David R. Hinson, the F.A.A.
Administrator, described the reorganization as an effort to streamline the agency by consolidating air traffic control into a single division with the research and purchasing section that serves air traffic operations.


Mexico's President-to-Be Names Free-Market Cabinet
On the eve of his inauguration, President-elect Ernesto Zedillo Ponce de Leon today named some of the prime movers of the outgoing administration to significant posts in his Cabinet, sending a signal of stability and continued Mexican Government commitment to a market economy.
Financial analysts reacted positively to the announcements, but investors seemed to have anticipated the moves over the last few days and decided to take some profits today.
American depository receipts of Telefonos de Mexico, this country's benchmark stock, fell $1.375, to close at $52.75 on the New York Stock Exchange.


Essay; Strategic Dilemma
The first rule of punditry is to present a clear point of view.
My formula: Here's what's wrong; here's who's messing up; here's what we should do.
No on-the-other-handwringing.
Let others take an attitude; I offer certitude.
That comes naturally because I have worked out a mindset.
The fervent furtherance of freedom, international and personal, is its bedrock.
That's why I want the U.S. to be interventionist for human rights abroad and anti-buttinsky at home.


Fleetwood Enterprises Inc.(FLE,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 30


A Show Built on the Notion That Art Is Where You Find It
FRANK MARESCA, a partner in a SoHo gallery that specializes in American self-taught and outsider artists, said recently that he wished he had a Ouija board.
That's so he could conjure up Marcel Duchamp, the Dada artist known for his surprising juxtapositions of objects.
But even Duchamp might have been caught off guard by Mr.
Maresca's collection of 22 found -- and confounding -- objects in "Chance," a show that opens today at the Ricco/ Maresca Gallery, at 152 Wooster Street, near Houston Street.
The show continues through Jan. 19.


More Men in Prime of Life Spend Less Time Working
By all accounts, Americans are more overworked than ever.
Unemployment has dipped to less than 6 percent, overtime is at a record high and many workers are holding down more than one job.
So why are so many men -- healthy men in the prime of life -- working less than ever before?
Even as the powerful American job machine has churned out tens of millions of new jobs in the last two decades, a raft of recent studies disclose that men past college age and well before the usual retirement age of the early to mid-60's are working much less than men did 10 or 20 years ago.
A rising proportion are neither working nor looking for work.


Fluor Corp.(FLR,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


New World Concert
The Boston Camerata, an early-music ensemble of singers and instrumentalists, is to present holiday music of the Western Hemisphere in a program called "A New World Christmas," on Dec. 19 at 8 P.M. at Gould Hall, 55 East 59th Street, Manhattan.
Tickets are $25.
Information: (212) 355-6160.


Ella Keats Whiting, English Professor, 98
Ella Keats Whiting, an administrator and English literature professor at Wellesley College for 33 years and a great-niece of John Keats, died on Thursday at her home in the Carleton Village retirement community in Bedford, Mass.
She was 98 and died of natural causes, a spokeswoman for Wellesley said.


This Time, Donald Boycotts Any Punches
LARRY DONALD figured RIDDICK BOWE had already landed his best shot.
He wasn't about to give him another chance.
So Donald boycotted the final pre-fight news conference yesterday at Las Vegas, Nev., two days after being hit twice by Bowe at a similar gathering in Los Angeles.
"It's very hard to be in the room with a former world heavyweight champion when he pulls a stunt like that," Donald said.


Cowboys Sign Blair Thomas, an Ex-Jet
The Dallas Cowboys signed a free-agent running back, BLAIR THOMAS, and defensive back DARREN STUDSTILL yesterday and cut a special teams player, JOE FISHBACK.
Thomas was cut by the New England Patriots.
The Cowboys have not been pleased with LINCOLN COLEMAN as a backup to EMMITT SMITH.


For a Rapper, Life and Art Converge in Violence
Over the last three years, Tupac Shakur has ridden the crest of rap music, becoming one of its biggest stars with a handful of albums and movies that have often portrayed and even glorified the violence that is so much a part of life in urban America.
But as his popularity grew, his life began to mirror the swaggering bravado and violence that is so much a part of his art, and it became more and more difficult to distinguish between the 23-year-old performer and the troubled characters that he rapped about and portrayed in films.


Flying Is Still Safer
To the Editor:
John M. Hoffmann (letter, Nov. 24) concludes that driving is safer than flying.
His premise, that the important factor is fatality rate per hour spent traveling, is false.


W. E. Arnow, Judge in Antiwar Trial, Dies at 83
Judge Winston Eugene Arnow, who shared the national limelight when he presided over the monthlong trial of the antiwar Gainesville Eight, died on Monday at West Florida Hospital in Pensacola.
He was 83.
Judge Arnow, a resident of Pensacola, died after a long illness, his family said.


Will Cuomo Do Pataki A Watershed Favor?
NEW YORK CITY officials have been worrying for months about the whoppingly expensive question of whether Governor-elect George E. Pataki will protect New York City's endangered water supply, even at the expense of his upstate constituents.
Why are they asking him?
Mario M. Cuomo is still Governor.
He could take steps to protect New York City's reservoirs now, before he leaves office, and make both Mr.
Pataki and Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani happy in the process: no mean feat.


Marino Files for Pension, But Does He Mean It?
Ralph J. Marino, the deposed majority leader of the State Senate, filed a letter today indicating that he would retire from the Senate at the end of the year.
Then he rescinded the letter.
And then he said he had not made up his mind.
Mr.
Marino filed forms with the New York State retirement system today notifying the office of his intent to retire on Dec. 31, according to Steven A. Greenberg, a spokesman for the State Comptroller's office, which oversees the state pension fund.


Health Care's an Issue For Young People Too
To the Editor:
What a difference two years make.
In 1992 I worked for the United States Senate.
Parking and plants for the office from the United States Botanical Gardens were perks I took for granted.
But when I left, I realized the biggest perk I was leaving behind: health care coverage.


Prodigy Testing Link to World Wide Web
Beginning today the Prodigy Services Company will allow some of its two million on-line information subscribers to connect to the popular Internet services known as the World Wide Web.
If the test link is successful, "it will be the first true merging of the Web with a major on-line information service," said Gene DeRose, president of Jupiter Communications in New York.


Corrections
A picture caption on Tuesday about a court hearing on the disputed election results in the Second Congressional District in Connecticut reversed the identification of lawyers for the two candidates in some editions.
Robert D. Tobin, the lawyer for Sam Gejdenson, was on the left; Ralph G. Elliot, the lawyer for Edward W. Munster, was on the right.


Senate Seems Set to Approve Trade Accord
The Clinton Administration today received commitments from several key Senators to support the overhaul of a 124-nation free trade pact, and both Democratic and Republican leaders said they were now certain the Senate would pass the accord in a vote scheduled for Thursday night.
Working to build on their victory on Tuesday in the House of Representatives, President Clinton, Vice President Al Gore and several members of the Administration spent all day cajoling the dozen or so senators still undecided.


A Challenge to Microsoft in Interactive TV
Scientific-Atlanta Inc. said today that it had formed a subsidiary, Power TV, that would take on the Microsoft Corporation in developing the operating system software for interactive television.
The Oracle Corporation and Sybase Inc., both data base software companies with multimedia projects under development, and Scala Inc., a producer of tools for the creation of multimedia titles, said they had begun to create versions of their programs to run with the Power TV operating system.
That system will be used in cable television, telephone and satellite systems to process the colors, video, audio and data that will be essential elements of future multimedia applications.


Maine Man Has a Head for Predicting Major Snowfalls
Duke Dulac, a barbershop owner in Augusta, Me., hasn't missed calling a Presidential or Maine gubernatorial election in 20 years.
So naturally, people tend to pester him about other things, too.
Take skiers.
They want to know what kind of a snow year it's going to be.
"A fella just asked me that an hour ago," said the 60-year-old Dulac during a recent telephone interview.
"So I'll tell you. The winter's sure started out soft, so that means it's going to end up tough."


CHRONICLE
LANI GUINIER, whose nomination for the position of Assistant Attorney General for civil rights was withdrawn by President Clinton a year and a half ago because of opposition provoked by her scholarly writings, announced a new undertaking on Tuesday.
She is founding a nonprofit organization called Commonplace, which she intends to "transform public discourse about social issues like race and gender, to create a learning environment where we can learn to talk across our differences in less adversarial fashion."
Ms.
Guinier, who is a professor at the University of Pennsylvania Law School, discussed her plans for Commonplace at a luncheon at the National Press Club in Washington.


An Israeli Mother Mourns, but Keeps the Faith
The letters keep coming -- tens of thousands of them by now, Esther Waxman says -- so many that she had to hire a private company to sort them.
In Israel, the correspondents include her 12th-grade students at Hebrew University High School in Jerusalem, where she teaches English.


For the Toy King, New Challengers
At least 21 cents of every dollar spent on toys this holiday season will end up in the coffers of Toys "R" Us -- and many analysts suspect that the reigning titan of Toyland is really raking in more than that.
But a swarm of potential challengers are nipping at the toy industry's 800-pound gorilla.
There's Noodle Kidoodle, Zany Brainy, Learningsmith and Baby Superstore, to mention a handful of nascent retail chains trying to nibble on Toys "R" Us's slice of the toy market.


A Bruised-Up Hampton Now Gives 1,000 a Shot
Rodney Hampton didn't know it at the time, but at some point in the game last week against the Washington Redskins, a very important piece of protective gear had failed him.
The padding that shielded his kidneys had come unzipped.
His left kidney, which had been smashed earlier in the season on a crushing hit, was again exposed.
The first hit came against the Arizona Cardinals in September, and it led to Hampton's being hospitalized and to his getting the gear to begin with.
This time, it was Redskins cornerback Tom Carter who hit him with about two minutes left in the game.
The blow definitely wasn't as hard as the first one, but it left Hampton in considerable pain.


Contemporary Asian Works by Four Choreographers
The Second Annual Asian Contemporary Dance Festival, presented at the La Mama Annex Theater, got off to a mostly dismal start on Tuesday night with work by four choreographers who took few imaginative risks.
Yung Yung Tsuai explored the "songs" behind the dance and dancers in "Our Songs," a trio set to music by Peter Gingerich in which three veteran performers gently rebelled against their art.
The performers were Eleanor Elizabeth Bobb, a reluctant ballerina; Miss Tsuai, an upstart Asian classicist, and Debra Balduchi, a singing jazz dancer.


Berlin Journal; O, Niederkirchnerstrasse, Be Some Other Name
The City Council here meets in a handsome 19th-century building but cannot decide what to call the street outside.
Some council members, including former Communists from eastern Berlin, want to retain the street's current name, Niederkirchnerstrasse, which honors a Communist resistance organizer who was executed by the Nazis in 1944.
Conservatives prefer the former name, Prinz-Albrecht-Strasse, but there is much opposition because during the Nazi era the most feared address in Germany was Prinz-Albrecht-Strasse 8, the Gestapo headquarters.


On World AIDS Day, a challenge of delivering a balanced message.
WORLD AIDS DAY may be a "Day Without Art," as museums and galleries sponsor events meant to increase public awareness of the disease, but it is certainly a day with ads.
And more advertising intended to spur the fight against AIDS is on tap for today, the seventh observance of World AIDS Day.
The American Foundation for AIDS Research, known as Amfar, will introduce the largest campaign since its founding in 1985, the first by its new pro bono agency, Angotti, Thomas, Hedge in New York.
And the Gay Men's Health Crisis, the AIDS service organization, is teaming up with the Body Shop for a promotion carrying the theme "On Dec. 1, even a token contribution can help people with AIDS." They will collect subway tokens to help those with AIDS and H.I.V., the virus that causes AIDS, travel to care operations around New York City.


Journal; Jewish Yuletide
"Look at it this way," my mother used to say.
"You get presents eight times, and they get them only once." But even she wasn't quite persuaded.
One of the rare old home movies I have of my parents during the few years they were married to each other depicts a Kodak-perfect 1950's Christmas morning -- complete with glittering tree, red-and-green stockings and that most Protestant of gifts, a Lionel train.
Hanukkah is a tough sell in America.
Though we did light the candles eight nights each year -- pyromania being another selling point to children in my family -- the Jews' Festival of Lights always seemed low-wattage next to the tree at Rockefeller Center, even as seen in black-and-white via the "Today" show.


Nets' Beard in a Quandary Over an Injury to Edwards
Butch Beard grudgingly conceded today that it will be difficult for Kevin Edwards to return from his partly torn left Achilles' tendon in three weeks.
He also admitted that he has considered the possibility that the Nets' starting shooting guard could miss the entire season.
No wonder Beard looked weary.
As Beard leaned against a wall outside New Jersey's locker room at Byrne Meadowlands Arena today, he discussed the missed opportunities of the previous evening when the Nets botched a 16-point lead in the fourth quarter and lost to the Lakers, 129-120, in double overtime.
Just when the discussion seemed as if it could not grow more depressing, the topic switched to Edwards.


Dole, in London, Urges Air Strikes Against the Serbs
Suddenly thrust into the limelight as a vigorous critic of European and British policy on Bosnia and Herzegovina, Senator Bob Dole met today with Prime Minister John Major and other officials and promptly laid down a message they did not want to hear: He called once again for powerful air strikes against Bosnian Serb positions and a lifting of the arms embargo for the Muslim-dominated Government.
Both stands are directly contrary to British views, United Nations policy and the latest Clinton Administration thinking.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.50
8.50
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
4.75
4.75
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
5.63
5.54
3.07
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.55
5.51
3.10
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.95
5.91
3.25
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.89
7.93
5.76
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
8.00
8.03
6.25
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.92
8.95
7.31
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
7.16
7.27
6.40
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Lawyers Rest Case on Cross-District Desegregation in Hartford
Civil rights lawyers today concluded arguments in a five-year-old lawsuit aimed at improving the education of poor minority children in Hartford's racially isolated schools by asking a Superior Court judge to order a school-integration plan combining the city with 21 suburban districts.
But arguments in the historic case ended with the judge, Harry Hammer, still seeking assurances that courts have the authority to act when segregation is de facto -- the result of housing patterns and population shifts -- rather than intentional, and when the state is already trying to improve conditions in the schools.


Sports of The Times; Mr. Cup Pleads His Case
"MR. BETTMAN, Mr. Goodenow, thank you for inviting me to join today's bargaining session."
"Your name again?"


Arthur Krim Memorial
A memorial tribute to Arthur B. Krim, an entertainment lawyer who was a former chairman of Orion Pictures and United Artists, is to be held on Tuesday at 11 A.M. at Alice Tully Hall.
Among those scheduled to speak are Lynda Johnson Robb; the actor Ossie Davis; John Kluge, the chairman of Metromedia; the producer David Picker, and Michael Fuchs, the chairman of HBO.
Joanne Woodward is to be the host.
The doors will open to the public at 10:30 A.M., but a call to (212) 988-7655, between 10 A.M. and 7 P.M. today, tomorrow or Monday is required to guarantee admission.
Mr.
Krim died in September at the age of 84.


World News Briefs; Visa Process Refined, Envoy to Russia Says
Responding to Russian complaints of rude treatment by consular officers at the American Embassy here, Ambassador Thomas R. Pickering said today that he had taken steps to improve the visa application process.
Mr.
Pickering said he had brought in specialists to monitor the "comportment and deportment" of officers as they conducted interviews, as well as Russian-language experts to study their "use of language."


Study Offers Patients Hope On Leukemia
A new technique offers a tantalizing hope of greatly increasing the number of leukemia patients who can have potentially life-saving bone marrow transplants.
In a paper published today in the journal Blood, researchers in Israel and Italy report that it might be possible to use bone marrow donors who would ordinarily be considered incompatible with leukemia patients by treating the marrow in a particular way before it is transplanted.


New Life for Campaign Reform?
President Clinton is looking toward one of his original promises -- to clean up politics -- as one way to revive his staggering Presidency.
He ought to find allies for Congressional reform among the new Republican majority, though that is far from certain right now.
Representative Newt Gingrich, who built his political career railing against Congressional "corruption" when Democrats were running the show, has shown uncharacteristic reserve on the major ethics issue he will face as the next House Speaker: ending the Congressional addiction to special-interest money.


METRO DIGEST
RAPPER'S LIFE IMITATES HIS VIOLENT ART Tupac Shakur has ridden the crest of rap music, becoming one of its biggest stars.
But as his popularity grew, his life began to mirror the swaggering bravado and violence that is so much a part of his art.
Last November he was accused of sodomizing and sexually abusing a woman in a Manhattan hotel.
Hours after a jury ended its first day of deliberation, Mr.
Shakur was shot in midtown Manhattan.
A1.
A law-enforcement official said Mr.
Shakur believes he walked into a setup, but detectives said the motive appeared to be robbery.
B3.


More of a Good Thing on Coney Island


Achille Lauro Burns Off Coast of Somalia
The Achille Lauro, remembered as the cruise-liner hijacked in 1985 by Palestinian terrorists who killed a Jewish passenger from New York and pushed him overboard in his wheelchair, ended its ill-starred nautical history in flames off the coast of Somalia.


Al Levitt Is Dead; Jazz Drummer, 62
The jazz drummer Al Levitt, who performed with Lee Konitz, Chet Baker, Lionel Hampton, Stan Getz and other musicians, died on Monday in Paris.
He was 62.
The cause was a cerebral hemorrhage, said a friend.


Whitewater Counsel Nears Decision on Indictments
Nearly three months into his job, the independent counsel Kenneth W. Starr is approaching his first critical decisions, including whether to seek an indictment of Webster L. Hubbell, a former senior Justice Department official and a close friend of the Clintons, people involved in the case said today.
Mr.
Starr is also considering whether to offer Mr.
Hubbell a plea bargain in exchange for his cooperation in the expanding investigation, they said.


The Pop Life
Jellybean Benitez's Venture
Traditionally, an entrepreneur who decides to start a new record label will look to one of the major labels for support.
But Jellybean Benitez, best known for his production work with Madonna, Sting, Whitney Houston and such Latin artists as Ruben Blades and Marc Anthony, decided to take his new Latin music record label elsewhere.
He went to Wall Street, and after some 18 months of negotiating and planning, he has found a backer: Wasserstein Perella, a leading international investment bank.
In addition to forming an independent record label that will release pop music by bilingual Latin artists, Mr.
Benitez and Wasserstein Perella have formed JB Music Publishing to acquire the rights to music by new and old artists in all genres.
Besides the fact that few record labels have ever found a sponsor on Wall Street, this deal, which industry sources say is in the $15 million range, is unusual for another reason.
It shows just how much faith big business has in the exploding Latin music market.
Sales of Latin music have nearly doubled since 1990.
The pop audience for Gloria Estefan and Jon Secada continues to grow, and the new album by the Mexican singer Luis Miguel entered the pop album charts at No. 29 in August, the best debut ever for a Spanish-language album.
And there's still room for sales to grow.
Though 10 percent of this country's population is Hispanic, Latin music makes up only 2 percent of domestic record sales.


First Lady Assails Orphanage Plan
In her most direct commentary on the new Republican leadership in Congress, Hillary Rodham Clinton today dismissed as "absurd" the suggestion by the presumptive Speaker of the House, Newt Gingrich, that building orphanages could reduce welfare rolls.
In a speech to the New York Women's Agenda, a nonpartisan coalition of women's groups in New York City, the First Lady did not mention Mr.
Gingrich by name.


Donors Replace Toys Stolen From Salvation Army
In a journey from despair to joy, the Salvation Army found itself inundated yesterday by toys, money and pledges of toys after burglars broke into its South Bronx headquarters and made off with 200 to 300 toys that were to be distributed to needy children this month.
"There's been a great outpouring of support from everybody -- the whole city, businesses and individuals -- and it's great," said Lieut.
Robert Santos, a commander of the Salvation Army's social services department.
"This means a lot of kids are going to have a much more wonderful Christmas."


Stocks Lower in Japan
Japanese stocks traded lower here today.
At the close, the Nikkei index of 225 issues stood at 19,013.60, down 62.02 points, or 0.33 percent.
On Wednesday, the Nikkei gained 149.13 points.


Mets Obtain Brewers' Henry
In their third trade in three days, the Mets acquired the right-handed relief pitcher Doug Henry from the Milwaukee Brewers yesterday for two players to be named.
Henry, who will be 31 years old next week, was 2-3 with a 4.60 earned run average and no saves in 31 innings over 25 games for the Brewers last season after starting the year on the disabled list with tendinitis in his right shoulder.
His most productive year in the majors came in 1992, when he saved 29 games for the Brewers.


Accounts
*
Kenny Rogers Roasters, Fort Lauderdale, Fla., to the Morrison Agency, Atlanta, to handle the rotisserie-chicken chain's account, previously at Tinsley Advertising, Miami.
Though billings were not disclosed, Advertising Age estimated them at $6 million.


Grand Ayatollah Ali Araki, Senior Shiite Cleric, Is Dead
Grand Ayatollah Ali Araki, who was considered to be the world's most eminent Shiite Muslim cleric, died Tuesday in Teheran, plunging the religious and political establishment into a debate over the choice of a successor.
The holder of his title of supreme guide and Marjaa Taqlid, which means source of emulation, is in a position to challenge the Iranian Government on religious as well as policy matters.


Rivers Has Returned Amid a Crowded Scene
The Knicks have 15 players under contract, but that situation is not expected to last long.
Sometime before late December, when Doug Christie hopes to be activated after recovering from ankle surgery, the Knicks are very likely to unload two players, either through a trade or by releasing one or two.
The Knicks have been exploring a trade for several weeks, but the no-strike, no-lockout agreement that prohibits current contracts from being adjusted has made it difficult to make a deal workable under the salary cap.


Grace Unit's European Biotech Patent on Soybeans Meets Opposition
A European patent that gives an American biotechnology company sweeping rights to genetically engineered soybeans has prompted both the Monsanto Company and an international coalition of public interest groups to file opposition papers at the European Patent Office.
Monsanto and the public interest groups find themselves in the unusual position of being on the same side of the issue, for different reasons.
Both contend that the patent granted to the American company, Agracetus Inc., is far too broad.
Monsanto says that it will have a chilling effect on research, while the coalition asserts that it could threaten future world food supplies.


Court Too Late in Barring Photos of Clinton Accuser, Lawyers Say
In response to a judge's temporary order blocking Penthouse magazine from distributing photographs of a woman who has accused President Clinton of sexual harassment, lawyers for the magazine are expected to argue in court today that the order is unconstitutional and unenforceable.
Millions of Americans this week saw the photographs, which show the woman, Paula C. Jones, wearing only a G-string.


A Useful Deterrent to Corrupt Cops
Mayor Rudolph Giuliani and the City Council agree that New York City needs a strong and independent agency to monitor police corruption, as recommended earlier this year by the Mollen commission.
They disagree, however, about what "strong and independent" means.
The agency envisioned by the Council, though not perfect, comes closer to meeting the job at hand.
Mr.
Giuliani can tinker with the plan here and there, but he would be wise to accept the Council's basic idea.
Lest anyone forget what the Mollen commission uncovered, here's that list again: renegade cops who sold guns and drugs in plain public view; senior officers who practiced a deliberate "blindness" to corruption; an Internal Affairs Division that looked away from evidence of corruption instead of digging it out.
Consider also that the corruption is cyclical in nature, erupting in ugly fashion every 20 years or so.
That cycle is likely to continue unless something is done.


U.S. Says It Uncovered a $100 Million Drug-Money Laundry
At the top there were Harvey the Wing, a partner in a small Manhattan law firm; Harvey's colleague at the firm, and a retired New York City firefighter who had gone into the trucking business.
They coordinated the action.
The retired firefighter hired Mike the Cop in the Bronx, two Hasidic rabbis, a fireman in a Queens engine company, a Bronx hospital worker, a branch bank manager in the Bronx and even the Bulgarian honorary consul in Los Angeles.
They all made pickups and deliveries.


3,000 Nurses Are Expected To Lose Hospital Jobs by '97
A new study of health-worker employment forecasts an accelerating decline in jobs in the next three years in New York City, even as the health-care system grows.
The study, prepared for the Bureau of Health Resources Development of the State Department of Health, predicted that about 3,000 registered nurses would lose hospital jobs between 1995 and 1997.
Of these, the report said, 2,000 are likely to find work in nursing homes or in home care.
But new nurses, arriving in the work force through graduation, would increase the surplus of registered nurses to 1,800.


TEXACO TO INCREASE OVERSEAS OIL PRODUCTION
Texaco Inc. said yesterday that it planned to increase its overseas oil production by 34 percent by the end of the decade, mainly by developing fields in the North Sea and the Middle East.
Peter Bijur, senior vice president in charge of foreign oil production, also predicted that Texaco would receive approval to proceed with two huge ventures in Russia next year.
A consortium led by Texaco is seeking to develop fields in Timan Pechora, an area in the Arctic Circle about 1,000 miles north of Moscow.
Texaco, based in White Plains, is also seeking approval for a large project on Sakhalin Island.
Mr.
Bijur said work on the projects could begin by the end of 1995.


Lowry Nelson, 68, Literature Professor
Lowry Nelson, emeritus professor of comparative literature at Yale University, died on Nov. 12 in Tallinn, Estonia.
He was 68 and lived in Bethany, Conn.
The cause was thromboembolism, the State Department said.
Professor Nelson was in Estonia doing research on Vyacheslav Ivanov, the Russian Symbolist poet.


Democrats Pick Gephardt As House Majority Leader
House Democrats chose Representative Richard A. Gephardt of Missouri today to lead their uncharted passage as a minority party.
He promptly defined the party's political message as a commitment to American workers and families and a higher standard of living.
Mr.
Gephardt, who has been majority leader and the No. 2 House Democrat behind Speaker Thomas S. Foley in the outgoing Congress, came to the Capitol today from Bethesda Naval Hospital and returned immediately after his selection at a caucus vote to prepare for gallstone surgery.


It's the End of the Riff for Wynton Marsalis's Septet
Wynton Marsalis made news in his first set on Tuesday night at the Village Vanguard.
Before he began to play, the trumpeter and band leader announced that this week's engagement would be the last for his septet, one of the most influential and active bands in jazz.
Mr.
Marsalis had been hinting recently that he was about to take a sabbatical, and now it was official.
"I'm going to enjoy this last week," he said from the stage, but there was a slight sense of sadness in the air, a feeling that something important had run its course.


Corrections
An article on Sunday about Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani's veto of the City Council's budget plan misstated the number of his previous vetoes.
It was three, not two; one was overridden.


Kentucky Holds Off A Rally By Ohio U.
Kentucky 79, Ohio U. 74
Rodrick Rhodes hit a free throw and short jumper to help third-ranked Kentucky withstand a late rally by 14th-ranked Ohio University in a 79-74 victory last night at Lexington, Ky.
Tony Delk and Walter McCarty led Kentucky with 17 points apiece, followed by Anthony Epps with 15 and Mark Pope with 11.
The Wildcats (2-0) also held a 42-36 edge on the boards behind Pope's 11 rebounds.


Where Offenders Get a Taste of Church
The public drunks, scufflers and brawlers and drunken drivers who drift into this city's dilapidated Spanish-style municipal court building do not look in the mood for lessons in religion and morality.
But that is what many eventually get.
Before they leave the old brick building, they have to pass before Judge Thomas P. Quirk, who has a sign on his door that reads: "God's Laws have no Loopholes."


Kevin Kelly Dies; Theater Critic, 64
Kevin Kelly, the theater critic for The Boston Globe for 32 years, died on Monday at Massachusetts General Hospital in Boston.
He was 64 and lived in Norwell, Mass.
The cause was cancer, The Globe said.


Trade Talks In Miami: Momentum Isn't There
The Administration raised the prospect of big things when it announced a summit meeting of the hemisphere's leaders last year, including a possible agreement on a trade zone embracing North and South America within 10 to 20 years.
But when leaders from 34 nations meet next week in Miami, the results will be far from bold: the leaders are not expected to agree on a firm plan or date for a trade area.


Thoughts From an Urban Suburbanite
IN the four months it took to sell the apartment in Manhattan and move to a two-story Colonial in a New Jersey village 25 miles away, friends in the city spoke little of the impending departure.
Their eyes said it all: "You have betrayed us."
Routine inquiries about our plans seemed, at times, to be opportunities for unspoken judgment.
"How can you give up Lincoln Center and abandon the Metropolitan Museum of Art?"


Transactions
Baseball  American League
BOSTON RED SOX -- Signed Calvain Culberson, Chris Hill, Dom Johnson and Greg Langbehn, pitchers, to minor-league contracts.
CALIFORNIA ANGELS -- Agreed to terms with Mitch Williams, pitcher, on a non-guaranteed contract.


Bank of Nova Scotia reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


A One-Man Melting Pot of Time, Place and Style
Joe Jackson gave the audience a little bit of everything on Tuesday night at the Beacon Theater.
Alone and with his three-person backing band, Mr.
Jackson played Chopin esque piano nocturnes and two-chord guitar rock, Afro-Caribbean grooves and Celtic-flavored folk.
Unfortunately, the British-born singer and multi-instrumentalist threw all these styles into a musical trash compactor, squeezing out the distinctive characteristics of each one and replacing them with little of substance.
This is perhaps emblematic of the path Mr.
Jackson's career has followed.
On his first album, "Look Sharp!" (1979), Mr.
Jackson came on like a disaffected post-punk wiseacre with smarts to match his attitude.
On follow-up albums, he soon proved that "Look Sharp!" was just a phase, and since then his entire output has been one of phases, moving from the rhythm-and-blues nostalgia of the album "Jumpin' Jive" to the updated salsa of "Night and Day" to the jazz and cabaret of "Body and Soul" to the mock-classical compositions of "Will Power."


Laurenizing The White House
At the White House, it's beginning to look a lot like Ralph Lauren.
On Saturday, the Polo/Ralph Lauren Creative Services team, working with Nancy Clark, the chief White House florist, will bring nouvelle Yule chic to five public rooms, a foyer and a hall.
At Hillary Rodham Clinton's behest, "we did an outreach to the Ralph Lauren with creative team, asking them to help us with design ideas for the holiday season," said Neel Lattimore, the First Lady's deputy press secretary.
Will Mr.
Lauren himself be on hand?
"He's not coming down this weekend," Mr.
Lattimore said.
"He's probably decorating his own home." SUZANNE SLESIN


All-Spanish Recital With Benita Valente
"How strong music is!" was the meaning of Benita Valente's exclamation in Spanish in the first movement of Ginastera's Third String Quartet.
"How it vanquishes the monstrous darkness!"
Yet as set by Ginastera, those words heralded music's power with heavy irony: the score did not vanquish the monstrous darkness so much as join it in its subterranean realm, the traditional quartet following the voice into a dream world with its images of a black moon, a slain soldier and waves of nocturnal desire.


Young Criminals' Prey: Usually Young
Wilfredo Feliciano remembers he was wearing his Nathan Hale Junior High School gym shirt on the evening of Dec. 8, 1993, and he remembers how easily the box-cutter sliced through it.
His attackers, a 15-year-old and a 16-year-old who lived in the same Brooklyn housing project as Wilfredo, didn't stop when they had cut apart the shirt.
As he struggled, screaming, into the lobby of his building, a slash of the razor-sharp cutter opened an enormous wound across his back.
He felt the sting and the blood, and then he felt the blade slicing into his forearms.


Judith Gardner, 51, Child Psychologist
Dr.
Judith Krieger Gardner, a child psychologist, teacher and researcher at Brandeis University, died of an aneurysm on Saturday at the Hadassah Hospital in Jerusalem.
She was 51 and lived in Belmont and West Tisbury, Mass.
She fell ill three weeks ago on a trek in Nepal with friends, her family said.


De La Hoya to Risk Title on Dec. 10
OSCAR DE LA HOYA, the unbeaten World Boxing Organization lightweight champion from East Los Angeles, will defend his crown on Dec. 10 against the once-beaten JOHN AVILA of Palmdale, Calif., it was announced yesterday in Los Angeles.


Pilots at Odds With Airline
American Eagle asked three of its pilots last week to seek counseling after the airline determined that their concerns about the weather were unfounded and that they had no basis for refusing to fly their propeller-driven aircraft.
An ATR-72 turboprop airplane crashed in icy weather in Roselawn, Ind., in October killing all 68 people aboard.
In the aftermath of the crash, the National Transportation Safety Board suggested that the planes, made by Avions de Transport Regional, be grounded in icy conditions until it completes its investigation.


2 U.S. Groups Buy Stakes in Syndicates at Lloyd's
In the second wave of corporate investments to replenish the coffers at Lloyd's of London, at least two American investment groups have bought large stakes in the managing agents that arrange new insurance policies and pay claims at Lloyd's.
One investment of $:88 million, or $137.6 million, comes from Insurance Partners and the Harvard University endowment fund, which are buying a 25 percent share of Charman Group Ltd., the second-largest syndicate at Lloyd's and one of its most profitable.
Insurance Partners is an investment group whose partners include the Robert M. Bass Group, Centre Re (a subsidiary of Zurich Insurance) and Chase Manhattan Bank.
The investment for Harvard's $7 billion asset endowment fund is managed by the Harvard Private Capital Group.


Helms Can't Fill the Shoes of Earlier G.O.P. Committee Leaders
To the Editor:
As a historian of modern America who served as an adviser to "The Sixth Floor" museum, the infamous school book depository in Dallas, I find Senator Jesse Helms's remark that President Clinton "better have a bodyguard" if he visits North Carolina offensive.
It calls up disturbing memories of the full-page ad that right-wing extremists purchased in The Dallas Morning News accusing President John F. Kennedy of treason on his fateful trip to this city.


Burkhardt &amp; Christy Wins Banking Job
Dime Bancorp Inc. and Anchor Bancorp Inc., both of New York, said yesterday that they had selected Burkhardt &amp; Christy in New York to handle their advertising after they complete their merger in January.
Billings were estimated at $5 million.
Burkhardt &amp; Christy was awarded the account of the merged banks, to be known as the Dime Savings Bank, after a two-month review that also included Korey, Kay &amp; Partners in New York, which has been the Anchor agency since 1992, and Merkley Newman Harty in New York, which has handled Dime since 1992; a Merkley Newman sibling shop, Doremus &amp; Company, was previously Dime's agency for many years.


Rival Offer Challenges Borden Deal
Paul B. Kazarian, a longtime suitor for Borden Inc., challenged the bid of Kohlberg, Kravis, Roberts for the company yesterday with an offer that was long on creativity but short on details.
Mr.
Kazarian submitted a plan to Borden's board in which he would make a $430 million investment to acquire a minority interest in the company, a troubled consumer-products giant.


Takeover Talk Pushes Lotus Shares Up
Continuing rumors of an impending acquisition of the Lotus Development Corporation by the Oracle Corporation fueled heavy trading of Lotus shares yesterday in the Nasdaq market, where the stock surged $3, to $44.75.
Speculation that Lotus will be taken over by Oracle or possibly by the AT&amp;T Corporation has been rife since Lotus reported a 60 percent drop in earnings in its third fiscal quarter, reflecting a slide in its desktop applications software.


Donors Grant Arafat $200 Million to Tide Him Over in Gaza
A group of 22 donor nations and 3 international agencies completed two days of intense negotiations today, agreeing to an injection of more than $200 million into the strife-torn Gaza Strip over the next four months to meet Yasir Arafat's emergency financing needs.
Donor nations committed $125 million in grants to enable the Palestine Authority to pay public workers through March, create several thousand construction jobs for its vast numbers of unemployed, and begin projects to improve roads, sewer and electrical systems.


Players Hoping Tour of Europe Will Jar Owners
The effects of hockey's labor predicament will flare on two fronts Thursday as the lockout of players begins its third month.
Across a conference table in Chicago, negotiators for the National Hockey League and the N.H.L.
Players Association will argue again over terms of a collective bargaining agreement in an attempt to end an impasse that has postponed the start of the season for 61 days.


Yearning for Yemen, Dying in Brooklyn; Stray Bullet Breaks a Cycle of Work, Saving and Trips Home
He kept to a dichotomous, back-and-forth regimen, and it was the same way with his Arab friends.
He would work behind the counter in one of the storefront Brooklyn delis, squirreling away money that he would mail to his expanding family in Yemen.
When the separation would nag at him, he would return home for a few months.
Then he would start the cycle all over again.
Some of his friends could endure years between visits with their families, but Nagi Al Qotaini would brood and could not go that long.
Sometimes, he would last only four or five months.
He had been doing this for nearly 12 years, since he was 18, but it never got any easier.


Bridge
Victory has not been staled by repetition for Nick Nickell, a financier from Raleigh, N.C.
After leading his team successfully in the Reisinger Board-a-Match Teams Sunday in Minneapolis, he was whooping with joy.
This was his fourth win in five attempts at major national team titles in the last 18 months.
His partner on each occasion was Richard Freeman of Atlanta, a vice president of Oppenheimer &amp; Company who was the youngest-ever Life Master when he reached that rank at age 18, in 1951.
Even earlier, he was famous on radio as a 10-year-old Quiz Kid.
Their teammates, all experienced professionals, were Bob Wolff and Bob Hamman, both of Dallas; Jeff Meckstroth of Tampa, Fla., and Eric Rodwell of Naperville, Ill.


World News Briefs; I.R.A. Chief, on 2d Visa, To Go to White House
The Clinton Administration has approved another visa for Gerry Adams, the leader of the political wing of the Irish Republican Army, and has invited him to a high-level meeting at the White House next week, Administration officials said today.
The meeting with Anthony Lake, the national security adviser, will mark the first time that Mr.
Adams has been received in the White House.
The officials said it was scheduled in recognition of the role the Sinn Fein leader has played recently in preserving the peace in Northern Ireland.


Jets Appear Confident That Monk Will Receive Record
On the last game of the 1982 season, Art Monk did not catch a pass for the Washington Redskins.
"I broke my ankle that day against St. Louis," he said today.
He has not missed catching a ball in a game since.
And at some point on Sunday, if the last 176 games are any indication, Monk, now with the Jets, will catch a pass against the New England Patriots at Foxboro, Mass., and tie Steve Largent's National Football League record for receptions in consecutive games.
It would happen the day before Monk's 37th birthday.


Charles J. Umlauf; Sculptor, 83
Charles J. Umlauf, a sculptor, died on Nov. 19 at a hospital in Austin, Tex. He was 83.
He died after a lengthy illness, The Houston Post said.


States Seek a Voice in Company Health Plans
State officials from both parties asked Congress today to revise a 20-year-old Federal law that prevents them from imposing taxes or minimum standards on the health plans of companies that serve as their own insurers.
Members of Congress from both parties said at the Congressional hearing that they would seriously consider such changes.
But the outlook for legislation is uncertain because many big multistate companies oppose any change that would allow states to impose requirements on employee health plans that might differ, and therefore conflict, from state to state.


RESULTS PLUS
N.B.A.
Eight Straight for Magic  The Orlando Magic set a franchise record with its eighth consecutive victory last night, beating the visiting Sacramento Kings, 114-107, behind center Shaquille O'Neal's 41 points.
"I may be outdating myself, but O'Neal really reminds me of Wilt Chamberlain," said Sacramento Coach Garry St.
Jean.
"People just bounce off of him inside. You pray for a hurricane to stop him."


Out-of-Court Statements Bring Stormy Hearing in Simpson Case
A pitched battle over the out-of-court statements of the victims' families and the continuing tug of war over a defense expert in DNA overshadowed the continuing selection of alternate jurors today in the O. J. Simpson murder trial.
In a stormy hearing before Judge Lance A. Ito, one of Mr.
Simpson's lawyers, Johnnie L. Cochran Jr., said that "an orchestrated media blitz" against his client threatened to deny him a fair trial.
He maintained that the loudest instrumentalist was Denise Brown, who repeated on television Tuesday night that she believed Mr.
Simpson had murdered her sister, Nicole, and Ronald L. Goldman.


Lopez Shows What the Hype Is All About
When Felipe Lopez signed his letter of intent to play at St.
John's, Coach Brian Mahoney envisioned his star recruit winning games like the one he played last night at Alumni Hall.
With St.
John's struggling to hold off gritty Coppin State, Lopez provided his first major dividend by scoring 27 points to lead the Red Storm to a 78-73 victory before a third straight sellout crowd.


Woman Dies in Stabbing
Josephine Sanchez successfully fought off a would-be mugger in her public housing project in Long Island City, Queens, last year.
But in a robbery yesterday, the police said, the 70-year-old woman was fatally stabbed in the back and never got a chance to fight back.
Detective Andrew McInnis, a Police Department spokesman, said Ms.
Sanchez was walking to her home at 35-20 21st Street, in the Ravenswood Houses, about 3:50 P.M., after purchasing $4 worth of toiletries at a nearby drugstore.
As she passed behind a building in the project, the detective said, a man ran up behind her, stabbed her in the back, and fled with her purse.


Northland Cranberries
Shares of Northland Cranberries Inc. fell after the company announced on Monday that poor crop quality would hurt earnings for the year.
The stock hit a 52-week low of $11 before closing at $12.75.


Liner Achille Lauro Burns Off Africa
Merchant ships and United States naval vessels steamed to rescue almost 1,000 people from the Italian cruise-liner Achille Lauro in the Indian Ocean today after a fire in her engine room surged to the sun-decks and staterooms, sending passengers scrambling for the lifeboats.
Officials here and reports from rescue vessels around the forsaken liner said she was listing sharply and settling ever lower in shark-filled waters off the coast of Somalia.


Integration Weighed
In a five-year-old lawsuit aimed at improving the education of poor minority children in Hartford's racially isolated schools, civil rights lawyers asked a Superior Court judge to order a school-integration plan combining the city with 21 suburban districts.


COMPANY BRIEFS
COMMUNITY FIRST BANKSHARES INC., Fargo, N.D., will acquire Abbott Bank Group Inc., a large bank in northwest Nebraska, for $29 million in cash.
GENCOR LTD., Johannesburg, said it had completed the $1.22 billion acquisition of the major portion of the Royal Dutch/Shell Group's Billiton metals and mining assets.


Norway: Out in the Cold by Choice
While most Central and Eastern European countries clamor for the swiftest possible admission to the European Union, Norwegians have for the second time rejected an invitation to join.
This week's referendum was only an advisory vote, but the Norwegian Parliament, which has the official say, will not defy the electorate's advice.
Norway's voters are not crazy.
Their country is indeed a special case -- already a NATO member, rich, well run and with an economic structure that might have made it a net loser from membership in strictly economic terms.
Its main export, oil, does not depend on privileged access to European markets.
Its well-managed fisheries will now not have to admit Spanish, Portuguese or other E.U. trawlers or accept the suspect custodianship of Brussels fishocrats.


Little-Noticed Provision Is Focus of Charter Fight
The commission that revised New York City's Charter in 1989 held dozens of all-day sessions, debating for hours such issues as whether borough presidents should still exist and what land-use powers the City Council should have.
But no one expected that the first major showdown between the executive and legislative branches on the Charter would be over something as dry and arcane as a budget modification -- a subject the commission spent relatively little time on.


Make Way for the Finns: This Time It's a Cellist
The Finnish invasion continues.
Following closely after a recital by the baritone Jorma Hynninen and concerts conducted by Esa-Pekka Salonen with Olli Mustonen as his piano soloist, Young Concert Artists opened its 34th season on Tuesday evening at the 92d Street Y with a recital by Jan-Erik Gustafsson, a 24-year-old Finnish cellist who won one of the organization's auditions this year.
And as if to keep the ties clear, Mr.
Gustafsson ended the first half of his program with a short solo piece by Mr.
Salonen.
Mr.
Gustafsson's playing seemed sensitive and introspective, and if it did not overwhelm the listener with tonal lushness or coloristic variety, its direct, understated musicality had a certain appeal.
Those qualities came through most clearly in a shapely, warm-toned rendering of the Chopin Cello Sonata, and in his singing account of the Cavatine in the Poulenc Sonata.
In Beethoven's Sonata No. 4, he favored the elegance of the work's surface over the drama of its inner life.


CBS Says It's No. 1 in the November Sweep
Declaring that it had stabilized after a poor start to the television season, CBS claimed victory yesterday in the closely watched competition of the November sweep rating month.
The claim by CBS was challenged by its competitors, all of which cited gains made from November 1993.
The other networks emphasized their strength among younger viewers, who are the most sought-after by advertisers, and said CBS's win was largely based on its popularity with viewers over 55.


Palestinian Authority Holds Up Delivery of Newspapers in Gaza
For a third straight day, the Palestinian Authority delayed distribution in the Gaza Strip today of the two main Palestinian newspapers in an apparent punishment for their reports on Hamas, the militant Muslim group that is challenging the authority.
Copies of Al Quds and An Nahar, dailies published in East Jerusalem, were confiscated by the Palestinian police when they arrived in Gaza at dawn, and were released several hours later.
Similar measures were taken on Monday and Tuesday.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy  The percentage of men working has declined in the United States -- to about 70 percent from 80 percent in the 1970's, at the same time as the number of jobs available to the less educated has fallen.  [ Page A1. ] The economy expanded at a 3.9 percent annual pace in the third quarter, pointing to a strong holiday shopping season.  [ D2. ]


Salary Cap Taken Off Immediate Agenda
The mediator whom the Clinton Administration sent to save Major League Baseball from itself is viewed by labor negotiators as a master of good timing, and today Bill Usery Jr. put that talent to use.
At Usery's urging, the owners' negotiating team agreed to postpone a meeting next Monday in Chicago, where the owners had been expected to declare an impasse in negotiations and implementing their salary-cap proposal.


Market Place; A Confidence Meter Frowns on Clinton and Stocks
Consumer confidence is reported to be sharply higher.
That sounds good, but if history is any guide, the latest readings from the Conference Board survey may be a bad omen for both stocks and President Clinton.
That is because consumers' views of the future are significantly less optimistic than their views of the present.
And in the past, such a divergence has been a negative indicator for the stock market.
Had someone bought and sold the stocks in the Dow Jones industrial average based on an indicator derived from the consumer confidence data since 1969, the portfolio would now be up 515 percent.
By contrast, a buy-and-hold investor would have gained 313 percent.
And with this week's results, the indicator has issued its first sell signal since June 1987.


RESEARCHERS LINK OBESITY IN HUMANS TO FLAW IN A GENE
Lending mighty support to the theory that obese people are not made but, rather, born that way, scientists have discovered a genetic mutation that is thought to be responsible for at least some types of obesity.
The mutation is believed to disrupt the body's energy metabolism and appetite control center, the mechanism that tells the brain one has eaten enough and has sufficient fat stores to meet the demands of the day.
Without a working hormonal signal for fullness, or satiety, a person might continue to overeat even when extreme corpulence threatens health and ego.


Carjack Case Hears Deno, But Not Dino
In a Perry Mason-like twist, a man named Dino finally appeared at a Rockland County carjacking and murder trial where the very existence of such a person had become the case's most tantalizing mystery.
But rather than a cut-throat drug dealer, he turned out to be a courtly barber, who, though he has a criminal record, now does volunteer work at an old-age home.
He even spelled his name differently from the way Mr.
Summers's lawyers had spelled it.


W. H. Johnson, 76, a Founder Of a Group for Black Officers
William H. Johnson Jr., a founding member and former president of the Guardians Association of the New York Police Department, the organization of black New York City police officers, died on Nov. 22 at New York Hospital.
Mr.
Johnson, who lived in Harlem, was 76.
The cause of death was a heart attack, said Roger Abel, chairman of


Groundbreaking for Bush Library
The 41st President of the United States broke ground today on the $85 million George Bush Presidential Library Center at Texas A&amp;M University here, gazing at an audience that included several former members of his Cabinet and deadpanning, "When I look out here at the dedicated leaders from my Administration, I see -- well, I see half the field for 1996."
The 90-acre center, scheduled to open in early 1997, will be the repository of 37 million pages of documents, more than a million photographs and a public display of mementos from Mr.
Bush's life and times.
And it will house the university's George Bush School of Government and Public Service, the Center for Presidential Studies and the Center for Public Leadership Studies.


Is Taylor Hanging Around for a 'Tell All' Book?
Ever wonder why Lawrence Taylor has been hanging around the Giants so much lately?
The former linebacker and future Hall of Famer has been on the sidelines for the last two Giants games, both on the road.
Doesn't he have anything better to do?
The answer is no.


John Calamari, 73, Author of Law Texts
John D. Calamari, an expert on contract law who was co-author of a primary textbook on the subject, died on Nov. 24 in New Rochelle (N.Y.) Hospital.
He was 73 and lived in Pelham Manor.
The cause of death was pneumonia, said his son, Paul, of Ossining.


Civil Rights Group Disputes Election Analyses on Black Districts
Lawyers for a leading civil rights organization today rebutted the argument that the creation of black-majority Congressional districts harmed the prospects of white Democrats in the elections three weeks ago, declaring that such analysis amounted to the scapegoating of blacks.
At a news conference here, the lawyers, representing the NAACP Legal Defense and Educational Fund, offered a detailed numerical analysis of Congressional districts previously held by the Democrats that were captured by the Republicans on Election Day.
They said the major factor in these losses was an overwhelming shift by white voters to the Republicans, not Congressional districts created to enhance black candidates' chances of election.


Calendar: Exhibitions, From Jewelry to Quilts
Jewelry Show and Sale  American Craft Museum, 40 West 53d Street; (212) 956-3535.
There will be a show and sale of gold and silver jewelry by 45 artists to benefit the museum.
Open today and tomorrow, 1 to 7 P.M.; Saturday and Sunday, 11 A.M. to 5 P.M.
Prices start at $300; members will receive a 10 percent discount.


Gingrich's Politics Didn't Follow Fashion; Divorce Doesn't Count
To the Editor:
Re "Gingrich's Life: The Complications and Ideals" (front page, Nov. 24): Discussion of Newt Gingrich's divorce has brought political criticism to a new level of hypocrisy.
Divorce ceased to be an issue in national electoral politics after Barry Goldwater defeated Nelson Rockefeller and became the Republican candidate for President in 1964.
In 1994 divorce is not illegal, nor is it immoral to most Americans.


Stocks Flat Despite Data On Economy
For once, good news on Main Street did not automatically lead to bad news on Wall Street.
But yesterday's relative tranquillity, which may have been attributable to technical factors rather than real market sentiment, could give way to a more pronounced selloff of stocks by tomorrow, when job-growth figures are released.
The stock market closed mixed yesterday, despite evidence of an unexpectedly strong economy, slowed only slightly by the Federal Reserve's tightening of interest rates this year.


At Visionary Apple, a Pragmatist Flirts With Heresy


Research on Embryos Opens a Pandora's Box
To the Editor:
Re "Should We Make Research Embryos? Yes, the Gains Could Be Great" (Editorial Debate, Nov. 25):


Mayor Overridden on Budget
The City Council yesterday overrode Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani's veto of its budget changes, setting up what Council officials said is likely to be a court battle to determine who has the ultimate authority for the city's spending plan.
The 47-to-1 vote, far more than the two-thirds majority needed, brought together the Council's Democrats and six of its seven Republicans.
Only Charles Millard, a Manhattan Republican, sided with the Mayor.


Spencer J. Drayton, Racing Official, 84
Spencer J. Drayton, a former F.B.I. agent who founded the Thoroughbred Racing Protective Bureau in 1946 and ran it for 33 years, died on Sunday at a nursing home in Stuart, Fla., near his home in Tequesta.
He was 84.
His family said the cause was congestive heart failure.


Rorem and Chabrier On a Double Bill
A double bill of Ned Rorem's opera "Miss Julie" and Emmanuel Chabrier's one-act operetta "Une Education Manquee" ("An Incomplete Education") is to be given three performances by the Manhattan School of Music Opera Theater, on Wednesday and on Dec. 9 at 8 P.M. and on Dec. 11 at 2:30 P.M.
Mr.
Rorem is to discuss "Miss Julie" in a free talk at 6:30 P.M. on Dec. 7, before the performance.
The Rorem work, based on the Strindberg play about a sexual duel between a young noblewoman and her butler, had its premiere in 1965 and has been revised and consolidated from two acts to one.
The Chabrier piece, from 1879, is the tale of an innocent young couple in the Louis XVI period who arrive at their wedding night with no instruction but learn from love and instinct.


Ballet Theater Cancels 'Nutcracker' at Purchase
American Ballet Theater announced yesterday that it was canceling performances of "The Nutcracker" scheduled for Dec. 12-24 at the Performing Arts Center of the State University College at Purchase, N.Y.
"We got off to a very late start," Robert Pontarelli, the company's director of publicity, said yesterday.
Ballet Theater reached an agreement in late September to use the college's studios for some rehearsals and performances, among them an annual holiday season of "The Nutcracker," using students in backstage capacities and providing company members as teachers.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-13  SERBS SPURN U.N.
LEADER  The leader of the Bosnian Serbs spurned the United Nations Secretary General, refusing to appear at a meeting at the Sarajevo airport.
Secretary General Boutros-Ghali warned that if Muslims and Serbs did not cooperate with the United Nations, he could not keep peacekeeping troops in Bosnia.
A1


CUC Int'l.(CU,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


L'Amour Francais At Symphony Space
A three-part series of readings, music and film, titled L'Amour Francais, is to be presented this month at Symphony Space, Broadway and 95th Street.
In the first program, "Contingent Loves," on Dec. 9 at 8 P.M., Rochelle Oliver and Fritz Weaver are to read from the romantic wartime letters of Simone de Beauvoir and Jean-Paul Sartre, in a theater piece devised by Isaiah Sheffer.
The second program, "Il Pleure dans Mon Coeur," on Dec. 10 at 8 P.M., consists of poems by Verlaine, Baudelaire, Rimbaud, Apollinaire and others, to be read by Carol Kane and Stephen Lang or -- set to music by Faure -- to be sung by Rachel Rosales, a soprano.
Admission is $16 for each program.
The Dec. 11 program consists of two films: "Simone de Beauvoir," a two-hour interview with this writer and feminist, at 2 P.M., and "Sartre par Lui-Meme" ("Sartre by Himself"), a three-hour portrait of the Existentialist writer and philosopher, at 5 P.M.
Both films are in French with English subtitles; admission is $6 for one, $10 for both.
Information: (212) 864-5400.


LEADER OF SERBS SPURNS A MEETING WITH HEAD OF U.N.
The leader of the Bosnian Serbs spurned the Secretary General of the United Nations today, refusing to appear at a planned meeting at the Sarajevo airport because it is not in Serb-held territory.
The Secretary General, Boutros Boutros-Ghali, declaring that Bosnian Muslims and Serbs must now cooperate with the beleaguered United Nations mission, said in a statement: "My message to them is that unless they do this it will become impossible for me to persuade the Security Council to keep the United Nations Protection Force here."


Barcelona's Demons Pay a Searing Visit
It may look like the usual European dance theater: a man keeps throwing wine out of a glass into the air, and women smack wet shawls against the floor within a space penned on three sides by a carved balustrade.
Nonetheless Ramon Oller, a young Catalan choreographer, has created one of the most riveting dance pieces of the year and he has a fierce way with movement and a wondrous capacity to surprise.
No one interested in experimental work of any kind can afford to miss Mr.
Oller's "Good Night Paradise," which had its premiere on Tuesday night when Ballet Hispanico opened a two-week season.


Quarterback Has Crimson in His Veins
The father and the son were sitting on a lake, waiting for the fish and talking about the future.
Jay Barker, Jerome's son, had it all worked out.
He was going to Alabama to play football for Coach Bryant.
On Saturday mornings, he was No. 42, Major Ogilvie's number, for the Center Point Trojans, who wore maroon jerseys that the son considered crimson.
His mother, Barbara, would bring a washcloth to the game, and Jay would come off the field and wipe his face and they would then go to watch the Crimson Tide.
And Jay had decided.
He would one day be one of them.


New York Case Is First, A Simpson Lawyer Is Told
Accusing the judge in the O. J. Simpson case of trying to interfere with criminal justice in New York, a judge in Manhattan yesterday ordered that a member of the Simpson defense team remain in New York to try an unrelated case even if it meant giving up a key role in the Simpson trial.
The New York judge, Harold J. Rothwax of Criminal Court, was adamant in rejecting a request by the lawyer, Peter J. Neufeld, to postpone a trial so he could take part in an important hearing in the Simpson case in Los Angeles in just under two weeks.


Advances in Electric Cars for Masses
Be it bodies or batteries, motors or wheels, the drive continues toward technology for the practical, mass-produced electric car.
At an electric-vehicle symposium in Anaheim, Calif., three significant announcements are expected today:


'Macbeth' and the Political Drama of Its Time
WITCHES AND JESUITS Shakespeare's Macbeth  By Garry Wills  Illustrated. 223 pages.
Oxford University Press. $25.


Chrysler Takes Steps to Bolster Price of Its Stock
The Chrysler Corporation announced today that it would increase its dividend, spend a billion dollars buying its own stock, and weaken its anti-takeover plan, meeting almost all the demands of its largest investor, Kirk Kerkorian.
The actions by Chrysler's board surprised many Wall Street auto analysts and investors, who did not expect a buyback so soon or such a large jump in the quarterly dividend -- 60 percent, to $1.60 a year.


Up Front, the Pressure Is on the Jets' Linemen. Just Listen to Their Coach.
Tonight was boys' night out, a Thursday at Nick's, hosted by Boomer.
It is part of a ritual of football in which quarterback Boomer Esiason -- who earns the most money, the acclaim and the headlines -- treats the offensive linemen, his protectors, to a weekly feast.
In this case it was at Nick Lowery's, in the Five Towns area south of here.


Ex-Television Evangelist Bakker Ends Prison Sentence for Fraud
Five years and two months after he went to prison for bilking thousands of contributors to his PTL ministry, Jim Bakker, the former television evangelist, became a free man today.
But Mr.
Bakker, now 54 and divorced from his wife of 30 years, Tammy Faye, stayed out of sight in the modest ranch-style house he has been renting for the past three months while under house arrest.


COMPANY BRIEFS
FIRST EMPIRE STATE CORP., Buffalo, completed its acquisition of Ithaca Bancorp, Ithaca, N.Y., for $19 a share in cash.
ORACLE CORP., Redwood Shores, Calif., completed the acquisition of Digital Equipment Corp.'s Rdb data base, repository and data base administration tools and the related support business for $108 million.





Last Chance
Here is a sampling of shows and exhibitions in New York City that are to close soon: Closing This Weekend  "ANGELS IN AMERICA: MILLENNIUM APPROACHES" AND "PERESTROIKA," Walter Kerr Theater, 219 West 48th Street, Manhattan.
Tony Kushner's two-part drama, directed by George C. Wolfe.
Through Sunday.
Tickets: $20 to $65.
Performances: "Millennium," tonight at 8 and tomorrow at 2 P.M.; "Perestroika," tomorrow at 8 P.M. and Sunday at 3 P.M.
Information: (212) 239-6200.


METRO DIGEST
WOUNDED RAPPER CONVICTED OF SEX ABUSE
Tupac Shakur, the rap star, was convicted of felony sex-abuse charges for groping a fan who went to his hotel room last year, but he was acquitted of the more serious charges of forcing the woman to have oral sex with him and his friends, and of weapons charges.
A1.


Achille Lauro Smolders After 1,000 Are Rescued
Listing and scorched after a mysterious fire that turned it into a blackened hulk, the Italian cruise liner Achille Lauro drifted in placid seas in the Indian Ocean today as United States Navy and other vessels rescued almost 1,000 passengers and crew members who had spent hours on the flat deck of an oil tanker.
Ornery to the last, the ill-starred vessel, which had been on the brink of sinking since Wednesday night, was still afloat and smoldering tonight, apparently because its internal superstructure had collapsed into the hull, providing a kind of ballast.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.50
8.50
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
4.75
4.75
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
5.56
5.66
3.04
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.57
5.55
3.10
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
6.00
5.95
3.24
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.92
7.89
5.79
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
8.01
8.00
6.28
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.86
8.92
7.31
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
7.11
7.16
5.66
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Chemical Banking to Cut 3,700 Jobs
To cut costs, Chemical Banking Corporation said yesterday that it would eliminate 3,700 jobs, or 9 percent of its work force, underscoring the continuing profit pressures on big banks in New York and elsewhere in the country.
Chemical's action, one of the biggest single employment cutbacks in New York in recent years, highlights the large loss of jobs among money center banks, including Citicorp and Chase Manhattan.
In metropolitan New York, fewer people now are employed by banks than on Wall Street.
And further steady reductions in banking employment are still expected to come.


RESULTS PLUS
N.B.A.
Timberwolves Triumph  Doug West hit a pair of free throws with 47 seconds left last night to give the Minnesota Timberwolves their second victory of the National Basketball Association season, 96-94 over the Utah Jazz at Salt Lake City.


A Famous Miser, Tiny Tim And a Tap-Dancing Chorus
THE latest entry in the annual holiday entertainment sweepstakes, the musical version of "A Christmas Carol" at the Paramount, makes for a pleasant 90 minutes.
But it never quite delivers the uplift you want from the story of the world's most famous skinflint and how he rediscovers his conscience.
Would you settle for a sleigh piled high with fruit and oversize Christmas gifts that break apart to reveal 12 chorus girls in red velvet, who tap dance and sing about "Abundance and Charity"?


Art in Review
'The Pop Image'  'Prints and Multiples'
Marlborough Gallery  40 West 57th Street  Manhattan  Through tomorrow
This large and thorough exhibition brings out the populism in Pop Art.
It shows how the attraction of mass-produced imagery and non-fine-art methods of reproduction, not to mention a certain irreverence for the sanctity of art, inspired many Pop artists to make nonunique, relatively inexpensive artworks in both two and three dimensions.
In the process, a cottage industry of print and multiple publishing was spawned.


Art in Review
'The Making of a Mural' 'Reginald Marsh at the United States Custom House'  Museum of the City of New York Fifth Avenue at 103d Street Through Jan. 22
New York City is rich with mural programs from the 1930's.
Among them, Reginald Marsh's paean to New York Harbor painted for the United States Custom House in lower Mahattan has long been legendary.
And with the recent reopening of the Beaux-Arts building as home to the National Museum of the American Indian, Marsh's murals are on public view again for the first time in decades.


Plan for Toxic Dump Off Coney Island Defies Common Sense
To the Editor:
Re your Nov. 25 news article on the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey's plan to dump toxic harbor dredgings in shallow ocean water only one-half mile off Coney Island beaches: The agency appears callous and unconcerned about the public's health and safety in defending its plan.
An official says, "We must not allow a dispute over trace levels of contaminants to jeopardize a project of great significance to the Port of New York and New Jersey."


Soothing Japanese Rhythms
Ondekoza and a number of American-based colleagues pounded and caressed the ears of Japanese drumming fans on Wednesday evening in Carnegie Hall.
In its choreography and its vigor, the so-called taiko style becomes almost a martial art, one in which violence has been sublimated into disciplined exultation.
The musicians were careful, however, to introduce mitigating interludes of koto solos and songful shakuhachi duets.
In the case of the Ondekoza ensemble, humor in the form of subtle vaudeville eased the general onslaught.
Yuko Daiko, the husband-and-wife team of Asoka and Lorraine Compton from Florida, opened the concert, followed by the San Francisco Taiko Dojo headed by Seiichi Tanaka.
These earnest efforts were followed by Ondekoza's blend of high-decibel virtuosity and clever games played with toys, kitchen cleavers and two three-stringed shamisens that kept lapsing into Stephen Foster.


The West's Bosnia Policy Was Designed to Fail
To the Editor:
Recent events in the Balkans clearly demonstrate that Britain and France never really planned to confront the Serbs, their allies in World Wars I and II; their plan has all along been to contain the Muslims.
When Lord Owen unveiled, with much fanfare, the Vance-Owen plan in April 1993 to divide Bosnia and Herzegovina into autonomous ethnic provinces under a loose central government, and the Serbs rejected it through a "referendum" that Lord Owen himself called "sham," who ate his words?
Not the Serbs!


Players' Union Is Discouraged After Meeting Adjourns
As the National Hockey League season slid one day closer to cancellation, league and union negotiators broke off talks early tonight after nearly eight hours of bargaining that offered no palpable hope for the future, except that the two sides would resume meeting Friday.
In fact, on Day 62 of the lockout, when the main action was expected to be the league listening to a counterproposal from the union on such issues as a rookie salary cap, arbitration and free agency, the N.H.L. came up with new wrinkles to its own plan that were not bound to please the players.


Pataki Warns Of Painful Cuts In State Aid To Close Deficit
Governor-elect George E. Pataki said today that closing a projected $5 billion budget deficit while keeping his campaign pledge to cut taxes would involve more pain than he expected, and he suggested that to do it, he might have to break another campaign pledge: protecting state aid to local schools and governments.
On a day in which he was either meeting with jubilant Republican lawmakers or hunkering down with budget advisers, Mr.
Pataki repeatedly said that he "had ruled out nothing" to close next year's projected deficit, except raising taxes.
He said his options included laying off workers, consolidating agencies, slashing welfare and freezing or cutting state aid to schools and local governments.


A Hero Who Was a Heel, Or, What Price Glory?
The gamesmanship explored by Ron Shelton's "Cobb" doesn't have much to do with baseball.
Guts, cunning, endurance, agility: useful as these are on the playing field, they're also part of the myth-making process that exalts a sports hero.
In his story about Ty Cobb, the notoriously sour baseball legend, Mr.
Shelton wrestles with raw material -- a drunken, violent, abusive, bigoted figure -- that is indeed raw.
So how badly, "Cobb" wonders, does America need its heroes?
Badly enough to play by new rules when the star athlete is a miserable man?
The answers can't be found in Cobb's glory days, which are dealt with so summarily in this blustery, fire-snorting film that they may disappoint sports fans eager to see Cobb in action.
Instead, those answers come at the 11th hour, with Cobb (Tommy Lee Jones) a bitter old reprobate and Al Stump (Robert Wuhl) a sportswriter hired to sugar-coat his story.
Actually, the one-man title of "Cobb," Mr.
Shelton's adroitly written but unevenly directed film, is misleading, since this collaboration to shape Ty Cobb's legend makes for a two-character, buddy-movie duel.


Republicans Vow Dismissals, Audits and Reshuffling of House
The House Republicans said today that when they take over next month they will dismiss hordes of Capitol functionaries, reshuffle all their offices, audit everything, hire more waste-and-fraud watchdogs and make all decisions of any note in the light of public scrutiny.
They said this would save the Government money, though they could not yet say how much, and they said it would make for a leaner bureaucracy, though they allowed that 1,500 people who were told today that they would be dismissed could apply for their old jobs and that some might be hired back after some re-education.


A Touch of Harry in the Night
The similarities between the Republican triumph on Nov. 8 and the Congressional elections of 1946 are, understandably, the subject of great interest.
Not only did the Republicans win the House and Senate by substantial majorities in both cases, recovering power after years of unbroken Democratic control, but the Democrat in the White House was humiliated, both at the polls and by the withering invective of the campaign.
And although the incoming Speaker of the House in 1946, Joseph W. Martin Jr., had none of the fire of a Newt Gingrich, he and the Republicans and Southern Democrats who dominated Capitol Hill felt they had a mandate to cut into the power of the Presidency and to turn back the New Deal.


Jesse Philips, 80, Philanthropist and Industrialist
Jesse Philips, a leading Ohio industrialist and philanthropist, died on Tuesday in Salt Lake City.
He was 80 and lived in Dayton, Ohio.
The cause was a massive stroke, his family said.
He had suffered a heart attack on skiing vacation in Utah and had undergone emergency heart surgery.


Port Authority Is Proposing A Toll Freeze For a Year
The Port Authority of New York and New Jersey proposed a 1995 budget yesterday that would keep tolls on Hudson River bridges and tunnels at $4 for at least one more year.
But officials said an increase is possible in 1996.
Stanley Brezenoff, the executive director of the authority, said losses at the New York City bus terminals and on the PATH train line would cause a $100 million deficit in the 1996 budget.
If other revenues remain flat, Mr.
Brezenoff said he saw no way to close the 1996 shortfall without raising tolls or the PATH fare, which is now $1.


Inside Art
The London Auctions
While the pickings were the weakest in memory, the responses at the sales of Impressionist and modern paintings, drawings and sculpture in London this week were not.
Bidding was active at both Sotheby's and Christie's, and a few works even brought strong prices.
But neither house achieved totals as high as those in the November sales of Impressionist and modern art in New York.
Sotheby's London sale made $17.7 million, just below the estimate of $17.9 million to $24.1 million.
Christie's fared better, as it had in New York, with a total of $23.5 million, a bit above its low estimate of $21.9 million. (In New York, Sotheby's sale brought $25.8 million and Christie's reached $37.5 million.)


Shrouds, Protests and the Names of Those Lost to a Disease
Like a funereal drumroll, the names of thousands who have died from AIDS were read, one by one, in front of City Hall.
At the Metropolitan Museum of Art, Renoir's "Two Girls at the Piano" was removed from view while other works were covered with black shrouds.
In observances large and small, the AIDS epidemic was marked yesterday by World AIDS Day with demonstrations, candlelight vigils, memorial services, church prayers and symbolic deprivations signifying the extent of the suffering.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; A high-tech fragrance campaign resurrects a Hollywood icon.
FOR years, advertisements declared that "every woman alive wants Chanel No. 5." Now a star dead since 1962 returns to assert that even those women no longer breathing want it too.
An extravagant, elaborate and expensive television commercial that begins Monday uses the computer-generated special effects technique called morphing to revive Marilyn Monroe as a celebrity endorser for Chanel No. 5.
During the spot, the model Carole Bouquet, a mainstay in the fragrance's campaigns since 1987, "morphs," or changes, into Miss Monroe and back into herself as Miss Monroe sings "I Want to Be Loved by You."


Wrist Injury Costs Coleman a Weekend
Add Derrick Coleman to the Nets' walking wounded.
Coleman, the club's All-Star forward, will miss the Nets' game against the Heat at Miami on Friday night and is doubtful for Saturday's game against the Sacramento Kings at Byrne Meadowlands Arena.
Team officials confirmed tonight that he has a sprained right wrist.


U.S. AND NATO SAY DISPUTE ON BOSNIA WAR IS RESOLVED
The United States and its NATO allies formally put their differences on Bosnia behind them today for the sake of saving the unity of their 45-year-old security alliance.
At the start of a two-day meeting, foreign ministers of the alliance insisted that whatever happened in Bosnia did not signal a crisis in NATO, even though the issue had been at the center of the alliance's concern for more than two years.


Lorillard and Ally Decide to Part Ways
Lorillard Inc. and Ally &amp; Gargano in New York said yesterday that they would end their relationship on the Newport and Old Gold cigarettes account, effective March 1, citing "creative differences." As a result, the account, with billings estimated at $18 million to $20 million, has been placed in review.
Arthur Stevens, a senior vice president at Lorillard in New York, said the company would "terminate" Ally "due to differences over the direction of the Newport advertising." That brand's long-running campaign, which carries the theme "Alive With Pleasure," features male and female models in odd poses in pools, pumpkin patches and other unusual locales.


Also of Note
Critics' choices of some other Manhattan art shows:  ANA MENDIETA, "Lineas: 1980-1983," Galerie Lelong, 20 West 57th Street.
The pictographic female form was Mendieta's subject, and it appears here drawn in notebooks, incised on leaves, and traced in seashells in a re-creation of a 1983 sculpture titled "Sandwoman." Documentary photographs of the artist's earthworks at remote sites give texture to a spare, carefully chosen show. (Through Dec.  23.)
MORRIS GRAVES, "Radiant Florals," Schmidt-Bingham Gallery, 41 East 57th Street.
This West Coast artist's still lifes of flowers are by no means his most distinctive work, but a gallery full of them (there are 30 here) can still be pretty magical, and his somber but glowing "Winter Bouquets" are just the thing for these late-autumn days. (Through Dec. 20.)
JUDITH GLANTZMAN, Blum Helman Gallery, 20 West 57th Street.
In answer to the age-old question about what little girls might be made of, Judith Glantzman's canvases indicate one ingredient: the colorful Expressionistic brushwork once seen as a male preserve, with a soupcon of irony thrown in for good measure. (Through tomorrow.)
RICHARD ARTSCHWAGER, Mary Boone Gallery, 417 West Broadway, near Spring Street, SoHo.
The latest from this sly Pop artist is an eery installation of sparkling plywood packing crates, which have profiles similar to earlier Artschwagers and sit around the gallery like so many shed skins. (Through Dec. 17.)
HANS HOFMANN, Andre Emmerich Gallery, 41 East 57th Street.
Made up primarily of small paintings on paper, this is a minor Hofmann show; but it's good to see this influential emigre teacher and artist in conjunction with the work of his greater European compatriot, Willem de Kooning, who reigns supreme at the Metropolitan Museum. (Through Jan. 14).


NATO Affirms Unity
Capitalizing on an American decision to stop pressing for air strikes against the Serbs, NATO ministers formally put their differences on the Bosnian war behind them.
Article, page A14.


Corrections
An article yesterday about killings of immigrant journalists in the United States included an erroneous date, supplied by an official of the Committee to Protect Journalists, for a meeting between Attorney General Janet Reno and a representative of the committee.
A committee official said yesterday that the meeting occurred in March, not several weeks ago.


Children Strike Fear Into Grown-Up Hearts
Once, before the children had guns, she could send them running from her stoop as if her voice were thunder and her accusing finger were lightning.
Louise Layton and other old women in the St.
Thomas housing project held power and respect, keeping watch on the courtyard from their high windows and rusted screen doors.
"I remember when we had flowers in St. Thomas," Mrs.
Layton said recently.
"You can't go out now to tend flowers. I'm afraid. I'm afraid of the young ones."


A Necessary School District Seizure
Schools Chancellor Ramon Cortines had no choice but to take over Community School District 17 in Brooklyn to end the chaos and turmoil there.
He has installed five trustees to replace the nine elected school board members, who were so hostile to each other that they were unable to cooperate in running the district or ending corruption and mismanagement.
Although the school system is often torn by tensions between advocates of centralization and decentralization, this exercise of centralized authority is entirely proper.
With nearly 28,000 students, District 17 is one of the largest of the 32 decentralized school districts.
It is also one of the most troubled.
For years, the district has been plagued by charges of patronage and corruption.
Many of its schools suffer from overcrowding and low test scores.
In 1990 Joseph Fernandez, then Chancellor, took over its financial operations because millions of Federal and state dollars for special remedial and drug programs had not been spent.


Jury Duty, or Drudgery?
Jury reform is in the air.
New York is overhauling its system to speed jury selection, shorten periods of jury service and reduce the number of professionals who are exempt from service.
These now include podiatrists, Christian Science nurses, prosthetists and embalmers, among others.
New Jersey's State Assemblyis considering a new bill to eliminate most of its exempted professionals,who include game and fish wardens and telephone operators.
And Arizona is mulling a proposal that would urge judges and lawyers to use simple language and not legalese when addressing jurors, allow judges to instruct jurors on legal issues at the start of trials and provide counseling to jurors who serve in particularly violent or high-profile cases.
More and more states now allow potential jurors to go home after one day if they are not assigned to a trial.


Bill T. Jones's Lyrical Look At Survivors
WE are a nation not of shopkeepers but of therapists.
No other culture in the world has, like postwar America, been so permeated with the idea that talking out personal problems, from the most trivial to the most severe, is good for you.
In recent decades, such concerns have been increasingly shared in group sessions.


PGA Says Norman Is Wavering
The future of the World Golf Tour took a curious turn yesterday when PGA Commissioner TIM FINCHEM said GREG NORMAN was re-evaluating his support of the new tour.
"Greg and I talked today on the telephone and he indicated he would not support any venture that would damage the PGA Tour, our tournaments or their sponsors," Finchem said in Ponte Vedra, Fla.
"It was a cordial conversation in which we both agreed that a confrontation would not be in the best interests of the game of golf."


New Offer To Be Heard By Borden
The board of Borden Inc. agreed yesterday to meet with Paul Kazarian, a would-be suitor, and presented him a list of seven questions about his complex proposal to acquire a minority interest in the company.
In what some traders viewed as a bit of one-upmanship by the Borden board and its advisers, the company requested a meeting with Mr.
Kazarian this Sunday.
Mr.
Kazarian, who made his offer on Wednesday, had requested a meeting with the board next Tuesday, and asked that big institutional shareholders be invited.


Knicks' Future Is Now, As in Now or Never
Pat Riley gets a front-row look tonight at the players who are bound to beat his brains in, should he stick around a few more years with his future Eastern Conference also-rans.
That's the Knicks, in Orlando tonight to continue what's looking more and more like a mighty struggle to keep their dubious future from spilling into their promising present, from giving Riley good reasons to wonder if signing a rich contract extension is such a smart idea.


U.N. Plays Down Missed Sarajevo Meeting
A staff error in Sarajevo may have kept Secretary General Boutros Boutros-Ghali from meeting the Bosnian Serb leader on Wednesday, United Nations officials said today.
They said staff members apparently had not confirmed with the Serbs that Sarajevo airport, the site chosen, was acceptable.
But some diplomats said this sounded like a search for scapegoats after an embarrassment.


Cato
Class A shares of the Cato Corporation, a retailer of women's apparel, closed yesterday at a 52-week low of $6, down $1.50.
Cato attributed a drop of 11 percent in November same-store sales to a "highly promotional and competitive sales environment."


Corrections
An article on Nov. 18 about the collapse of a bridge over the Han River in Seoul, South Korea, misstated the circumstances of the destruction of a similar bridge during the Korean War.
The original Han bridge was destroyed by South Korea to impede advancing North Korean forces; it was not destroyed by the North.


Mammogram Interpretation Is Questioned
A new study has raised serious questions about radiologists' reliability in reading mammograms and making recommendations about what to do when a suspicious lesion is found in the breast.
The study, by researchers at the Yale University School of Medicine and published yesterday in The New England Journal of Medicine, found that radiologists who read mammograms can vary considerably in their interpretations of the X-ray films and in the advice they would give to women.


For Children
'Bending Toward the Light'  'A Jazz Nativity'
Avery Fisher Hall  Lincoln Center  (212) 721-6500 (Centercharge)  Recommended ages: 4 and up  Sunday and Monday
This 10-year-old rhythmic Nativity pageant was written for adults of all religions, but children like it so much that it has become an annual pilgrimage for families who want to hear jazz performed by well-known performers.
How does Dave Brubeck playing the piano sound to you?
Lionel Hampton on the vibraphone?
Tito Puente is one of the Three Kings, using his skills on the timbale in lieu of a gift of myrrh.
Mr.
Puente's hat, like those worn by the other kings, is a spire of plumes.


Cuban Exiles Raise Cash To Resettle New Refugees
Frustrated over Government delays in releasing Cuban refugee families held in detention camps at the Guantanamo naval base in Cuba and in Panama, Cuban exile groups are getting pledges to privately finance the transportation and resettlement of about 8,000 refugees in this country.
The money would also pay for schooling for more than 2,000 children.


New Video-Game Challenge: Cut the Budget, if You Dare
Call it the political equivalent of "Mortal Kombat." It's the Government's budget game you can't win without spilling the blood of millions.
The lesson of the computer game released today by a Presidential panel on entitlement spending is that there is no easy way to keep these politically sacred payments -- Social Security and Medicare, in particular -- from consuming the entire Federal budget by 2030.


Live Rock: A Guide To New Clubs
ROCK clubs are the subatomic particles of New York City's cultural life.
They materialize without premonition; some attract, some repel, some bind together in unexpected combinations.
Like quarks, rock clubs can be up or down, strange or charmed.
And most of them have a very short life, barely winking into view before they disappear forever.
The long odds -- starting, but hardly ending, with the price of Manhattan real estate and the regulatory gantlet -- don't discourage everybody.
Each year, new clubs appear, hoping to endure long enough to become landmarks like CBGB or the Bottom Line, both of which have survived for more than 20 years.
Clubs in New York can serve as neighborhood hangouts, as headquarters for a scene in the making, or as destinations for performers on national tours.
The most ambitious try to do all three, providing the pleasure of joining the in-crowd just before the rest of the world finds out about the latest thing.
On a more practical level, it doesn't hurt, either, to have a popular local bar or cafe supporting the erratic business of live music.


Adversarial Allies: Sparring Over Bosnia and NATO Membership
At the root of the problems within the Atlantic alliance over Bosnia is a growing tendency among the Europeans to take a different view of their security needs than the United States does, something that rarely happened during the cold war.
One thing allied foreign ministers all agreed on at NATO's fall meeting today was that Bosnia had been a failure that must never be repeated.


New Team Takes Over School District 17
The day after Schools Chancellor Ramon C. Cortines seized control of the city's largest school district, security guards moved in to padlock records, and a new team of leaders wasted no time letting district employees know an era of reconstruction had begun.
Mr.
Cortines himself arrived at District 17 offices in central Brooklyn at 7:30 A.M., accompanied by Barbara Byrd-Bennett, the administrator who is taking over from the district's superintendent, Bernice Wiley.
Mr.
Cortines removed Mrs.
Wiley from her post on Wednesday.
He also suspended the district's nine-member board and replaced it with five trustees to try to solve the mismanagement and political infighting that he said were paralyzing the district, which runs from Crown Heights to Flatbush and has 28,000 students.


At the Bar; A new warrior takes over New York City's Legal Aid Society.
Wanted: fool to rush in where angels fear to tread.
Position available for top executive of nation's largest legal services organization, based in New York City.
Demoralized staff facing layoffs.
City Hall offering contract with 16 percent budget cut and no-strike clause; soliciting bids from competitors.
Popular support for the lawyers, to say nothing for the indigent clients: underwhelming.


The Dark Side of Genius and Its Supporting Cast
T.
S.
Eliot was a genius and a prig -- not an endearing combination in life, and not an easy one to portray on screen.
Willem Dafoe, whose usual screen presence is hot and passionate, is one of the last actors who come to mind to play him.
But as "Tom and Viv" tells the ghastly story of Eliot's marriage to Vivien Haigh-Wood, Mr.
Dafoe's stunningly sharp, sympathetic portrait raises the film above a script that is full of serious holes and stilted dialogue.
Mr.
Dafoe's Eliot has the forced accent of an American who desperately wants to be British, a voice as unnatural as a hothouse English rose.
His face is thin to the point of gauntness.
His narrow nose is a little too beaked to be truly refined, yet it carries the perfect expression of his pinched, hawklike nature.
Here is a man terrified of emotional chaos, who marries a woman guaranteed to give him nothing but.


Marx And Engels Didn't Do Davis Cup
Less than 24 hours before the Davis Cup finals were to begin, Vadim Borisov today delivered a rhapsody in Russian revisionism:
"Tennis has always been considered a very beautiful sport in Russia," Borisov, the Davis Cup captain, said.
"But today it's becoming more professional, and many young people want to make money in it. You know, it's just becoming a job."


Mexican, Taking Office, Pledges To Fight Poverty and Corruption
Ernesto Zedillo Ponce de Leon, a politically inexperienced economist thrust by tragedy into the leadership of Mexico's long-governing party, took office as President today, promising a new fight against poverty, "definitive" steps to democracy and sweeping changes in the corrupt justice system.
"Many have not benefited from the fruits of progress," Mr.
Zedillo, 42, said in an inaugural address that was filled with implicit criticism of the previous administration's failings.
"Now that we are able to build a more prosperous Mexico, we must -- and can -- make it a more just Mexico."


Senators Cool to Pact With Koreans
Democratic and Republican Senators alike gave a frosty reception today to the Administration's agreement with North Korea to halt its nuclear program, saying it had made too many concessions and might encourage other nations to engage in nuclear blackmail.
With some Republicans threatening to block the agreement, several members of the Senate Subcommittee on East Asia told the Administration's chief negotiator on the accord that it was unwise to promise North Korea $4 billion in new atomic reactors when North Korea would not permit inspections of some of its nuclear sites for five more years.


BUSINESS DIGEST
International
The Senate approved the new global trade accord, ending years of GATT negotiations with more than 100 nations over the lowering of tariffs, and also creating a World Trade Organization.  [ A1. ]


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  *
Alabama Power Co. is selling $150 million of bonds due in 2024 through Donaldson, Lufkin &amp; Jenrette Securities Corp.
The bonds, which are callable in five years, carry an interest rate of 9 percent and are priced at 99.421, to yield 9.056 percent.
The bonds are rated A+ by Duff &amp; Phelps.


Gibbs Says No Again to Coaching Carolina
The former Washington Redskins' coach JOE GIBBS has again said no to coaching the Carolina Panthers, repeating the response he gave the expansion team last spring.
"We're sorry Joe has decided against it, but we have our list and we'll move forward," the Panthers president MIKE McCORMACK said. (AP)


Clinton to Ask Billions More In Spending for the Military
Trying to quiet Republican criticism that the military is underfinanced, President Clinton held a Rose Garden ceremony today to announce that he would seek a $25 billion increase in military spending over the next six years.
With Defense Secretary William J. Perry and the Joint Chiefs of Staff at his side, Mr.
Clinton outlined plans to improve readiness and to support military personnel.
Among the purposes of the new money, he said, will be the troops' annual cost-of-living pay increases that Congress has already authorized into the next century.


Corrections
An article yesterday about the recently deposed majority leader of the New York State Senate, Ralph J. Marino, misstated the amount of the annual pension he could receive if he resigned from the Senate this year.
It is $65,625, not $55,000.


Colin Powell Is Honored in His Ancestral Home


Executive Changes
CALIFORNIA MILK ADVISORY BOARD, Modesto, Calif., named Adri G. Boudewyn chief executive.
CHANEL INC., New York, appointed Debara Splendorio executive director of training for Chanel Beaute and Fragrance.


Players Try To Block Foreign Fill-ins
As baseball's owners intensify talk about using replacement players next season, the union has made a pre-emptive move to cut off what it anticipates will be a potential source of those players.
It has set in motion an effort to block foreign players from obtaining visas to serve as replacements for major leaguers who have been on strike since Aug. 12.
Gene Orza, the union's associate general counsel, confirmed yesterday that the Players Association has asked the Department of Labor to certify the strike, a step that would prompt the Immigration and Naturalization Service, under Federal regulation, to deny visas to foreign players seeking to play baseball in the United States.


Endgame in Bosnia
With Serbian forces advancing without restraint, European and American diplomats in headlong retreat from their own peace plan and the U.N. threatening to withdraw its peacekeepers, the prolonged dismemberment of Bosnia is moving into its endgame.
Washington cannot, especially at this late date, unilaterally rescue Bosnia from its unhappy fate.
Neither is it obliged to lean on the Bosnians to accept Serbian terms in order to end the fighting.
But what the Clinton Administration can and must do is stop trying to please everybody at once and instead begin talking bluntly and honestly -- to the Bosnians, the Serbs, the allies and the American people.
That is something the Administration has so far spectacularly failed to do.
The last few days have been the worst, with the White House, the State Department and the Pentagon speaking with three discordant voices.


Region Briefs; Ship Hits Rail Bridge, Halting New Jersey Lines
Rush-hour service was disrupted for thousands of commuters on New Jersey Transit's Morris and Essex lines yesterday after a ship hit an open railroad drawbridge on the Hackensack River in Jersey City.
The mishap knocked the bridge out of service from 4 to 5 P.M., preventing 10 trains from leaving the railroad's main terminal in Hoboken on schedule and backing up six Hoboken-bound trains at Newark's Broad Street station, said Linda Maurice, an N.J.
Transit spokeswoman.
She said each train usually carries about 1,000 passengers.


Woman Hit by Train Dies
A woman waiting for a northbound IRT local at 103d Street and Broadway was killed yesterday when she leaned over the platform, looked in the wrong direction and was struck by the oncoming train, the transit police said.
The police said the woman, who was thrown back onto the platform, died at St.
Luke's Hospital.


Glittering Beyond Greece's Sculptures, Writings and Myths
Classical Greece means many things.
The Parthenon, the sculpture of Phidias and Praxiteles, the writings of Herodotus and Thucydides merely top a long list of well-known cultural cornerstones.
But one thing it usually doesn't mean, at least outside the specialized field of antiquities, is jewelry.
"Greek Gold: The Jewelry of the Classical World" at the Metropolitan Museum of Art may change that.
This beautiful exhibition, as seductive as it is esoteric, adds a substantial chapter to the general understanding of one of civilization's most widely revered periods.
Not that the word "chapter" really describes "Greek Gold." The exhibition is more like a thorough outline, an unusually rich and delightful form of Monarch Notes: one strength is the remarkable degree to which it functions as a microcosm.
Its usually tiny works of wearable ancient art echo in miniature many of the themes, motifs and concerns at the heart of classical Greece, including its preoccupation with the human body, its devotion to its all-too-human gods and the perfect pitch with which it distilled its forms and proportions from nature.


Monthlong Happy Party At the City Ballet
Whenever the New York City Ballet performs "The Nutcracker," everything onstage at the New York State Theater seems part of one big happy party.
The festivities got under way on Wednesday night when the company gave this season's first performance of George Balanchine's version of the holiday classic.
The "Nutcracker" revelry continues through Dec. 31 and should delight everyone but Scrooge.
Fortunately, in the world of "The Nutcracker" there are no Scrooges.
The work's eccentric characters are benign.
Mischievous children never mature into delinquents.
Adults are warmhearted.
And although there are wicked mice, those marauding rodents are soon defeated.
Almost everything else in the ballet involves merrymaking.
There's a wonderful family gathering in the first act.
Snowflake fairies frisk convivially through that act's finale.
The second act is another party, this time in an enchanted realm where sweets mingle and give no one indigestion.
And the candies' ruler, the Sugarplum Fairy, is not so much an imperious queen as a gracious hostess.


Evangelical Minister Is Slain in Brooklyn
A gunman shot and killed an evangelical minister in the Bushwick section of Brooklyn on Wednesday night as he walked out of a Chinese takeout restaurant, the police said.
Detective Richard Bergin, who is investigating the case, said it was unclear whether the gunman knew the minister, Alphonso Williams, 49, or what the motive for the shooting was.


N.H.L. Stars Face Another Stubborn Lot
Wayne Gretzky &amp; Friends boarded their chartered jet and headed to Finland late tonight with a few physical bruises to nurse and a psychic wound to lick.
In an exhibition game against the Detroit Vipers of the International Hockey League, this barnstorming team of locked-out National Hockey League stars was defeated, 4-3, in a game of surprising intensity at the Palace of Auburn Hills.


Man Held for Practicing Dentistry Without Degree or License
Over the last four years, Gilberto Cordova drilled and filled and cared for the teeth of more than 100 patients, most of them fellow immigrants from El Salvador.
But the police said today he did it without a degree or license to practice dentistry.
"He provided a full range of dental services, everything from new bridges and crowns to root canal," said Detective Lieut.
Gerard Pelkofsky of the Suffolk County police.
Mr.
Cordova's illegal practice is an example of an underground network that serves Suffolk's growing population of Central and South American immigrants.
It is a network that provides services with no language barriers and no questions about alien status, the police and advocates for Latino immigrants said.
"Dental and medical care is a big problem for them," said Patrick Young, program director for the Central American Refugee Center, an advocacy and service organization in Hempstead.
"They have no idea how things work in this country so they go where their friends go and where people speak their language."
Mr.
Cordova's illegal practice came to light a week ago when a patient who had had root canal work developed an infection and had to have several teeth extracted by a licensed dentist, the police said.
The patient, a native of El Salvador, complained to the police, who found that Mr.
Cordova had attended dental school in El Salvador but had never earned a degree in dentistry and was never granted a license to practice dentistry.
Lieutenant Pelkofsky said detectives raided Mr.
Cordova's split-level brick and aluminum-sided home here at 81 Adams Street at 8:50 P.M. on Wednesday and found a complete dental office on the lower floor.
Mr.
Cordova, 47, and his wife, Rosa, 42, who worked as his receptionist and dental assistant, were charged with the unlawful practice of dentistry.
Both were given desk appearance summonses and are to appear in First District Court in Central Islip on Jan. 17.
Lieutenant Pelkofsky said the Cordovas faced other possible charges, including the violation of environmental laws in disposing of X-ray film and other items, and failure to use procedures necessary to prevent the spread of the AIDS virus.
The police said that Mr.
Cordova's father and brothers were all practicing dentists in El Salvador and that his son was a student at the New York University School of Dentistry.
At one time in Central America, it was not uncommon for some dentists to work without formal degrees.
Typically, they learned their trade as apprentices to other dentists.
Mr.
Cordova had worked as a technician at a dental laboratory on Long Island until two years ago, when he quit to work full time at his growing dental practice, the police said.
The shades were drawn at the Cordova home this afternoon and telephone calls went answered.
The mailman made a delivery shortly after noon as two young men, one of whom was described by a neighbor as Mr.
Cordova's son, entered the house.
Both declined to comment.
Maria Hernandez, who lives around the corner on Jackson Avenue with her sister and brother-in-law -- all Salvadoran immigrants -- said her sister had been a patient of Mr.
Cordova's.
"I can't believe he is not a real dentist," Ms.
Hernandez said.
"My sister had no problems with him. He and his wife were always very nice to us."
Mr.
Young of the Central American Refugee Center said that an estimated 85,000 Salvadoran immigrants live on Long Island, of which 35,000 live in Suffolk.
The largest concentration, or about 5,000, live in modest single-family homes and apartments in Brentwood, he said.
Most Salvadoran men are legal aliens, he said, while many of the women and children tended to be illegal aliens.
"Finding good professional health care and legal advice is a difficult problem for Latino immigrants," he said.
"There have been many cases involving people who have taken advantage of Salvadorans and their problems with immigration. This case with a dentist points out the need for better educating the Salvadorans about medical services available to them."


A Romantic With Emotions Held Firmly Under Control
Romanticism was referred to as a sickness in its day.
Modern psychiatry might just call it magical thinking: a vision of what the world could be, should be, would be, rather than what it is.
Yet an artist like Ferdinand Hodler (1853-1918) had good reason to want the world changed.
He was born into poverty, and by the time he was 12, both parents were dead of tuberculosis, a disease that would later kill his brothers and sisters, two of his mistresses and his son.
In one way or another, this traumatic, hammering experience of loss pervades almost every aspect of "Ferdinand Hodler: Views and Visions" at the National Academy of Design.
The exhibition is the first American overview of this Swiss artist's career in more than 20 years, and even though the large-scale works that made his name are not included, it captures the blend of passion and reserve that defines his work.


Paying Families to Overpopulate?
To the Editor:
Re "$650 a Baby: Germany to Pay to Stem Decline in Births" (news article, Nov. 25):


Abroad at Home; Shame, Eternal Shame
Anyone who did not grasp the meaning of what is happening in Bosnia need only have looked at the newspaper picture this week of a Bosnian Government soldier taken prisoner by the Serbs at Bihac.
They made him wear a fez, mocking his Muslim religion, as the Nazis made Jews wear a yellow star.
How did it happen that, 50 years after the Nazis, human beings are being humiliated and killed in Europe because of their religion?
All of us in what we like to think of as the civilized West share the shame.


INSIDE
Conviction in Bridge Killing
A 28-year-old immigrant from Lebanon was found guilty of murder and other charges in the shooting of a vanload of Hasidic students crossing the Brooklyn Bridge.
Page B1.
Erasing Deficit Could Hurt
Governor-elect George E. Pataki said closing a projected $5 billion deficit while cutting taxes might force him to trim state aid to local schools and governments.
Page B1.
Huge Loss in California
Orange County, Calif., one of the nation's wealthiest counties, is facing a $1.4 billion loss from buying risky and volatile investments known as derivatives.
Page D1.
Chemical Bank Cuts Jobs
The Chemical Banking Corporation said that it would eliminate 3,700 jobs, one of the biggest single employment cutbacks in New York in recent years.
Page D1.
Dark Reminder of a Plague
To mark World AIDS Day, the "Love" sculpture by Robert Indiana in Philadelphia was draped in black.
In Paris, 42 nations agreed on prevention efforts.
Pages B3 and A12.


Corrections
A brief report by The Associated Press in the Company News column in some editions of Business Day on Wednesday, about a proposed spinoff of a unit of Lin Broadcasting, misstated a provision of the deal.
Lin shareholders will receive one share of the unit, Lin Television, for every two shares of Lin Broadcasting they own on Dec. 9; the ratio is not one for one.


A VICTORY FOR CLINTON
The Senate tonight approved American participation in the most ambitious global trade accord reached in four decades.
Approval of the 124-nation pact, by a far wider margin than expected, ended a dozen years of negotiations over the lowering of tariffs and the creation of the World Trade Organization, a new international body designed to police commerce among nations.


Foote, Cone Gets A Tourism Account
The Illinois Department of Commerce and Community Affairs said yesterday that it had awarded Foote, Cone &amp; Belding in Chicago a three-year contract for its tourism bureau advertising, with billings estimated at $12 million.
For the last three years the contract, which expires Jan. 31, had been with Ogilvy &amp; Mather Chicago.


Sports of The Times; Usery Can Play Hardball
THERE is hope for baseball.
There is hope that come next spring we may once again watch real major leaguers, not the scab variety being threatened by John Harrington and other owners with no pride.
The reason for hope is that the owners and players are at least listening to W. J. Usery Jr., master mediator.
On Wednesday, the owners postponed their plan to impose a salary cap on the players, which had been scheduled for next Monday.
Why did they back off?
Partly because Bill Usery persuaded them.


Britain and I.R.A. Group to Begin Talks in Northern Ireland
The British Government and Sinn Fein, the political arm of the Irish Republican Army, will start negotiations in Belfast Wednesday, almost one year after Britain and Ireland began an uncertain program to try to resolve the conflict in Northern Ireland.
Although the announcement was not a surprise, it still set off an exciting ripple that history was in the making.
British officials have in the past conducted secret talks with Sinn Fein leaders, but never before have they sat down openly at the same table with them.


U.S. Coach Blames China's Approach
The coach of the 1996 United States Olympic swimming team disputed an assertion yesterday by the Chinese foreign ministry that a dozen recently failed drug tests by Chinese athletes represented individual action rather than systematic cheating.
The Chinese Olympic Committee has confirmed that 11 athletes failed tests for performance-enhancing drugs at last month's Asian Games held in Hiroshima, Japan.
As many as eight are reported to be swimmers, including one world-record holder.


Pepsi Escalates Brazil's Cola War
Firing a broadside in a cola war over South America's largest market, Pepsi-Cola said today that it was spending $400 million through next June to triple its share of the market in Brazil.
Christopher A. Sinclair, president of Pepsi-Cola International, called the investment "the single largest business ramp-up in Pepsi's history." He predicted at a news conference here that Brazil's cola market would soon outstrip those of Mexico and Germany to become the second-largest in the world, after the United States.


Paris Meeting Backs U.N. Program to Combat AIDS
Recognizing that the global fight against AIDS has so far been largely ineffective, 42 countries pledged today to throw their political weight behind a new United Nations program to step up prevention campaigns and to fight discrimination against victims of the disease.
At a so-called AIDS summit meeting on World AIDS Day, a dozen prime ministers and other senior officials also agreed to work more closely with AIDS victims and carriers of the human immunodeficiency virus.
Those who are infected often say their opinions and experience are ignored.


Diner's Journal
3 Kinds of Spectacle
Before you eat dinner at the new American Renaissance, you really ought to take a look at the restrooms.
I'm told there are televisions in the men's room.
Nice.
But nothing compared to the ladies' room, a fantasy of flowers, marble and mirrors that looks like a set for a Busby Berkeley musical.
One expects dancing girls to burst out of the red snakeskin doors, tap their way across to the gorgeous green glass washbasins and burst into song.
After this, the spectacle of the dining room seems, well, subdued.
And that is in spite of an indoor waterfall, gilded ceilings that soar a couple of stories, old pillars, new lights, showy flowers.
It's quite a setting.


Best Buy's Shares Post Drop of 26%
Shares in the Best Buy Company fell 26 percent yesterday after the computer and appliance retailer said its third-quarter earnings would fall short of Wall Street expectations.
The stock plunged $11.375 yesterday, to $32.87, on the New York Stock Exchange, where it was one of the most actively traded issues.


Luther Foster Jr., 81, Dies; Leader of Tuskegee Institute
Luther H. Foster Jr., who headed Tuskegee Institute for 28 years, died on Sunday at the South Fulton County Medical Center in East Point, Ga., while on his way home from vacation.
He was 81 and lived in Alexandria, Va.
The cause was a heart attack, said his daughter, Adrienne Foster Williams of Iselin, N.J.





Retail Sales Rise Slowly As Holiday Buying Begins
The nation's retail chains managed to ring up moderate sales gains in November, but only after jump-starting their businesses with holiday-related promotions.
The month was a cliffhanger for most retailers as sales, which were weak in September and October, stalled during the first three weeks of the month before picking up steam around Thanksgiving Day.


Schlepper as Insult
To the Editor:
In "Schleppers" (editorial, Nov. 24), you inadvertently insult all New Yorkers by calling them by that name.
According to Leo Rosten's book "The Joys of Yiddish," some of the meanings of the word "schlepper" are: "drag, jerk, a maladroit performer, unkempt, untidy." Merely engaging in the essential New York activity of schlepping will not necessarily turn you into a schlepper. (Rabbi) SAMUEL CHIEL  Newton, Mass., Nov. 28, 1994


Art in Review
Lisa Hoke
Horodner Romley Gallery  107-109 Sullivan Street  SoHo  Through Dec. 21
In the past, Lisa Hoke's sculpture has sometimes had the look of clothes-making spun out of control, as in the case of wall pieces made of hundreds of plaited ribbons or dozens of zippers stitched together into a metalic tapestry.


Israelis Yield West Bank Taxation and Health to Palestinians
Israel handed over responsibility for taxation and health services in the West Bank to the Palestinian Authority today, completing the first phase of an expansion of Palestinian self-rule beyond the Gaza Strip and Jericho.
In ceremonies in Ramallah and Nablus, the head of the Israeli military government in the West Bank, Brig.
Gen.
Gadi Zohar, signed transfer agreements with officials of the Palestinian Authority.
The Palestinians now control the tax department and the government health system throughout the West Bank, but will continue to receive technical guidance from the Israelis for several months.


The Term-Limits Shakes
There is plenty of term-limits action in Washington this week, both before the Supreme Court and within the new Republican majority on Capitol Hill.
Leaders of the term limits movement are hoping the Court will ignore the Constitution and allow states to decide how long members of Congress can serve.
Their hunger for the ruling is increased because they know many of the Republicans elected to Congress as advocates of term limits privately think they are a bad idea.
Term limits were put into the G.O.P.'s "Contract with America" as a vote-getting tactic.
Now that they have control of Congress, the Republicans are not eager to pack their bags and head for home.
The columnist Robert Novak, who knows his right-wingers, lists three top House leaders -- Representatives Newt Gingrich, Dick Armey and Bill McCollum -- as soft on term limits.
Two more G.O.P. leaders, Representatives Henry Hyde and John Kasich, are listed as outright opponents.


Italian Premier's Deal With Unions Averts General Strike
Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi struck a last-minute compromise with Italy's labor unions on budget cuts today, averting an eight-hour general strike planned for Friday that would have deepened his Government's aura of embattlement.
The breakthrough, after 22 hours of negotiations, was depicted by the Italian leader as more good news after two developments that eased the crisis over a decision last week by magistrates in Milan to investigate him in a corruption case.


The West's Bosnia Policy Was Designed to Fail; Bombing Is Impractical
To the Editor:
In "Robust or Bust" (column, Nov. 28) William Safire urges the United States to "give serious bombing a chance" in Bosnia.
He cites the effectiveness of America's massive 1991 bombing campaign in Desert Storm, which, according to heady postwar claims by America's air-power enthusiasts, marked the first time a war was won practically by air power alone.


Bowe Weighs In at 241 Pounds
RIDDICK BOWE returns to the ring tomorrow night for only the second time since losing his heavyweight titles to EVANDER HOLYFIELD when he meets the unbeaten former Olympian LARRY DONALD in a scheduled 12-round bout in Las Vegas, Nev.
Bowe weighed in today at 241 pounds, a drop of 6 pounds from his last fight.
Donald was at 228.
Bowe, who weighed 247 pounds for his unsuccessful return to the ring in August against BUSTER MATHIS JR., claims to be in his best shape since beating Holyfield in November 1992 to win the titles.
"It's just like during the Olympics when they said he's lazy and he's crazy," Bowe said.
"People think I'm no longer hungry. That's not true." (AP)


CHRONICLE
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON had some observations this week about the intrusion of the press into her private life, too.
Speaking at a class on Presidential spouses offered by George Washington University, she said she thought she had come to Washington prepared for the loss of privacy.
But the speculation about the Clintons' private life was more painful than she had anticipated, she said.


A Gardener Whose Tree Ushers In Christmas
A nervous thread runs through the life of David P. Murbach.
"It's on my mind every single day of the year," he said.
Though it might vary a foot or two from year to year, his obsession is forever green, 80 feet tall and weighs seven and a half tons.
It is the Christmas tree at Rockefeller Center, and his always urgent mission, as the complex's chief gardener, is to find the next one.


Sale Signs That Fool Are Subject Of a Sweep
In Manhattan, the signs are as commonplace as pigeons and impatient drivers: "Going Out of Business," "Lost Our Lease" and "Liquidation Sale."
But as many have noticed, some of the signs seem never to go away, or at least the stores that post them take months to finally shut their doors.


CHRONICLE
In May, CINDY CRAWFORD and RICHARD GERE took out a full-page advertisement in The Times of London to proclaim the strength of their marriage and to say they were looking forward to having a family.
Yesterday, they announced that they had separated.
The news was released by two public-relations concerns in Los Angeles: PMK (his) and Wolf Kasteler (hers).


Wounded Rapper Gets Mixed Verdict In Sex-Abuse Case
Tupac Shakur, the rap star, was convicted yesterday of felony sex-abuse charges for groping a fan who went to his room at the Parker Meridien Hotel last year, but he was acquitted of the more serious charges of forcing the woman to have oral sex with him and his friends, and of weapons charges.
With his prominence in the music world and his repeated run-ins with the law, Mr.
Shakur has become a symbol of "gangsta rap," a genre often criticized for its violent images and for what many feel is its degradation of women.
He was not in the courtroom as the verdict was read yesterday, because he was receiving treatment for gunshot wounds he suffered early Wednesday in what the police said was a robbery.
His lawyer, Michael Warren, would not say exactly where he was.


Lionel Stander Dies at 86; Actor Who Defied Blacklist
Lionel Stander, whose gravelly voice and beetling brow made him a memorable presence on stage and screen and whose political beliefs in the era of the Hollywood blacklist earned him a long exile from American films, died on Wednesday at his home in the Brentwood section of Los Angeles.
He was 86.
The cause was lung cancer, said Alan Nierob, a family spokesman.


First Lombardi Award for Miami
WARREN SAPP, a junior defensive end at the University of Miami, yesterday became the first member of the Hurricanes to win the Lombardi Award as the nation's top lineman.
Sapp, 6 feet 3 inches and 284 pounds, beat out Arizona defensive end TEDY BRUSCHI, Nebraska offensive tackle ZACH WIEGERT and Florida State linebacker DERRICK BROOKS.
Sapp had 84 tackles, 10.5 sacks, 4 forced fumbles, 3 fumble recoveries and 25 quarterback pressures as the leader on a team that led the nation in total defense.
"I'd love to have him around for his senior year," Coach DENNIS ERICKSON said.
Sapp hasn't said if he'll turn pro. (AP)


Double Lockout: Minors Bolt Door
National Hockey League players, locked out for more than two months, have found another door shut.
It is the one leading to the International Hockey League, the leading minor professional league in North America.
Bob Ufer, the commissioner of the I.H.L., issued a directive Wednesday night, banning teams from signing anyone who is not already on their 23-man roster until at least Dec. 16 and possibly longer.


Republicans Elect Bruno Senate Leader
In a changing of the guard in the State Senate, Republicans formally elected Joseph L. Bruno of Rensselaer County as their new majority leader today.
"The people on Nov. 8 dictated to the people of this state that there be change," Mr.
Bruno said at a news conference, where he was surrounded by his Republican colleagues.
"The people in our conference recognized that call for change and have consequently supported me."


Balkan War May Spread Into Croatia
Intense mortar and artillery fire broke out in Croatia today as the war in Bosnia threatened to spread over the border.
Paul Risley, a spokesman for the United Nations Protection Force, said there was a "fierce exchange of artillery and mortar fire this morning" between the Croatian Army and Serbian forces, who have controlled close to one-third of Croatia since 1991.


Finance Arm To Take Over Italy's Tessile
The creditor banks that took control last year of one of Italy's largest, most innovative and most indebted textile groups, Gruppo Finanziario Tessile S.p.A., agreed today to make the company available to Gemina S.p.A., a finance and investment group.
The announcement by Gemina ends a drawn-out feud for control of the Turin-based textile company, which almost alone brought the Italian designer-fashion craze to the United States in the 1980's.
For Italy's textile industry, shaken by recession and disclosures of financial misdealings, the transaction represented a successful effort to keep the Tessile group in Italian hands.


Dixon Place Benefit
John Kelly, Curtis Robertson and the Pageboys and the Five Lesbian Brothers are among 13 performance artists participating in the Dixon Place Performers' Fund Benefit on Monday at 7:30 P.M. at Exit Art, 548 Broadway, at Prince Street, SoHo.
Proceeds from the benefit will go toward paying performers' fees at Dixon Place, one of New York City's oldest downtown avant-garde theaters.
Tickets are $20 for general admission; $30 for the event and a pre-performance cocktail party at 6 P.M.
Information and reservations: (212) 219-3088.


Maryland County Embroiled in Voting Rights Suit
The flat, featureless countryside around here is dotted with the chicken farms that have brought economic renewal to Worcester County.
To the northeast at the tip of the county sits Ocean City, a boardwalk isle that serves as a summer draw for the Middle Atlantic States.
But the county may soon become known throughout the nation for something else: It is becoming a prime legal battleground in the war over how to apportion political power fairly between whites and blacks.


Government Auctions Off The Spoils Of 2 Spies
The ill-gotten goods of Aldrich H. Ames, Moscow's man inside the Central Intelligence Agency, were auctioned off in a suburban shopping mall today, an incongruous end to the tale of greed that was the last great spy story of the cold war.
The curious and the covetous bid on jewels, gems and geegaws, once stashed amid purloined papers and classified computer files, seized by the Federal Bureau Investigation after Mr.
Ames and his wife, Rosario, were arrested nine months ago in their well-appointed home in a Virginia suburb of Washington.


The Knicks Are Seeking Some Respect From Magic
Patrick Ewing likes to avoid pre-game rhetoric, but he had a message today for the Orlando Magic.
"They're a great team, we're a great team, but in order to get to the championship, you've got to come through New York," Ewing said as the Knicks prepared for Friday night's early-season showdown against the Magic.


Home Video
This is the time of year for massive new video reference works, with 1995 on the cover and updated lists of thousands of titles inside.
Prime examples are new editions of two consumer standbys: "Leonard Maltin's Movie and Video Guide" (Penguin, $7.99), with 15,000 video listings, and "Video Hound's Golden Movie Retriever" (Visible Ink Press, $17.95), with 22,000 titles.
Other new sources take a more particular view.
"Mrs. Hudson's Video Take-Away," for example, is a catalogue of 10,000 titles from Mrs.
Hudson's Video Library, 573 Hudson Street, at 11th Street, in the West Village.
With a clientele that is choosy about film, Mrs.
Hudson's doesn't overburden itself with new releases.


How Gay Young Men Deal With Coming Out
The protagonists of each of the three short films that open today at the Quad Cinema under the title "Boys Life" are young, white, middle-class men facing the realities of being 17 or 18 and gay.
Although it may be less traumatic for young gay men to come out to their friends and families today than it was 25 years ago, these three films suggest that acknowledgement of one's own homosexuality in a predominantly straight society is still no picnic even in a supposedly liberated era.
In Raoul O'Connell's "Friend of Dorothy" and Robert Lee King's "Disco Years," the main characters are students who have to tiptoe with excruciating care through environments that could turn viciously hostile with one indiscreet gesture.
The protagonist of Brian Sloan's "Pool Days" is a virginal 17-year-old lifeguard who is just becoming aware of his homosexuality but has yet to act on his desires.


The West's Bosnia Policy Was Designed to Fail; First Attack on Bihac
To the Editor:
Ironically, the Bosnian Serbs are doing what the United Nations and the Bosnian Muslims failed or were unwilling to do, i.e., make Bihac a safe haven.
Tragically, this has been accompanied by a great deal of bloodshed and destruction.
But need it have happened?


System Support
Electronic "chat groups" on the Internet have become so popular that you'd expect more and more politicians to take part in them.
Imagine the strategy session, for instance, that might have taken place before the recent election:
I got bounced from the system. Trying to get back in. Advice? mbarry@washingt.dc


Bhopal Journal; In India's City of Death, Time Has Healed Little
Ten years after a blanket of lethal gases from a Union Carbide pesticide plant swamped this central Indian city as it slept, Ram Singh Thakur, a former drugstore clerk, lies on a mattress on the floor of his shack just outside the plant.
Until a few years ago, Mr.
Thakur, 64, was an outspoken community leader.
Now, partly paralyzed after a stroke, he is unable to work or to walk.
"Nothing seems to help," he said, his voice slurred.


Critic's Choice/Film; Mixing Humanity and History to Illustrate the Flux of Family Life in China
With exquisite simplicity, the astonishing Chinese film maker Zhang Yimou tells stories that pierce the heart.
"To Live," his latest (after "Raise the Red Lantern," "Ju Dou" and "The Story of Qiu Ju"), is one more stirring example of this director's ability to mix humanity with history, letting a politically charged drama unfold on the most intimate, affecting scale.
Mr.
Zhang's daringly iconoclastic work remains banned in China, but it deserves to be admired in every corner of the globe.
"To Live," an eloquent and devastating chronicle of family life in modern China, spans three decades in the marriage of a couple (played wonderfully by Ge You and Gong Li) buffeted by political upheaval.
Those changes manifest themselves in indirect ways, but family tragedies and reversals of fortune are inextricably linked to larger changes in Chinese life.
That theme is familiar among today's Chinese film makers, but Mr.
Zhang makes it particularly personal and moving.
He also sets forth this sad story with a superb eye for revealing detail.


German Bomber Is Freed
A German woman who was sentenced to life in prison for a 1972 bomb attack that killed three American soldiers was freed today after serving 22 years.
The prisoner, Irmgard Moller, 47, was a member of the Red Army Faction when she took part in the attack against a United States military headquarters in Heidelberg.


On Stage, and Off
'Angels' Folds Its Wings
This Sunday, ending an 83-week run at the Walter Kerr Theater, Tony Kushner's "Angels in America" comes to a close.
The seven-hour play is a landmark of pre-third-millennium theater; it won a 1993 Pulitzer and Tony for best play; it made or hugely enhanced the reputations of actors like Stephen Spinella, Ron Leibman, Joe Mantello, Kathleen Chalfant and Marcia Gay Harden and established Mr.
Kushner as a leading American playwright.
"Angels" also defeated the inherent dilemma in an important new subgenre, the AIDS play.
Plays about an inevitably fatal disease risked having the dramatic tension pricked out of them in midplot by a simple blood test: the audience would know an H.I.V.-positive hero was doomed; an uninfected one had a happy ending in sight, no matter how serious the tone.
Mr.
Kushner transcended that by introducing angels and lobbying trips to heaven.
A switch to science-fiction can make an audience throw up its hands, but he neither yanked a plot-fixing deity out of the heavenly machinery nor confected an ending more apocalyptic than a plea for more time.
Audiences bought it.


You Have to Do the Digging Before You Get to Print


Shop Around Before Buying a 'Gold Hernia'
To the Editor:
Re "My Solid Gold Hernia" (Op-Ed, Nov. 26) by Frederick Willman, about excessive hospital charges: May I suggest that the trouble is not so much with the system, but rather a matter of geography and making a judgment as to which physician and hospital to expose oneself "for incision."


Killings Erode a California City's Calm
It was Halloween night a year ago when Deborah Bush, a crime-scene investigator with the Pasadena police, heard the staccato spray of semiautomatic gunfire a few doors from her home in a quiet neighborhood of neatly tended bungalows.
Wasting no time, Ms.
Bush sprinted down the street, where she found six bodies sprawled, some writhing in pain, others ominously still.
Instinctively, as she had been trained to do as a police officer, she searched for signs of life from the nearest victim, barely a teen-ager, and knew almost at once that he was dead.
Moving swiftly to the next body, she again searched in vain for a pulse.
And it was only then that she realized that the second bullet-riddled bodywas that of her elder son, Stephen Coats, 14.


Restaurants
In the daytime, Oceana is like a trim little boat sailing off in calm seas.
The snug banquettes are occupied mostly by men who seem content to be on this particular voyage; an aura of satisfaction hangs over the room as busboys scurry about replacing tepid rolls with warm ones, refilling wine glasses and bringing freshly iced water.
These diners have signed on for a three-course cruise, which lends the room a relaxed air unusual in midtown Manhattan at midday.
It feels like a place where power lunchers go when they want to slow down.
At night, Oceana seems like a completely different restaurant.
It is as if the boat had docked and taken on a new load of passengers, who are somehow less sure of themselves.
They are couples, tourists, one night a lone woman who is entertained most of the evening by one waiter or another.
The crew has not changed, but it, too, seems less sharp than in the daytime, allowing rolls to cool and water to warm.


Market Place; A building products distributor opens doors with acquisitions.
A CONSOLIDATION in the building products distribution industry has brought Cameron Ashley Inc. to the attention of Wall Street professionals.
The company, based in Dallas, has quietly become prominent in the distribution of residential building materials like roofing, millwork, vinyl siding and insulation.
In Florida, its Ashley division is the dominant distributor of pool and patio construction wares.


Assembly Again Passes Sexual-Abstinence Bill
For the third time in six years, the New Jersey Assembly passed a bill today that would require schools to teach sexual abstinence as the "only completely reliable means" of preventing unwanted pregnancies and sexually transmitted diseases like AIDS.
The bill was approved 53 to 16 and sent to the Senate.


Derivatives Loss Jolts Stocks; Dow Off 38.36
Stock prices, already falling because of gnawing inflation fears, were staggered yesterday by a surprise -- that a wealthy Southern California county was facing a loss of $1.5 billion, in part because of buying risky investments known as derivatives.
The loss by Orange County, Calif., is the largest attributed to derivatives by an institutional investor this year.
The disclosure hurt Merrill Lynch &amp; Company, the nation's largest securities firm, in particular, because it has dealings with Orange County.


Game's Stars Knock Owners' Idea Down
Tony Gwynn stood at a middle lane, a bowling ball in his hand.
To his right, Ken Griffey Jr. was rolling a strike.
To his left, Frank Thomas was tying the laces to his bowling shoes.
"One or two guys in this bowling alley would make the biggest difference," Gwynn said, nodding to the likes of the Rangers' Jose Canseco, the Braves' Terry Pendleton and the Mets' Bobby Bonilla, while referring to one of the elements that would crack the solidarity of the players' strike.
"These guys are the name players, the ones that put people in seats. The more players like that cross, the more difficult it will be. But you can wipe my name off the slate, and I think you can do that for the other guys here."


Kathleen Mahon, 49, Lawyer for Officers
Kathleen P. Mahon, a lawyer who represented Federal law-enforcement officers, died yesterday at her home in Syosset, L.I.
She was 49.
The cause was lung cancer, her family said.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-17  ECONOMIST TAKES OVER IN MEXICO  Ernesto Zedillo Ponce de Leon took office as President in Mexico, promising a new fight against poverty and sweeping changes in the corrupt justice system.
A1  NATO PATCHES BOSNIA RIFT  Meeting in Brussels, the U.S. and its NATO allies insisted that whatever happened in Bosnia, it would not affect their unity.
A14


Berlin Cameron Joins Sony's Review List
The Sony Electronics unit of the Sony Corporation of America, as expected, has added another agency to the list of finalists on the review for its account, with billings estimated at $50 million.
The new agency is Berlin Cameron Doyle in New York, Rick Clancy, a spokesman for Sony Electronics in Park Ridge, N.J., said Wednesday.


Roberts, After 10 Years, Wants a Second Decade
William Roberts has played in the National Football League for 10 years, and has reached the point where nothing shakes him.
After a decade of trap blocks, aches and pains, contract squabbles, two Super Bowl rings, losing seasons and Ray Handley, it's easy to understand why Roberts speaks calmly about his past and future with the Giants.
While Roberts, who has one year left on a two-year deal, says he expects to be back in 1995, he leaves open the possibility that the Giants may decide to go with the younger players next season.
He feels that way because when the Giants signed him to a new deal, they didn't give him guaranteed money up front.
If they did, it would be harder for them to let him go next season.


No Headline
"We should not measure this trade agreement against a perfect and unrealizable ideal. These are the only trade partners we have. We don't trade with Mars, we don't trade with the moon, we don't trade with countries made in Heaven." SENATOR GEORGE MITCHELL  [ A22:1. ]


Corrections
A brief report in Business Day on Wednesday about a plan by Merck &amp; Company to repay debt misspelled the surname of the company's chief financial officer.
She is Judy C. Lewent, not L'ewent.


The Spoken Word
READINGS, Small Press Book Fair, 20 West 44th Street, Manhattan.
Norman Mailer, Grace Paley, George Plimpton, Susan Minot, John Ashbery and others read from their work.
Tomorrow, 10 A.M. to 6 P.M., and Sunday, 10 A.M. to 4 P.M.
Free.
Schedule and information: (212) 764-7021.
POETRY READING, Beatrix Books and Pix, 33-18 Broadway, Astoria, Queens.
A reading of Walt Whitman's poetry.
Tomorrow at 7:30 P.M.
Free.
Information: (718) 204-5775.


Fang Legend Grows; He Waits
Two hours before Wednesday night's game at Alumni Hall, a St.
John's official walked over to Ron Mitchell, the Coppin State head basketball coach, and handed him an envelope containing a check for the school's guarantee.
I resisted the urge to peek as Mitchell opened it and made sure the figures were right.


Judge Halts Suspension Of Leading Equestrian
It took him 7,000 words to do it, but after a tortuous ride that took him over the obstacles of antitrust regulations, past the barbed claim of private privilege, over the daunting domain of property rights and even on a detour into the swamps of feudal law, Judge Edward J. Greenfield came to a decision yesterday.
The American Horse Shows Association, he ruled, had acted in an "arbitrary and capricious" manner when it suspended one of the nation's leading equestrian competitors without giving him a fair chance to refute charges that he participated in a plot to kill a horse for $250,000 in insurance money.


Another Bible Chapter
It all boils down to what you want in your Biblical epic.
Hollywood can give you the whole bloated enchilada in "The Bible," directed by none other than John Huston, or a single spicy slice, like Cecil B. DeMille's "Samson and Delilah," starring Victor Mature and Hedy Lamarr, not to mention Angela Lansbury as Delilah's older sister.
A laugh here, a tear there -- hey, it's entertainment.
The latest television excursion into Biblical territory aims for accurate translations, its international consortium of producers seeking advice from, as they say, "leaders from the Catholic, Protestant and Jewish faiths." Not as sexy as the typical Hollywood reading, perhaps, but the well-worn stories remain compelling.
Add a solid cast, one actor from this country, another from that, throw in an imposing physical production.
The upshot is quite respectable Biblical drama.


3 Mismatched Brothers In a Small-Town Caper
Since "Trapped in Paradise" assembles three actors as amusing as Nicolas Cage, Dana Carvey and Jon Lovitz, it's a minor holiday miracle that this homey comedy barely elicits even a chuckle.
Setting his cumbersome story among small-town folks at Christmastime, the writer and director George Gallo ("29th Street") succeeds all too well in capturing his characters' ordinariness without allowing them any particular spark.
Quaint little Paradise, Pa., isn't plastered with neon signs, but if it were, they would tout this as Capra country.
This wholesome burg is meant to be a humorously incongruous place to find the Firpo brothers: one restaurateur (Mr. Cage) and two crooks (Mr. Carvey and Mr. Lovitz) on the lam.


Frances Jalet-Cruz, 84, Prison Rights Advocate
Frances T. Freeman Jalet-Cruz, a legal-aid lawyer who fought for more humane conditions in the Texas prison system, died on Tuesday at St.
Joseph's Manor in Trumbull, Conn.
She was 84.
She had suffered a long illness, her family said.


Misconduct Found on Clinton Health Plan
A Federal district judge said today that he intended to impose sanctions on Clinton Administration officials for their "misconduct" in a court case involving the disclosure of documents from Hillary Rodham Clinton's task force on health care.
The task force, with a staff of more than 500 people, devised President Clinton's health care plan, the centerpiece of his domestic policy.
The proposal, which sought to guarantee health care for all Americans, died in Congress in September, killed by critics who said it would have assigned far too much power to the Government.


'I Remember It All As If It Were Yesterday'
The quarterback of the Erasmus Hall High School football team in Brooklyn, a 17-year-old named Adrian Bailey, came to watch a ceremony yesterday honoring a predecessor of his, an Erasmus quarterback who played 60 years before him.
"Had you ever heard of Sid Luckman before this?" Bailey was asked.


Giuliani Threatens to Impound Funds for Social Service Agencies
One day after the City Council overrode his veto of its budget plan, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani said that he had sent letters to social service agencies telling them not to expect any money promised by the Council's plan.
He also said he would impound those funds, even if a court ordered him to administer the Council's plan.
Meanwhile, at the other end of City Hall, the City Council's legal staff met with an outside law firm to devise a strategy for a possible lawsuit if the Mayor continued to reject the Council's budget.


Reaction, Like Outcome Itself, Is Ambiguous
In clubs where Tupac Shakur's "gangsta rap" lyrics have catapulted him to celebrity and on streets where he is sometimes vilified for appearing to glorify guns and violence, the reaction to the outcome of People v.
Tupac Shakur was as mixed as the jury's verdict.
"I spent the whole trial hoping it wasn't true," said Danyel Smith, the music editor of Vibe magazine.
"It was difficult for me to believe that he was capable of such a thing because I've had conversations with him. I've seen him socially at parties and things like that. I just didn't believe it was true."


CLINTON ASSOCIATE IS REPORTEDLY SET TO PLEAD GUILTY
A former top Justice Department official, Webster L. Hubbell, a close friend of the President and Hillary Rodham Clinton, has agreed to plead guilty to two felony counts and to cooperate with Whitewater prosecutors, people involved in the investigation said today.
The development is a significant blow to the White House, where Mr.
Hubbell, who resigned in March as Associate Attorney General, was once among the inner circle from Little Rock, Ark., one of the First Family's closest confidants.


Pressed by Zairian Troops, Rwandans Flee Camps
As many as 30,000 Rwandan refugees, walking silently in the rain, lined the roads for miles here today, carrying bundles of wood and whatever belongings they had managed to gather as Zairian soldiers forced them to leave their impromptu encampments and return to refugee centers.
This forced mobilization began a few days ago, partly to give the Zairians more control over the refugees and partly to harass them, perhaps convincing them to go back to Rwanda, which they fled last summer as rebel forces ousted the government and its army.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League
TEXAS RANGERS -- Named Butch Wynegar manager and John Tudor pitching coach of Charlotte of the Florida State League and Rick Knapp pitching coach of the Rangers of the Gulf Coast League.


Second Award for Salaam; One More to Go
Another award for RASHAAN SALAAM.
And more pressure to leave Colorado for the National Football League after the Fiesta Bowl game with Notre Dame.
Salaam won the Doak Walker Award as the nation's top running back yesterday and said he would announce in early January whether he will pass up his senior season.
Salaam has already won the Walter Camp Foundation Award as the nation's best college football player with the big one, the Heisman Trophy, to be announced on Dec. 10.
He averaged 186.8 yards per game this season, fourth best in National Collegiate Athletic Association history. (AP)


Bonds Ebb; Buyers Await Data on Jobs
Prices of Treasury securities were slightly lower yesterday in moderate trading, in advance of the important monthly employment report due today.
The benchmark 30-year bond fell 6/32 , to 946/32 , which pushed up its yield to 8.01 percent from 8 percent on Wednesday.
Rates for shorter-maturity bills also increased as prices, which move in the opposite direction, were lower.


Vikings Get a Reprieve, Then Triumph
If the Chicago Bears were for real, if they had any true designs on winning the National Conference Central Division, then they had to find a way to topple the Minnesota Vikings.
They had dropped five straight to Minnesota.
They had lost the last one, in Week 3, by 42-14.
In Chicago.
So, the Bears hit the road tonight and worked overtime to prove their point.
And the point proved was this: The Vikings still have their number.


CHRONICLE
MARLA MAPLES TRUMP may go on a camping trip with a married man on television, but she's no home wrecker, not even on the screen, she says.
"I don't think of myself as 'the other woman,' " she said the other day as she described her guest role on "Something Wilder," a NBC sitcom starring Gene Wilder.


Guilty Verdict For Gunman In Van Attack
A Manhattan jury yesterday found a 28-year-old immigrant from Lebanon guilty of murder and attempted murder for firing shot after shot into a vanload of Hasidic students crossing the Brooklyn Bridge last March 1, killing one and injuring three others.
The defendant, Rashid Baz, sat quietly and calmly as the jury forewoman repeated the word "guilty" 16 times -- for one count of murder, 14 of attempted murder and a single count of criminal use of a firearm.


Reds Sign an Ex-Yankee and an Ex-Met
The Cincinnati Reds added pitching yesterday, agreeing to contracts with the free agents XAVIER HERNANDEZ and PETE SMITH, both coming off disappointing seasons with New York teams.
Smith, 28, is trying to overcome arm problems that limited him as a starter with the Mets last season, and Hernandez is coming off a poor year with the Yankees as a reliever.


THE 104th CONGRESS: THE PRESIDENT; Clinton Hints Of a Tax Cut As He Meets G.O.P. Chiefs
As he met for the first time with the new Republican Congressional leaders, President Clinton said today that he would not rule out working with them on a tax cut for the middle class, but he vowed to oppose any proposal that would "explode the deficit" or repeal a ban on assault weapons.
"I hope and believe we can cooperate with the new Congress," Mr.
Clinton said, speaking via satellite to delegates at a National League of Cities meeting in Minneapolis.
"But cooperation from me cannot mean abandoning principle, abandoning the hard work we have already accomplished together in our fight to restore the economy, our fight against crime, our fight to give this country back to the hard-working people who play by the rules."


Sports of The Times; Toward A New Sense Of Values
THE University of Tennessee played Stanford Thursday night in one of those December showdowns that will be meaningless in March.
Tennessee, the nation's top-ranked team in women's basketball, routed Stanford, ranked No. 2, by 105-69.
What was noteworthy abut the game, what slapped me in the face at least, was the Volunteers' stunning level of athleticism.
It was almost as if Tennessee, the team of the future, was running in a race in which Stanford, the team of the past, was standing still.


Hahn Automotive Warehouse (HAHN,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


California Fund Woes Worsening
Many California agencies and municipalities that borrowed money to participate in a loss-plagued investment fund in Orange County, Calif., may not be able to make withdrawals to pay off their loans without suffering heavy losses or risking a run on the fund, officials said yesterday.
In response to potential losses of $1.5 billion in the investment fund, Standard &amp; Poor's Inc., the credit-rating agency, said yesterday that it might lower Orange County's debt rating, which is now just below the highest level.


Now, for the Fruits of Freer Trade
The trade treaty's surprisingly easy approval in the Senate -- 76 to 24 -- is testimony to the good that Congress can do when its leaders stop squabbling and start legislating.
Freer trade, by steering workers into high-paying exports jobs, could add as much as $1,700 to the typical family's income over the next decade.
That gain was at risk until Senator Bob Dole, the next majority leader, took responsibility for bringing wavering Republicans in line behind President Clinton's legislation.
The House also approved the agreement by a large margin.
Now that the political drama is over, Americans can look forward to reaping the benefits.
They are not hard to locate.


THE 104th CONGRESS: BALANCE SHEET; Analysis Increases the Cost Of Clinton's Welfare Plan
The capital received another tutorial on the high cost of overhauling the welfare system today when the Congressional Budget Office announced that President Clinton's proposal would cost nearly $5 billion more during the next five years than he had allotted.
With the Clinton plan likely to be a dead letter in a Republican-led Congress, the Congressional Budget Office estimate was less important for what it said about the plan than for what it said about welfare overhaul in general: putting welfare recipients to work will cost money, probably more than the public realizes.


Partisan Bidding War on Defense
For political reasons, the Clinton Administration shrank from cutting the Pentagon budget when it had the chance to do so in the last two years.
Now, for the same reasons, it is engaged in a bidding war with the Republican-controlled Congress to spend more than the current $252 billion.
Mr.
Clinton cannot outbid the G.O.P., which is prepared to spend still more.
But there is a downside that the Republicans ought to recognize, too.
More military spending puts their agenda of tax cuts and deficit reduction at serious risk.
The Administration will ask Congress for about $4 billion a year for the next six years -- $25 billion in all -- to keep up troop readiness, cover a Congressionally mandated pay hike and improve the military's housing and quality of life.
It will also seek an emergency increase of $2 billion this year to pay for operations in Haiti, Kuwait, Bosnia and Cuba.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.50
8.50
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
4.75
4.75
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
5.44
5.49
2.96
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.61
5.57
3.10
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
6.10
6.00
3.26
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.79
7.92
5.74
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.91
8.01
6.23
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.75
8.86
7.25
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.99
7.11
5.65
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Observer; Ease in Tabloid World
Here is the latest literature on the royal farce of Windsor.
Hasn't all this been in the newspapers already?
Or at least all of it that's juicy enough to deserve scanning?
I've been scanning this story for what seems like years now.
Scanning gets the job done.
It's not like Bosnia.
You can't scan Bosnia and get to first base.


Making a Big Move, The Economical Way
After accepting a new job last summer, Mario de Francisco, an automobile sales executive, needed to pack up his family and move from Rochester Hills, Mich., to Brookfield, Conn.


Oregon's Assisted Suicide Law Gives No Sure Comfort to Dying; A Rational Right
To the Editor:
Critics of Oregon's new law on physician-assisted suicide tend to neglect its safeguards, like the requirements for multiple requests, a waiting period and confirmation of the diagnosis by a second physician.


It's Time Britain Had a Written Constitution
To the Editor:
Re "Britain's Civil Liberties Backslide" (editorial, Nov. 28): The American Constitution safeguards a fundamental right: that people cannot be forced to testify against themselves.
This right to silence is now being taken away from us in Britain, as you point out.


After Five Years of Prison, a Woman Gets Her Day of Redemption
A few hours after Margaret Kelly Michaels was told that prosecutors had dropped child sex-abuse charges against her, that she no longer faced the prospect of a life lost to prison, she telephoned her mother in Pittsburgh.
"It's over," Ms. Michaels said, and together they sobbed.


NATO Turns From Force To Diplomacy in Bosnia
Turning their backs on military force as a way of pressing a peace settlement in Bosnia, the United States, three of its NATO allies and Russia tonight began a new diplomatic push to induce the Bosnian Serbs to accept a plan they have been rejecting for months.
Calling once again for an immediate cease-fire in the embattled Muslim enclave of Bihac, the five countries agreed on only a modest concession to get the Serbs of Bosnia and Herzegovina to withdraw from the 70 percent of the country they now occupy and accept a 49 percent share instead.


G.M. and Ovonic to Make Batteries for Electric Cars
General Motors and a battery technology company will start commercial-scale production of nickel metal-hydride batteries for electric cars next year, the companies announced yesterday.
Nickel metal-hydrides store about twice as much electricity per pound as lead-acid batteries, and can deliver the energy quickly.
A Geo Metro converted to electricity with nickel metal-hydrides won an electric car race in Phoenix early this year by traveling more than 200 miles at highway speeds without recharging.


George Cunha, 82; Led in Preservation Of Books and Papers
George M. Cunha, an internationally respected expert in preserving books, documents, posters and brittle historical materials, died on Tuesday at St.
Joseph Hospital in Lexington, Ky.
He was 82 and had lived in Kentucky since 1980.
The cause was an aneurysm, said the Northeast Document Conservation Center in Andover, Mass., which he co-founded and directed.


Allies Agree to Suspend Flights Of NATO Planes Over Bosnia
In a conciliatory gesture to the Bosnian Serbs, United Nations military officials and NATO agreed earlier this week to suspend flights of NATO warplanes over Bosnia, United Nations officials said here today.
The decision was seen here as part of an effort to persuade the Bosnian Serbs to accept a cease-fire with peace terms they had rejected, and to free about 400 United Nations peacekeepers that the Serbs are holding.


Head of Ousted School Board Says He'll Challenge Decision
The former acting president of the Brooklyn community school board ousted this week by Schools Chancellor Ramon C. Cortines said he would challenge the decision, even though he had asked Mr.
Cortines to act.
Sylvester Leaks said he would meet today with Norman Siegel, executive director of the New York Civil Liberties Union, to see whether he can legally challenge Mr.
Cortines's decision to take control of District 17, which stretches from Flatbush to Crown Heights.


THE 104th CONGRESS: NEW LEADERS; Senate G.O.P. Elevates Dole But Ousts Ally From 2d Spot
Senate Republicans re-elected Bob Dole as their leader today and then undercut him by dumping his assistant leader, Senator Alan K. Simpson of Wyoming.
They replaced Mr.
Simpson with the more confrontational Senator Trent Lott of Mississippi, who had campaigned hard on his connections to Newt Gingrich, who will soon become Speaker of the House.


Brooklyn Drivers Fear Reckless Young Guns
The holdup on Myrtle Avenue was for all purposes complete a few minutes after noon on Aug. 22.
Thomas Reilly, a driver who delivers Boar's Head meats, had his hands in the air.
The $175 he had just received from the Shop Smart bodega had been torn out of his pocket.
As the three teen-age bandits prepared to bolt from the truck's side door, the 41-year-old Mr.
Reilly found himself staring into the stony face of a 15-year-old pointing an automatic weapon at him.
He saw no panic in the boy's eyes, no fear, and neither he nor the teen-ager spoke.


Meter Reader Discovers Human Skeleton in Queens Basement
There was a giant cobweb stretching across part of the room and right beyond it, under the stark glare of a bare ceiling light, was a fully clothed skeleton sitting erect in a kitchen chair.
Beneath the chair was a skull that the police said had apparently broken away and fallen to the floor.


U.S. and G.M. End Truck Case Without Recall
Transportation Secretary Federico F. Pena today announced an unprecedented legal settlement with the General Motors Corporation that will end a Federal investigation of up to six million pickup trucks he had called potentially lethal.
In exchange for dodging a possible recall, G.M. will contribute $51.3 million to safety programs that Mr.
Pena said would save more people than the trucks would kill.
Mr.
Pena sought to portray the settlement as the most efficient way to save lives, by swapping years of litigation to force a recall of a dwindling number of aging trucks for immediate help to "save hundreds of lives and prevent thousands of injuries in the next several years."


Connie Kay, 67, Drummer, Dies; A Specialist of Sounds and Styles
Connie Kay, a drummer best known for his work with the Modern Jazz Quartet, died on Wednesday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 67.
The cause was cardiac arrest, said his manager, Evelyn Levine.


COMPANY BRIEFS
CHOICES ENTERTAINMENTCORP., Morrisville, Pa., has reached agreements to acquire the operating companies of 10 privately held video store chains with combined annual revenues of $44 million.


Miami Beats Nets in Every Possible Way
Butch Beard sensed trouble tonight when he heard the Miami Heat had a players-only meeting on Wednesday.
"It always happens," the Nets' first-year coach said.
"You had to know they were going to come out against us and give an inspired effort, at least early."
Beard told his players exactly what to expect.
Sure enough, he got what he expected from the Heat.
But not from his players.


Prosecutors Drop Charges In Abuse Case From Mid-80's
Ending one of the most sensational child sex-abuse scandals in the nation, prosecutors today formally dropped their case against Margaret Kelly Michaels, the former day care teacher who spent five years in prison before her 1987 conviction was overturned on appeal last year.
In a hearing this afternoon before Judge Joseph A. Falcone of State Superior Court here, an assistant Essex County prosecutor, John S. Redden, said his office decided to seek dismissal because too many obstacles had been placed in the way of a successful retrial.


Compositions for a Big Band by Women
The second half of the Carnegie Hall Jazz Band's "Women in Jazz" concert, on Thursday at the group's namesake hall, opened with the most exciting piece of the performance, "El Viento," written for the occasion and conducted by the composer Maria Schneider.
Ms.
Schneider set up a landscape of vague and gauzy colors, and when the tenor saxophonist Bobby LaVell improvised corkscrew phrases, the sound slowly accumulated around him, as if growing upward from his feet.
Ms.
Schneider is after new sounds, and in the harmonic ambiguity of her material, the tight and dissonant voicings, she made a case for herself as one of the better composers working in the big band idiom.
The rest of the night wandered a bit, with the band suffering from an uncharacteristic lack of energy.
Under Jon Faddis's direction, it usually swallows everything it takes on, then smiles happily, but the material seemed to be causing a bit of discomfort.
The concert, meant to celebrate compositions by women, drew on works by Mary Lou Williams, Melba Liston, Carla Bley, Ms.
Schneider and Toshiko Akiyoshi, and at times the band seemed stumped.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article in Business Day yesterday about plans by the Chemical Banking Corporation to eliminate 3,700 jobs misstated the company's stock price.
The stock closed on Thursday at $36.625, up 25 cents, on the New York Stock Exchange.


Jets Planning to Run Without Injured Murrell
Finally, the Jets' ground game has a chance to break out after a string of weak games against teams with superior run defenses.
And just in time.
For as they plunge into the stretch run in search of a playoff berth, the Jets face three of the poorer run-stopping clubs in the National Football League, beginning Sunday against the New England Patriots.
They have not run the ball well since these teams last met Oct. 16, when the Jets won, 24-17.


Canadian Imperial Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Jobless Rates Down Slightly In New York and New Jersey
Unemployment in the New York region dropped only slightly in November, signaling that the recovery in the local area, already weaker than in most of the nation, may be losing steam.
"What is striking is the contrast between the brisk recovery nationally and what is going on in this region," said Samuel L. Ehrenhalt, the regional commissioner of the Bureau of Labor Statistics.
"The labor market here has shifted into neutral."


THE 104th CONGRESS; Hello, Out There (Helms Style)


ABC Rail Products Corp.(ABCR,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Brazen Robbers Escape With Booty
It was 9:30 A.M. on an autumn Monday on Myrtle Avenue in Brooklyn when Chris Curiale pulled up and parked his delivery truck outside the Associated Foods supermarket.
Mr.
Curiale, who is 24 and has been on the delivery route for B &amp; G Foods for several months, began to stack boxes of frozen meat at the back door to his truck.
Within minutes, two young men began to size up the scene.
One man monitored Mr.
Curiale's position inside the cargo section of the truck, and quickly signaled to the other when the delivery man was deep inside his truck.


Man in the News: THE 104th CONGRESS -- PROFILES; A Forceful Conservative as G.O.P. Whip, a Clinton Ally to Lead Democrats -- Trent Lott
Trent Lott, chosen today as the new majority whip in the Senate, is the very embodiment of the modern aggressive Republican Party in the South and, increasingly, throughout the country.
Senator Lott, a 53-year-old lawyer from Pascagoula, Miss., is certain to give his party a more confident conservative face to present to the public as the No. 2 Republican behind the Senate majority leader, Bob Dole.
Mr.
Lott is, in the words of one Republican Senate staff aide, "as close as it gets in the Senate to Newt Gingrich."


Fictional Portraits Are a Stamp Tradition
To the Editor:
Marc Furstenberg's complaint (letter, Nov. 28) that the Postal Service goofed up its depictions of Bat Masterson and Wyatt Earp in the new "Legends of the West" series overlooks a tradition of fictional postal portraits.


George B. Timmerman Jr., 82, Segregationist Leader in 50's
Former Gov.
George Bell Timmerman Jr. of South Carolina, one of the South's last segregationist politicians, died on Tuesday at Richland Memorial Hospital in Columbia, S.C.
He was 82 and lived in Batesburg, S.C.
He died of injuries suffered in an automobile accident on Sept. 4, a hospital spokesman said.


As Caucasus Fighting Continues, Moscow Is Accused of Attacks


Tax Planning and More Through Ernst &amp; Young
IF you go to a financial expert with a specific question -- whether to buy or lease a car, what type of investment to make for your daughter's education, whether to accept an early retirement offer -- the answer is likely to be, "We'll have to run the numbers."
"What numbers," you may wonder, "and how do we run them?"


Election Results Deliver Hope, Not Meanness; Faces at the Table
To the Editor:
The spirit of Thanksgiving is a beautiful thing to behold.
If anyone had reason to challenge the spirit of Thanksgiving it was the homeless, hungry and disaffected.


2 New Issues Emphasize Emerging Markets
The Ivy New Century Fund will look for growth opportunities worldwide, with an emphasis on emerging markets, and the Ivy Latin America Strategy Fund intends to be fully invested in Latin America.
"It is becoming increasingly obvious that many of the great investments will be found in the high-growth developing nations," said Keith J. Carlson, executive vice president of the group.
Both of the new funds are permitted to hedge against currency risks, but plan to do so only for defensive purposes.
Arthur J. Bonnel, a former manager of the MIM Stock Appreciation Fund, has joined United Services Advisors Inc. to create Accolade Funds.
Its first offering, the Bonnel Growth Fund, will look for midsize companies worldwide with strong earnings and little debt.
"Historically, companies of this size grow faster than their larger competitors and offer greater opportunity for achieving gains," Mr.
Bonnel said.


Election Results Deliver Hope, Not Meanness
To the Editor:
Re "Election Harvest Crowds Thanksgiving Table" (letter, Nov. 24): Because the election did not go John B. Stadler's way, he would have me take my Thanksgiving Day dinner with a generous helping of guilt.
Not a chance!
It is precisely because the Democrats took a drubbing that I feel I have more to be thankful for this holiday season.


Lebanese Premier Quits in Cabinet Dispute
Prime Minister Rafik al-Hariri of Lebanon resigned today, accusing a handful of ministers in his 30-member Cabinet of obstructing his program to rebuild the country after 15 years of civil war.
President Elias Hrawi rejected the resignation and said he was using mediators to persuade Mr.
Hariri to reconsider.


Cowardice at the Justice Department
In a decision clouded by politics, the Clinton Administration has declined to join in a legal battle over discrimination against gay men and lesbians.
The United States Government belongs in this fight, which involves not so much gay rights as the power of local government to disenfranchise an entire group of citizens.
Last year, after the Cincinnati City Council passed civil rights ordinances that included homosexuals and lesbians among the groups entitled to equal treatment, voters amended the city charter to bar such enactments.
Rights groups sued and won a Federal District Court ruling that the charter amendment was unconstitutional.
When voter groups favoring the amendment appealed to the U.S.
Court of Appeals, gay rights groups asked the Justice Department to intervene.


Journalists in Danger
Journalists in many lands risk their lives to report the news, but many Americans are unaware of the special risks taken in their own country by reporters who write for immigrant and expatriate communities.
A report by the Committee to Protect Journalists, for many years a monitor of the dangers faced by mainstream media reporters, points up the need for this special awareness by the profession, law enforcement and the public.
Journalists for expatriate publications and radio stations, reporting on matters of deep controversy concerning their native countries, have been murdered in the United States.
The committee cites 10 cases since 1981 involving Vietnamese, Haitian, Chinese-American and Cuban-American journalists.
Others have been threatened with violence.


Hanson Plc(HAN,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Pelvozh Journal; Cold Reminder of Stalin's Murders Refuses to Fade
There is no road to this place.
It was never necessary to build one.
For three decades, after tramping through snowdrifts or trudging along the icy surface of the Pelyi River, Soviet citizens arrived at this beautiful site in chains.
Thousands of Stalin's earliest victims were sent here to starve and freeze and work themselves to death.
The camps here are not as famous as Kolyma or Magadan -- the great centers of human destruction in eastern Siberia.
But these small clusters of buildings along the road to Salekhard, on the edge of the tundra 1,200 miles north of Moscow, were every bit as deadly.
This one -- nothing more really than a few wooden buildings and a watchtower encircled by barbed wire -- was called Camp 48, after some kilometer mark forgotten long ago.


Beliefs
The stately Walnut Street Baptist Church in downtown Louisville, Ky., is home to a congregation founded in the early 19th century, but last Monday it was the site of a new development in American religious life.
While the organ played and more than 100 people watched, regional leaders of a dozen denominations solemnly signed a set of guidelines that they are urging all their churches to use in preparing couples for marriage and in strengthening existing marriages.


Hadco Corp.(HDCO,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 29


Times Co. Regains Control Of Electronic Rights to Paper
The New York Times Company has regained significant control over electronic rights to The Times's contents in a deal announced yesterday with the British-Dutch publishing giant Reed Elsevier P.L.C.
The 10-year deal, which stems from Reed Elsevier's acquisition of Mead Data Central and the Lexis/ Nexis on-line computer service, frees the Times Company to use the contents of the daily newspaper in a variety of new types of electronic services for consumers.
Lexis/Nexis will continue to have electronic rights to distribute articles from The Times, but eventually much of its exclusivity will lapse.
Reed Elsevier will then retain exclusive rights only in electronic services distributed to professionals in the field of law.


Bob Evans Farms Inc.(BOBE,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 28


Norman Supports New Tour
Officials of the World Golf Tour said yesterday that they have no plans to back off their original plans to start their rival tour in 1995, despite recent characterizations to the contrary by the PGA Tour.
Disputing the tone of a statement issued on Thursday by PGA Tour Commissioner Tim Finchem, the golfer Greg Norman said through his agent that he is not "re-evaluating" his involvement in the World Tour and that he intends to go ahead with his efforts to get the tour off the ground beginning next year.


Bonds Rally Despite Employment Figures
Treasury bonds staged a powerful rally yesterday, despite a stronger-than-expected jobs report.
The Labor Department report showed continued robust growth in the economy, convincing investors that the Federal Reserve would raise interest rates again sooner than expected.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, a front-page article yesterday about a plea agreement by Webster L. Hubbell referred incorrectly in some editions to the Arkansas savings institution at the center of the Whitewater investigation.
It is Madison Guaranty Savings and Loan, not Morgan Guaranty.


Waking an Old East German Giant
Building after building sits vacant.
The rust is everywhere -- on miles of piping that run overhead, on stanchions supporting huge water tanks and on smokestacks reminiscent of the last century.
This mournful site a few miles west of Leipzig is the Buna chemical complex, once the heart of the East German state chemical industry and, more recently, all but destined for the scrap heap.


Corrections
A picture caption on Wednesday about company members of "Cats" who rehearsed for the sixth annual Gypsy of the Year competition, part of an AIDS fund-raising drive, referred incorrectly in some editions to the amount raised.
The $800,000 figure referred to proceeds from all the events in the monthlong campaign for Broadway Cares-Equity Fights AIDS, not from the Gypsy competition alone.


SYSDECO OF NORWAY TO BUY ATEX PUBLISHING
The Sysdeco Group, a Norwegian software tool supplier, announced yesterday that it would purchase Atex Publishing Systems of Bedford, Mass., an international supplier of computer systems for newswriting, editing and typesetting for newspapers and magazines.
Atex, which two years ago was bought from the Eastman Kodak Company by a group of European investors, was sold for $11.9 million in cash and $9.1 million in assumed subordinated loans.
It is expected to have revenues of more than $50 million in 1994.
Atex has 350 employees.


Transactions
Baseball  American League MILWAUKEE BREWERS -- Promoted Jon Greenberg, assistant director of media relations, to director of media relations.
SEATTLE MARINERS -- Signed Gary Thurman, Basil Shabazz and Darrell Sherman, outfielders, to contracts with Calgary of the Pacific Coast League.
TEXAS RANGERS -- Placed Jeff Huson, infielder, on waivers for the purpose of giving him his unconditional release.
Named Mike Berger manager and Brad Arnsberg pitching coach of Charleston of the South Atlantic League; Bump Wills manager and Steve Foucault pitching coach of Hudson Valley of the New York-Penn League; and Frank Neville minor-league medical coordinator.
National League CHICAGO CUBS -- Placed Dave Otto, pitcher, on waivers for the purpose of giving him his unconditional release.
Basketball  National Basketball Association CHICAGO BULLS -- Placed Corie Blount, forward, on the injured list.
Activated Larry Krystkowiak, forward, from the injured list.
Hockey  National Hockey League ANAHEIM MIGHTY DUCKS -- Assigned Oleg Tverdovsky, defenseman, to the Brandon Wheat Kings of the Western Hockey League.


USAir Revises Fuel-Tank Checks To Reassure Public Over Safety
Faced with questions about its safety record, USAir announced yesterday that it was adding two new steps to its pre-flight refueling procedures to insure that none of its aircraft take off without enough fuel.
Beginning on Monday, USAir gate agents will specifically tell the captain of each flight exactly how much fuel is on the aircraft.
The airline said the new step was being added to reassure the public that its flights are safe.


Andrew Kopkind Tribute
A memorial tribute to Andrew D. Kopkind, a political journalist and author, is to be held today at 3 P.M. in Caspary Auditorium at Rockefeller University, 1230 York Avenue, at 66th Street, Manhattan.
Mr.
Kopkind died on Oct. 23 at the age of 59.
Among those who are to speak are Torsten Wiesel, the president of the university, and the writers Alexander Cockburn, Joan Didion, John Gregory Dunne, Dick Schaap and Calvin Trillin.


No Headline
"The people with the guns, the kids with the guns, they have no regard, no remorse, and so they'll shoot you anyway," THOMAS REILLY, a truck driver in Brooklyn.  [ 1:3. ]


Support for Arafat in Gaza Replaced by Wide Enmity
Gaza's jails provide a barometer of just how far Yasir Arafat has fallen in his own homeland.
Palestinians taunt their jailers, employees of Mr.
Arafat's Palestinian Authority, by addressing them in Hebrew.
In interrogation sessions, jailed Islamic militants begin their answers to Palestinian investigators with Katzin, the Hebrew word for officer.
Some answer only in Hebrew, which they learned from years spent in Israeli jails.


Rose Wells Bing, 83, Consultant On Fashions for Retail Stores
Rose Wells Bing, a fashion consultant who was instrumental in bringing the ideas and trends of Europe to American consumers, died on Wednesday in Beth Israel Hospital.
She was 83 and lived in Manhattan.
The cause was a heart attack, said her grandson, Jonathan Bing of Manhattan.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-7  ARAFAT SUPPORT FADING
Yasir Arafat and his administration in the Gaza Strip are becoming increasingly isolated and unpopular among the residents, amounting to a state of rebellion, and he has responded with helplessness. 1


In From the Cold, Ex-Agent Warms to Capitalism
Nikolai Nazarov has information to offer American businesses interested in investing in Russia.
After all, he spent 20 years as a K.G.B. agent assigned to monitor the activities of foreign businessmen there.
"My job was just getting the information," he said in a recent interview.
"That is the only thing I was trained to do, the only thing I can do, the only thing I like to do."


Eckerd Corp.(ECK,N) reports earnings for 13wks to Oct 29


Federated Officer Named Chief of Bradlees
Bradlees Inc., the regional discount-store chain, said yesterday that Mark A. Cohen, a senior executive with Federated Department Stores Inc., would become its chairman and chief executive, effective today.
Mr.
Cohen, who was chairman and chief executive of Federated's Lazarus chain, will replace Barry A. Berman, who announced in August that he intended to resign as the company's top executive.
A spokeswoman said Mr.
Berman, who is 51, would continue working for Bradlees in a role that would be decided by Mr.
Cohen.


Locking In Profits, but Deferring Capital Gains Until 1995
The prospect of a tax cut on capital gains can inspire both joy and anxiety.
Investors would like nothing more than to postpone sales until next year and reap the benefits promised by Republicans in Congress.
But what if the value of their securities plunges in the meantime?
In this choppy market, waiting until next year to sell winners is anything but risk free.
In the last few months, the Dow Jones industrial average has ranged from striking distance of 4,000 to below 3,700.
And swift declines, like the 91-point drop on Nov. 22, can quickly erase gains.
For the uneasy, there is a safer route.
A technique called shorting against the box lets investors defer taxes while protecting their portfolios from market declines.
The practice involves borrowing additional shares from a broker and selling them immediately, thereby setting the sales price.
Later, the borrowed shares are replaced with those already in the investor's portfolio.
By beginning the transaction this year and waiting until next year to close it, the investor can lock in capital gains and postpone tax payments.


Region News Briefs; Gasoline Switch Going Smoothly, E.P.A. Says
A required changeover to new, cleaner-burning gasoline is occurring smoothly, top officials of the Environmental Protection Agency said yesterday.
The change, they said, will result in less smog and lower concentrations of toxic chemicals in the air.
Beginning on Jan. 1, the fuel will be the only kind that can be sold in New Jersey, Connecticut and downstate New York; on Dec. 1, it became mandatory in fuel distribution terminals in those areas.
It is being sold at many gas stations already.


Corrections
An article and a chart in Business Day yesterday about a sharp decline in the stock price of the Best Buy Company misstated the price in some editions.
The stock fell $11.375 on Thursday, to $32.875, on the New York Stock Exchange.


Navistar Intl. Corp. (NAV,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Autissier's Mast Breaks, as Does a Dream
It was a dream with every chance of becoming reality.
The French solo sailor, Isabelle Autissier, had a five-day lead over all in the BOC Round-the-World race.
Her 17 rivals, all male skippers, knew that she would be impossible to catch unless her sailboat broke down.
And that's just what happened.


Bond Swaps Ease Pain Of Big Declines in 1994
SEASON'S greetings from the I. R. S.!
That's what the tax break known as a bond swap amounts to -- a year-end gift of otherwise-Federal dollars.
But if investors tie the ribbons on this nice present wrong, they may wind up saying "Uh oh" instead of "Ho ho."
Bond owners can surely use a Santa this year.
"There are plenty of losses out there -- many of 20 percent or more," said Jim Lebenthal, a New York bond trader.


Connecticut Pours It on During a Rout of Yale
Having routed Lafayette of the Patriot League by 62 points a week ago in its season opener, Connecticut turned to the Ivy League for easy pickings tonight.
The opponent was Yale, which can occasionally beat the Huskies in football, as was the case this past season, but not in basketball.
In a game between schools from two different basketball worlds, the veteran UConn team (3-0), which is ranked No. 16 by The Associated Press, routed the Eli, 105-53.


Hope Is Seen for Captive U.N. Troops
Throughout the week, the governments whose soldiers are being detained by Serbian forces in Bosnia have maintained that they were concerned about the captives but not overly fearful for their safety.
That low-key approach appeared to be paying off tonight as the chief United Nations official in the Balkans announced that he had secured the Serbs' agreement to release the troops.


U.S. Confirms Investigation Into Pricing of Appliances
The Justice Department confirmed yesterday that it was involved in an "investigation of the pricing practices of large appliance manufacturers."
The Whirlpool Corporation, the Maytag Corporation and the Raytheon Company, which is the parent of Amana Refrigeration Inc., all said yesterday that they had received notices from the Justice Department, were cooperating fully in the investigation and believed they had done nothing wrong.
The General Electric Company declined to comment.


MEETING WITH SUITOR, PAUL B. KAZARIAN, IS CANCELED
Borden Inc. canceled a proposed meeting on Sunday with Paul B. Kazarian, a suitor for the company, after he did not respond yesterday to an invitation to provide information about his proposal to acquire a minority interest in Borden.
"We are disappointed they canceled the meeting," said Richard E. Nicolazzo, a spokesman for Mr.
Kazarian.
"We trust they will attend the meeting we requested in our letter of Nov. 30 for Tuesday, Dec. 6, in New York City." On Wednesday, Mr.
Kazarian challenged the bid of Kohlberg, Kravis &amp; Company to acquire Borden for $2 billion.


An Intimate New 'Butterfly'
This may be a minority opinion, since a fair portion of the audience stood and cheered Catherine Malfitano's performance in the title role of a new Metropolitan Opera production of "Madama Butterfly" on Thursday night, but for this listener the most dramatic moment in the entire evening was when 4-year-old Alyssa Aftab (in her first trousers role as Cio-Cio-San's son), accidentally fell off the top step of the Japanese house.
She turned nearly upside-down, twisted into a somersault, landed on her feet and, like a seasoned pro, stayed right in character.
For the only time in this, the most sentimental of operas, an audible gasp in the audience showed concern about anybody onstage.
That's a shame, because on the surface this production has much to recommend it.
It is replacing the shopworn 1958 production that was still in service last season and that has now been donated to the Kirov Opera in St.
Petersburg.
There was originally talk of having Franco Zeffirelli create this new "Butterfly," but the assignment went instead to Giancarlo del Monaco, whose brand of realism, evident in two compelling Met productions of "La Fanciulla del West" and "Stiffelio," is far more intimate and restrained than what we might have expected from Mr.
Zeffirelli.


Officer Slain in a Gunfight in Brooklyn


Rapper, Shot and Convicted, Leaves Hospital for Secret Site
Tupac Shakur, the wounded rap star, was discharged yesterday from Metropolitan Hospital Center in Manhattan, a day after a Manhattan jury convicted him of sex abuse.
As the police searched for the gunmen who shot the entertainer at least four times in what they say appeared to be a robbery early Wednesday, his lawyer, Michael Warren, said Mr.
Shakur was "someplace in Manhattan."


Wallowing in Despair
Popular music usually evolves through recombination.
New Orleans rock plus Caribbean mento equals reggae, and gospel plus rhythm-and-blues equals soul.
These days it doesn't take long for musical styles that seem to be opposites to start attracting one another.
On Tuesday night at the Mercury Lounge, punk rock met its traditional enemies, hippie rock and heavy metal, as Xanax 25 performed an hourlong set.
The fusion resulted in a show that explored the downside of psychedelia.
Xanax 25, a New York band that plays every Monday night at the Nightingale bar (213 Second Avenue, at 12th Street, East Village), made angry music inspired more by Altamont than by Woodstock, more by Charles Manson than by Timothy Leary.
Children of the 1980's, Xanax 25 grew up in the shadow of the previous decade's failure without ever having had a taste of its promises.
In "80's Kid," a song about therapy sessions that boasts the chorus "Don't waste your time on me," Jaik Miller sang in a voice full of resentment, "When I was 11, I tried to kill myself with a bottle of my father's sleeping pills so I could get out of sixth grade." It was Xanax 25's third song in a row that mentioned suicide as an easy way out, which is not surprising for a band named after a tranquilizer.


U.S. Agency Seeks Faster Deportations
The Immigration and Naturalization Service announced changes in the process for making decisions on applications for political asylum, with an eye toward deporting undeserving applicants more quickly.


Exiles Who Fled for Lives Sustain German Culture
THE building at 2121 Broadway, on the corner of 74th Street, fairly overflows with contemporary sensibilities.
On the ground floor, Fairway, one of the city's pioneering produce houses, caters to the eating cult with fresh, shiny comestibles.
Above, in a dance studio, the lithe and limber swing and sway, and in a play group, toddlers socialize.
A martial arts dojo offers secrets of confidence and self-defense.
But on the fourth floor there is an anomaly, a musty space that instead of looking to a perfectable future harks back to an anxious time when the Jews of Germany were forced to flee a land they had thought of as their own.
This is the offices of Aufbau, a German Jewish newspaper founded as the Nazis consolidated power.


Student Made Up Attack Story, Police Say
A 20-year-old student who reported that she was slashed and stabbed by a black man during a robbery in a university parking lot here this week actually slashed herself, the police said today.
The student, Josephine Lupis of East Northport, was arrested Thursday night and charged with falsely reporting an incident.
She faces one year in prison if convicted.


A Neighborhood Mourns
Daniel Long remembers the mixed emotions he felt one day about five years ago when Raymond Cannon told him excitedly that he was going to become a New York City police officer.
Mr.
Long, a former city firefighter who worked in Queens and who watched the three youngest boys in the Cannon family grow up on William Street in Smithtown, L.I., told Raymond, "I wish you the best of luck."


Dow Gains 44.75 Points In Surprising Advance
Jarred at first by another sign of a strong economy, stock traders did something surprising yesterday: they bid up stock prices for the biggest rally in more than a month.
By recent standards, yesterday's employment report ought to have been depressingly healthy, at least for stock and bond traders.
The November unemployment rate hit a four-year low as 350,000 jobs were created, news that would normally have sent stocks and bonds falling out of fears of inflation and another move by the Federal Reserve to raise interest rates.


No Charges to Be Filed for Search of Clinton Files
The independent prosecutor investigating whether any Bush Administration officials acted illegally in the 1992 search of Bill Clinton's passport files said he would bring no charges in the two-year-old inquiry.
The prosecutor, Joseph diGenova, said on Thursday that he had completed his investigation and was finishing a report summarizing his findings, but he declined to discuss them.
The report will be submitted to a panel of appellate judges who will decide whether to make it public.


Masur's Way With Bruckner's Third
The magic in Kurt Masur's Bruckner performances with the New York Philharmonic has tended to be intermittent, and such was the case again on Thursday evening at Avery Fisher Hall with Bruckner's Third Symphony.
As before, there were stunningly arrayed brass choirs, beautifully voiced and exquisitely balanced, but there was also coarse, almost inept brass playing in the general run of the performance.
The horns, with their gorgeous, waning chords at the end of the Adagio resembled nothing so much as altar boys with spanking white smocks thrown over street clothes grass-stained and muddied by roughhousing on the way to church.


RESULTS PLUS
N.B.A.
Winning With Webber  The Washington Bullets finally won their first game with Chris Webber in the lineup, getting 18 points and 9 rebounds from their new forward in a 115-104 victory over Detroit last night in Landover, Md.
Webber, who temporarily left the game in the third quarter to receive three stitches for a cut over his right eye, made 8 of 11 shots in 34 minutes.
He also had three assists, four steals and three blocks.
The Bullets, losers of six straight, had been 0-4 since Webber joined the team after being obtained in a trade with Golden State.


CHRONICLE
In KURT MASUR's view, the talk he is to give tomorrow morning at the Cathedral of St.
John the Divine will simply be "some of my thoughts in connection to this church." In the eyes of the Very Rev.
JAMES PARKS MORTON, the dean of the cathedral, what Mr.
Masur is to deliver is a sermon, the last of a series called "Art and the Sacred" that began on Oct. 9.


Time Is Right for a Year-End Tax Review
Antithetical though it may be to the holiday spirit, a bit of attention to taxes in the final weeks of the year can pay off handsomely.
The savings reaped may even cover all those gifts to loved ones.
Congress has done little to change the tax rules this year, no doubt lulling some people into complacency.
Yet nearly everyone can still do something to minimize the bill that comes due in April.


CHRONICLE
DEBORAH and GERALD S. STROBER, on a tour to promote their new book about Richard M. Nixon, had no idea yesterday morning that they would go to the Washington office of Mr.
Nixon's last chief of staff, ALEXANDER M. HAIG Jr., to give him a gift for his 70th birthday.
The couple, who have a public relations firm in Manhattan, appeared on the "Morning Show" on WWRC-AM in Washington to talk about the book, "Nixon: An Oral History of His Presidency," published last month by Harper Collins.
When they left the studio, they tuned their car radio to the program and heard MIKE CUTHBERT, the host, telephone Mr.
Haig to ask if he had seen the book (he was interviewed for it in January).


Battle of the Budget May Not Go to Court
On the brink of a court battle over the fiscal powers of the City Council, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani and City Council Speaker Peter F. Vallone reopened efforts yesterday to reach agreement on what services and programs should be pared to close a budget gap of more than $1 billion.
The two officials directed their staffs to try to end a 10-day budget impasse after they held their regular Friday meeting to discuss city issues.
"We're hopeful that we'll be able to work out an agreement that we can both be satisfied with," Mr.
Giuliani said, adding, "I can't tell you that we can."


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy  Job growth accelerated in November.
The Labor Department reported that the unemployment rate fell to a four-year low of 5.6 percent.
The report showed a well-balanced economy enjoying robust growth.  [ Page 1. ]  Job growth in the New York region, however, lagged behind the nation.  [ 48. ]


Magna Int'l.(MGA,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Region News Briefs;
The wife of a Garden City, L.I., man slain on the Long Island Rail Road a year ago filed a $36 million damage suit today against the railroad and its parent agency, the Metropolitan Transportation Authority.
Carolyn McCarthy, the wife of Dennis McCarthy and the mother of Kevin McCarthy, who was critically wounded when a gunman opened fire on the train, charges that the railroad and the M.T.A. failed to provide adequate protection for passengers.
The action was filed in State Supreme Court in Manhattan.


The G.O.P. Contract Is Too Timid
Liberals and conservatives alike regard the Republicans' "Contract With America" as a bold venture, though liberals complain it goes too far.
In truth, it is a timid measure that even if carried out will leave the U.S. a handicapped player in the global capitalism of the 21st century.
Make no mistake: a capitalist revolution is sweeping the world.
Communist central planning is no longer throttling the production and productivity of 1.2 billion Chinese people.
Development planning is no longer stifling Latin America.


U.N. Study Accuses Hutu in Rwanda Killings
United Nations investigators concluded today that Hutu militants were guilty of genocide in Rwanda and that the rival Tutsi were not guilty of retaliation, as many have charged.
The investigators, led by Atsu-Koffi Amega, a former judge from Togo, said, "There exists overwhelming evidence to prove that acts of genocide against the Tutsi group were perpetrated by Hutu elements in a concerted, planned, systematic and methodical way."


LeMond Finds There's No Fuel Left
Greg LeMond has to say goodbye.
At age 33, LeMond, the three-time winner of the Tour de France and the greatest American bicycle road racer, has decided he is no longer able to compete in the sport.
He will make a formal announcement on Saturday in Beverly Hills, Calif., as part of the Korbel Night of Champions, a fund-raiser for the United States Cycling Federation.


College Students' Image
To the Editor:
Your Nov. 26 news article on guarantees offered by community colleges for students graduating from vocational programs disserves students planning to transfer to four-year colleges.


Hudson's Bay Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Clinton Rules Out Federal Money for Research on Human Embryos Created for That Purpose
President Clinton today ruled out using Federal money to support research on human embryos created for that purpose, but he appeared to leave the door open for sponsoring research on leftover embryos at fertilization clinics.
A panel advising the Director of the National Institutes of Health had recommended earlier in the day that the Government support some research on human embryos outside the womb to improve understanding of infertility, birth defects and other disorders.


INSIDE
Toll Rising in Ferry Disaster
The death toll in the sinking of a ferry that was hit by a freighter in Manila Bay was at 34, with 100 people still unaccounted for.
Page 5.
Cost of Welfare Overhaul
President Clinton has underestimated the cost of overhauling welfare by nearly $5 billion, the Congressional Budget Office said.
Page 11.
Sex Abuse Case Dropped
Ending a 10-year scandal, prosecutors in New Jersey dropped their case against a day-care teacher charging child sex abuse.
Page 25.


Bahrain Investment Group Acquires Prime Equipment
Investcorp, the Bahrain investment group that owns Saks Fifth Avenue and Gucci, said yesterday that it had bought the Prime Equipment Company, which rents construction equipment, for $300 million.
Prime, based in Houston, has 74 outlets that deal with contractors and refiners in 11 Sun Belt states.
The company is the nation's second-largest equipment rental company behind Hertz and had rental revenue of $113 million in 1993, according to the Rental Equipment Register, a monthly trade publication.


JOBLESS RATE FELL AGAIN LAST MONTH TO A 4-YEAR LOW
Surpassing nearly all expectations, the job market posted exceptionally strong gains in November as payrolls swelled by 350,000 and the unemployment rate fell to a four-year low of 5.6 percent, the Government reported today.
The improvement in the economy embraced broad sectors of business and nearly all population groups.
Indeed, the growth last month was so vigorous in the face of persistent efforts by the Federal Reserve to slow the economy to a more sustainable pace that analysts now say another rise in short-term interest rates is all but certain.
They predict that a rate increase could come possibly before the end of the month but is more likely at the end of January.


The Wild Blue Yonder


Sampling Choreography From Switzerland
The sixth Swiss Dance Festival got off to lugubrious start on Thursday night at the TriBeCa Performing Arts Center.
Yet the event sounded so sensibly planned.
Each participant was represented by solos.
Thursday's program was devoted to dancers associated with German-speaking areas of Switzerland.
Tonight and tomorrow afternoon, those from French-speaking Switzerland will be featured at the center (199 Chambers Street).
In theory, this arrangement should have provided both unity and variety.


It's a Risky Business With Big Free Agents
The Giants are in a difficult situation.
If they go to their soon-to-be unrestricted free agents now -- like David Meggett or linebacker Corey Miller --and make them a contract offer, they risk having that offer denied and the agent for the player using it to get more money from other teams.
And if they do nothing, they risk getting burned by the player catching the first bus out of Giants Stadium when the season is over and free agency begins.


Seahawk Star Is Paralyzed In Car Crash
Michael Frier, a 25-year-old defensive tackle for the Seattle Seahawks, was paralyzed and might never walk again after his spinal cord was severely damaged Thursday night in an automobile crash involving two of his teammates.
As the Seahawks tried to cope with the grim details of Frier's condition this afternoon, there were questions about who was driving an Oldsmobile Bravada that crashed into a utility pole on a rain-slicked road, whether criminal charges were going to be filed and against whom and whether alcohol was involved.


SUPERVALU TO TAKE A CHARGE AGAINST EARNINGS
Supervalu Inc.,the nation's second-largest food wholesaler, said yesterday that it would take a $244 million charge in the third quarter, mainly to cover the costs of cutting back some of its operation.
The company said it would sell as many as 30 stores and eliminate 4,300 jobs, or 10 percent of its work force, over the next two years.
The company also said it would record a gain of $41 million in the quarter because of a favorable settlement with the Internal Revenue Service of a dispute relating to the company's 1992 taxes.
These special items will lead to a net charge of $188 million, or $1.66 a share.
In addition, the company said it would earn between 47 cents and 52 cents a share for the quarter that ends Dec. 3, less than the 62 cents a share that Wall Street analysts have been predicting.


In Magic Kingdom, Knicks Play the Court Jesters
This wasn't a statement.
It was an insult.
A slap in the Knicks' faces that will leave a lasting sting.
The Orlando Magic did almost whatever it wanted tonight, and it flaunted its superiority with open disdain.


CHRONICLE
One final bit of business was conducted before the 103d Congress passed into history on Thursday.
Just as the vote on the GATT trade accord was completed in the Senate, with the chamber still full, SENATOR BOB DOLE, the incoming majority leader, announced that before leaving he wanted to mark the 92d birthday of SENATOR STROM THURMOND, The Associated Press reported.
In response, Senator Thurmond, Republican of South Carolina, said: "I will be 92 on Dec. 5, but 92 years young." He is in line to become chairman of the Armed Services Committee next year and is, no surprise, the oldest member of Congress.


Bridge
Cover the East-West hands shown in the diagram, and plan the play as South in seven hearts after the lead of the spade ten.
The opponents have done no bidding, and are aware that you have a singleton spade.
The deal occurred Sunday in the final session of the National Swiss Team Championship in Minneapolis.
A Canadian team -- Boris Baran, Mark Stein and Mark Molson of Montreal, Drew Cannell of Winnipeg, Manitoba, and Jack Coleman of Portland, Ore. -- had a big lead but stumbled in the penultimate round.
In part because of the diagramed deal, they lost the round heavily to a foursome led by Barry Rigal of Manhattan.


The S.E.C. Championship: An End and What It Means
The idea was to create an end: a football game to determine the Southeastern Conference champion and cash in on the most intense devotion to the sport in the nation.
But as the third S.E.C. championship undergoes a growth spurt, as a centerpiece to a weekend of events here after two years in Birmingham, Ala., the game has become a means to a bigger end.
"You can't win a national championship," said Alabama Coach Gene Stallings, "if you don't get into the championship game in this particular conference."


Hockey Negotiators Stop Talks, For Now
The abrupt break in the hockey negotiations yesterday wasn't a breakdown.
Management and labor agreed to disagree and to resume their bargaining Monday in Chicago.
The weekend window could mean that the two sides will intensify their negotiations to end the lockout, which has postponed the start of the season for 63 days.


Corrections
An article in Business Day on Tuesday about the planned acquisition of the Chambers Development Company by USA Waste Services misattributed a quotation.
It was Philip Angell, assistant to the chairman of Browning-Ferris Industries, who said, "It's a complex deal and hard to tell on the face of it if that's the right price." The remark was not made by Andrew Silver, an analyst at Dillon, Read &amp; Company.


Reports of Ex-Official's Plea Agreement Revive Whitewater Worries at White House
White House officials expressed surprise and apprehension today about reports that Webster L. Hubbell, a close friend of President Clinton, had agreed to plead guilty to felony charges and cooperate with Whitewater prosecutors in their expanding investigation.
Bracing themselves for a new round of political criticism, the officials nonetheless said they did not believe the plea agreement would have any significant legal ramifications for the White House.
They said Mr.
Hubbell, once the No. 3 official in the Justice Department, did not have any incriminating information about either Mr.
Clinton or Hillary Rodham Clinton.


Region News Briefs; Connecticut House Race Is Still Undecided
Representative Sam Gejdenson appeared to have lost 14 more votes than his Republican challenger, Edward W. Munster, in a second recount of votes in Norwich that was completed here today.
But a further 296 ballots remained in dispute, leaving the outcome of the race still uncertain.
After the initial recount Mr.
Gejdenson, who has represented eastern Connecticut for seven terms, was declared the winner by only four votes, making the race one of the closest in this century.


Soccer Teams Think Defense
How effectively Brown defends against Rutgers, and how Rutgers handles Brown's Darren Eales, the player of the year in the Ivy League, will be major factors in deciding which of the two teams goes to next week's final four in the Division I soccer tournament.
Brown (13-3-1) arrived in New Jersey for this afternoon's game at Rutgers having allowed 15 goals in 17 games this season, with just 1 of the goals coming in the first half.
Brown has also developed a potent attack, spearheaded by Eales, who possesses tremendous speed and a knack of getting free in tight situations besides his scoring ability.
A senior striker from Cambridge, England, Eales has scored 16 goals.


Police Recall Futile Search For Carjacker
Three New York City detectives testified today that they had been unable to find any trace of a reputed Bronx drug lord named Dino, the mysterious figure that the defendant in a murder trial here says is actually responsible for carjacking a Jeep and killing its teen-aged driver.
The detectives, a Housing Authority detective and two detectives from the New York City Police Department, said they had searched for Dino by questioning people at a Bronx bodega and the Edenwald Houses, a public housing project in the northeast Bronx, and by running computer searches for someone with the nickname Dino.
The said they had also searched for a blue Lexus, the car the defendant, Edward L. Summers, said he and Dino drove to Rockland County on the day of the carjacking.


Intuit Inc.(INTU,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


U.S. Moves to Halt Abuses In Political Asylum Program
Concerned that tens of thousands of foreigners had applied for political asylum as a backdoor way of getting jobs in the United States, the Immigration and Naturalization Service announced significant changes in the process today with an eye to deporting ineligible applicants more quickly.
The immigration service said that to reduce a backlog of 425,000 asylum seekers, it would more than double the number of asylum officers, interview all new applicants within 60 days and seek to dispose of all new cases within 180 days.


Man in the News: THE 104th CONGRESS -- PROFILES; A Forceful Conservative as G.O.P. Whip, a Clinton Ally to Lead Democrats -- Thomas Andrew Daschle
In electing Tom Daschle to lead them for the next two years, the 47 Democrats of the new Senate have chosen to tread close to the political path they have followed since Bill Clinton became President.
Mr.
Daschle, a South Dakotan who turns 47 next week, campaigned all summer as a reformer of the Senate's Gordian knot of rules and traditions, as a man who would ramrod legislation onto the floor and get senators home at a decent hour instead of 9 or 10 P.M.
That was back when Democrats ran the chamber and fully expected to keep doing so.


Greif Brothers Corp. reports earnings for Year to Oct 31


Tie City Workfare Plan to Minimum Wage
To the Editor:
"Plenty of Jobs? Where?" by Philip Harvey (Op-Ed, Nov. 25) rightly portrays shortcomings in the proposal by Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani to require work from New York City's able-bodied, childless welfare recipients.
Yet inexplicably Mr.
Harvey fails to move beyond negativism, never pointing out the obvious change to the plan that would alleviate what he terms its cruelty.


Oregon's Assisted Suicide Law Gives No Sure Comfort to Dying
To the Editor:
"Suicide Law Placing Oregon on Several Uncharted Paths" (front page, Nov. 25) refers to studies on sanctioned suicide in the Netherlands.
There is a difference between euthanasia as practiced in the Netherlands and what will be available in Oregon on Dec. 8 as a result of the passage by voters of Measure 16.


Mitchell Energy &amp; Develop.  Corp.(MND A,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Region News Briefs; Court Rebuffs Effort By Airport to Cut Trees
Westchester County's four-year-old legal effort to force property owners in Greenwich to cut trees growing under a flight path into Westchester County Airport was rejected again today by a Federal court.
Landings on one of the airport's two runways have been restricted to small planes since 1988 because of the trees, just over the state line from the airport, in Harrison, N.Y.
Last May, the United States Supreme Court let stand a Connecticut Supreme Court decision blocking the county from claiming an easement that would have allowed it to cut the trees.


Promotion at Publisher
Erik Engstrom has been promoted to chief operating officer of Bantam Doubleday Dell Publishing Group Inc., the book and magazine publishing company.
Mr.
Engstrom, 31, is only the second executive to hold the title in the company's eight-year history.


Oregon's Assisted Suicide Law Gives No Sure Comfort to Dying; No Criminal Conviction
To the Editor:
Re "Death Made Too Easy" (Op-Ed, Nov. 16): Robert A. Burt writes in his attack on an individual's right to choose not to suffer that the issue before the Michigan Supreme Court is "the appeal from the criminal conviction of Dr. Jack Kevorkian for assisting in a patient's suicide."


Duty Calls, but So Does O. J.; Torn Between 2 Judges, Lawyer Ends Up Annoying Both
Peter J. Neufeld, who has been practicing law in New York for 20 years, has a big problem.
He has one client in New York, Pedro Gil, whom he is defending pro bono in a well-publicized murder case involving the death of a police officer.
But Mr.
Neufeld has another client -- a certain O. J. Simpson of Los Angeles, accused in an even better-known murder case.
One pro-bono case and one veritable case of the century are a nice mix of work for any lawyer.
The problem is that both cases are under way at roughly the same time in two cities separated by a sizable continent, and the judges in the two cases seem unyielding in their insistence that Mr.
Neufeld give them his exclusive attention.


Officer Killed In a Shootout In Brooklyn
A police officer responding to a reported holdup and a robbery suspect were killed yesterday in a wild gunfight in a bicycle shop in Brooklyn, the police said.
Backup officers swarming to the scene captured three other young suspects hiding in the basement, one bleeding from a gunshot wound.
In a few minutes of drama, danger, heroism and tragedy, the first officer who entered Frenchie's Cycle World at 929 East 107th Street in Canarsie was met by a robber who pretended to be an employee and tried to send him away, saying it was all a mistake.
But when the officer's partner walked in, the robber's accomplices opened fire without warning with semiautomatic weapons.


Moving With No Strings And Few Connections
The monthlong 92d Street Y Harkness Dance Project got off to a fine start with dance by Bebe Miller at Playhouse 91.
The inaugural program, seen on Thursday night, consisted of mostly familiar recent work by Ms.
Miller but it was good to see her funny, sensuous "Cantos Gordos" again.
And the playhouse, the home of the Jewish Repertory Theater at 316 East 91st Street, Manhattan, is a find, intimate yet spacious-feeling with good sightlines, a wonderfully welcoming atmosphere and stage space that frames dance well.
"Cantos Gordos" -- "fat songs" -- is set to a score by Don Byron that has a sly humor and wistful melodic moments reminiscent of Duke Ellington.
Mr.
Byron and Ms.
Miller and her four charming dancers create a sense of the last, playful moments in an unfancy, nearly-empty ballroom late at night.


Public &amp; Private; A Military Mess
Keith Meinhold is a petty officer in the Navy.
He is also gay.
Everyone he works with knows he is gay.
In fact, millions of people learned it when he appeared two years ago on ABC News, got a simple question and gave a simple answer: "Yes, in fact I am gay."
While Americans had been told that the armed forces could not tolerate the open presence of gay men and lesbians, that their safety would be in danger and the esprit de corps imperiled, Mr.
Meinhold and others like him have gone about their business with little rancor in the ranks.
That's what gay soldiers envisioned when Bill Clinton promised in the Presidential campaign to end a ban on gays in the military.
But, Mr.
Meinhold and a few others notwithstanding, that's not what Clinton Administration policy has wrought.
Quite the contrary.


Lights, Cameras, Crowds: It Must Be Christmas


METRO DIGEST
DRIVERS WORK IN FEAR OF YOUNG GUNS Although delivery drivers have long been the prey of thieves, the holdups have become more violent, even lethal, in recent years as guns have proliferated and as more and more young people carry out the crimes.
Law-enforcement officials say the young criminals often lack the restraint of older criminals.
Page 1.
NEW YORK CITY  BATTLE OF THE BUDGET MAY NOT GO TO COURT On the brink of a court battle over the fiscal powers of the City Council, Mayor Giuliani and City Council Speaker Peter F. Vallone reopened efforts to reach agreement on what services and programs should be pared to close a budget gap of more than $1 billion.
Council officials said that if an agreement was reached, they would probably abandon efforts to seek a court interpretation of their powers.
Page 27.
EX-OFFICIAL SAYS HE'LL CHALLENGE OUSTER The former acting president of the Brooklyn community school board ousted this week by Schools Chancellor Ramon C. Cortines said he would challenge the decision, even though he had asked Mr.
Cortines to act.
Sylvester Leaks said he would ask the New York Civil Liberties Union whether he can legally challenge the decision to take control of District 17.
Page 27.
GERMAN CULTURE SUSTAINED BY EXILES The building at 2121 Broadway, on the corner of 74th Street, fairly overflows with contemporary sensibilities.
On the ground floor, Fairway, one of the city's pioneering produce houses, caters to the eating cult with fresh comestibles.
But on the fourth floor there is an anomaly, a musty space that harks back to an anxious time when the Jews of Germany were forced to flee a land they had thought of as their own.
This is the offices of Aufbau, a German Jewish newspaper founded as the Nazis consolidated power.
About New York, Page 27.
SKELETON DISCOVERED IN BASEMENT There was a giant cobweb stretching across part of the room and right beyond it, under the stark glare of a bare ceiling light, was a fully clothed skeleton sitting erect in a kitchen chair.
Beneath the chair was a skull that the police said had apparently fallen to the floor.
Page 26.
RAPPER LEAVES HOSPITAL FOR SECRET SITE Tupac Shakur, the wounded rap star, was discharged from Metropolitan Hospital Center in Manhattan, a day after a Manhattan jury convicted him of sex abuse.
As the police searched for the gunmen who shot the entertainer at least four times in what they say appeared to be a robbery early Wednesday, his lawyer, Michael Warren, said Mr.
Shakur was "someplace in Manhattan." Page 26.
REGION  SEARCH FOR SUSPECT FUTILE Three New York City detectives testified that they had been unable to find any trace of a reputed Bronx drug lord named Dino, the mysterious figure that the defendant in a Rockland County murder trial says is actually responsible for carjacking a Jeep and killing its teen-aged driver.
Page 29.
POLICE SAY WOMAN MADE UP ATTACK STORY A 20-year-old student who reported that she was slashed and stabbed by a black man during a robbery on the Old Westbury campus of the State University of New York actually slashed herself, the police said.
Page 29.
JOHNSON &amp; JOHNSON LOSES SUIT A Federal jury awarded $434,000 to an immunologist who claimed he was dismissed by a Johnson &amp; Johnson subsidiary because he opposed sending Federal regulators inadequate test results to secure quick approval of a medical device.
Page 29.


Brazil's Treasures, Lost and Found
Trying to reconcile God with gold, Brazil's 18th-century mining barons lavishly decorated churches here, creating an exuberant art form called Brazilian Baroque.
In the mid-1700's, when this gold-rush town was larger than New York, one visitor said that praying in Pilar Church was like talking to God inside a great golden urn.
But the gold ran out years ago, and the locus of economic power shifted from Brazil's interior to its industrialized coast.
Today, some wealthy Brazilians have developed a predatory taste for 18th-century cherubs, saints and winged angels executed in what is now hailed as Brazil's first art style.


Pataki Tells His Advisers To Streamline Government
Governor-elect George E. Pataki told the 220 members of his transition team yesterday to look for ways to cut costs and consolidate government as they design the policies, propose the personnel and finally take the reigns of state government in January.
"We are going to keep our campaign pledges, notwithstanding the $4.5 billion to $5 billion deficit," he said in an interview after meeting with the group for an hour.
"We are going to go forward with the tax cut we talked about. So we are going to cut costs and streamline government. They were all charged with that and they all understand that."


U.S.-Backed Candidate for Trade Post Is Trailing
One day after winning Congressional approval of a vast global trade accord, the Clinton Administration appears to be losing the first power struggle in the new world trade order.
At issue is who will head the soon-to-be-created World Trade Organization, the agency that is to handle trade disputes and replace the existing Geneva-based bureaucracy of GATT, or the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade.


Salvadorans See Future Imperiled by U.S. Immigration Move
People in villages like this one say they survive because of the money they receive from relatives working in the United States.
The hundreds of monthly stipends and the savings brought with villagers who return to live here have an impact on every small farm and tiny business.
So everybody sees their future dependent on a decision announced Friday in Washington that the United States Immigration and Naturalization Service will not renew a program that allowed tens of thousands of Salvadorans to live in the United States legally.


At Last, the Train Under the Channel
SOMEWHERE west of Folkestone, hurtling toward the English Channel at 100 miles an hour, the passengers begin to stir.
Outside, the hedgerows and stone cottages of the Kent countryside flash past; ahead, the line of low grassy bluffs that mark the English coastline draw closer and closer.
Faces pressed to windows, like those of children on a school outing, the travelers aboard the Eurostar Express want to be sure they don't miss the best part, the dizzying moment when they will all plunge into the black hole bored into the back of the Dover cliffs, the mouth of the Channel Tunnel, the 31-mile-long tube that will carry them on their first channel crossing beneath the sea.
Suddenly and without warning, the train pitches into darkness.
Ears pop.
Conversations rise.
Is this it?
"Yes, yes, I'm sure this it, I'm quite sure this is it," declares one man, straining to peer into the dark when, just as suddenly, the train re-emerges into the morning sun.
There is laughter.
No, not yet.
Just a small tunnel that carries the tracks beneath an overpass, part of the sprawling complex of sidings and switch yards that mark the final approach.


'Let Monsters Be Monstrous'
To the Editor:
In her essay on horror films, Caryn James says that heart is what sets a great horror film apart from just another monster movie  [ "In Search of the Man Within the Monster," Nov. 13 ] .
Yet a lack of heart is not a problem in horror films.
Lack of horror, however, is.
If you had to pick one thing to say about most of the recent big-budget horror films (Francis Ford Coppola's "Bram Stoker's Dracula," Mike Nichols's "Wolf," Kenneth Branagh's "Mary Shelley's Frankenstein" and Neil Jordan's "Interview With the Vampire" it would have to be, "They aren't scary."


'The Answer' at Playhouse in Bronx
THE Belmont Italian American Playhouse purports to be more cross-cultural than ethnically bound.
Although its current play, "The Answer," a contemporary farce, was written by an Italian-American playwright, John Morogiello, it does not impart an Italianate air.
That said, "The Answer," one of the theater's three producers, Marco Greco, says, is emphatically not what the playhouse is qualitatively about.
And a good thing it isn't.


Northern Ireland
To the Editor: We were so delighted to read your coverage of the Causeway Coast of Northern Ireland ("Northern Ireland: Vistas of Peace," Oct. 2) where we enjoyed a marvelous stay two years ago.
We found the Giant's Causeway a fascinating natural sight and great fun to clamber around on; one might imagine Beowulf striding about there.
The people of the area provided much of the enjoyment -- a warm, literate and witty group, ready to offer assistance and conversation.


Erasing Boundaries


Celebrating for History
American Museum of Natural History, Dec. 1.


The Joy of Compulsion; Better Than String
ONCE in my archeologist days, I gazed in awe at a room I had just finished excavating in the ancient Greek town of Morgantina in Sicily, filled with hundreds of spectacular fourth-century B.C. terra-cotta statuettes, so sacred and dignified, all depicting the goddess Demeter.
The director of the dig, Eric Sjogvist, amused at my reaction, observed how much more exciting it would have been to have found "the rich glory of the commonplace" -- you know, the things that would tell us so much more about antiquity than the official pieces -- Helen of Troy's shoe closet or Alexander the Great's collection of drinking cups (he was a notorious boozer in his last year).
Had we had in our hands a copy of the imaginative, beautiful book called MAGNIFICENT OBSESSIONS: Twenty Remarkable Collectors in Pursuit of Their Dreams (Chronicle, paper, $19.95), by Mitch Tuchman, with spectacular photographs by Peter Brenner, we would have dreamed up far better ideas.
This amusing and serious book is about 20 real collectors who are most certainly not collecting "dignified" things like Renaissance bronzes or Manet paintings, but vast, gorgeous and thoughtful works like Lionel trains, puzzles, toy soldiers and swizzle sticks.
The book is a revelation and a joy.
Mr.
Tuchman, a California collector himself and editor in chief at the Los Angeles County Museum of Art, and Mr.
Brenner, the museum's supervising photographer, present the collectors, their beliefs and their pieces compellingly.
After reading the lucid and mesmerizing explanations of why these gifted collectors acquire puzzles or aquarium furniture and after looking at the dazzling photographs, you may become as hooked on the book as its subjects are by their satisfyingly strange artifacts.
It turns out that what swizzle sticks tell about contemporary civilization is profound.
Thomas Hoving


Stadium Plans: Ruthian Touch And No Dome
New York City's plans to improve Yankee Stadium may crystallize as early as this week with the expected release of a design for the ballpark, which is to incorporate old-fashioned touches reminiscent of the original stadium, officials say.
Last week, Hellmuth, Obata &amp; Kassabaum, a Kansas City, Mo., design firm, gave the city its report, which examined increasing luxury suites, club seating and parking, and retail opportunities around the stadium.


For Limping Parody, Durang to the Rescue
IN THAT CLASSIC MEMORY PLAY about Amanda, a faded Dixie beauty and mother, there's a delicious moment when Amanda almost loses her temper.
The scene is her run-down little flat in St.
Louis.
The exhausted mother watches her beloved child limp like Quasimodo to the ancient davenport and collapse.
"Oh," Amanda sighs, "if only I had connections in the Mafia, I'd have someone come and break both your legs." Her child gently demurs: "Don't try to make me laugh, Mama. You know I have asthma." Amanda is at her wit's end: "Your asthma, your leg, your eczema. You're just a mess, Lawrence."


SERVICE WITH A SNEER
The Denny's story demonstrates what many of us (and certainly all blacks) have known for a long time ("Service With a Sneer," by Howard Kohn, Nov. 6).
If you are black, regardless of income level, every social or economic transaction with the mainstream culture carries an extra load of uncertainty, anger, negative feedback and the risk of encountering real hatred.
Thirty years after the passage of civil rights legislation, blacks apparently still cannot go into a national chain restaurant (let alone myriad local mom-and-pop establishments) without the risk of being insulted.
Is it any wonder they tend to direct less than their full attention to the mainstream culture?
MARK N. COHEN Plattsburgh, N.Y.


Taking On Ticketmaster Over Pricing
To the Editor:
Ticketmaster has to pay many bills.
It needs exclusive contracts for guaranteed business.
Ticketmaster has to pay for phones and computers.
I'm not saying Ticketmaster hasn't made mistakes, but it is not a monopoly.
You usually can get tickets some other way.
ROSANN FELLER  Jackson Heights, Queens, Nov. 9


Dinnerware, Noted Names and Chuckles
BE forewarned: an exhibition now at the Newark Museum is a reversal of expectations.
Although renown painters and sculptors of the last three decades are featured, their work in this show will raise some eyebrows and evoke a good many chuckles.
These are big names of the art world, like Roy Lichtenstein, George Segal, Donald Judd and Cindy Sherman.
Their signatures command hundreds of thousands of dollars for their Minimalist, Conceptual or Pop Art.
But here these names are inscribed on soup plates, teacups or centerpieces for the dinner table.


Two Booklets on Flying And Getting to the Plane
Two booklets packed with information have just appeared in new editions.
"Fly-Rights, a Consumer Guide to Air Travel," published by the Department of Transportation, has been revised and reissued after nine years.
With the addition of guidance on frequent flier programs, travel with disabilities and a list of other agency publications on travel, the booklet has grown to 58 pages from 32.
The overbooking section is a useful, concise explanation of this practice, the rules that govern it and what the passenger is entitled to.


Music on CD-ROM: It Works The Way We Listen, Not the Way We Hear
WHEN music is casually heard, it seems to be linear, unfolding in time, proceeding from its initial framing silence to its final closing tones.
But once we start paying attention to the passing sounds, music is not linear at all.
It seems to leap about; our ears find echoes of the past in the present, form expectations about the future, spur recollections of other musical experiences and lead us to interpretations that have nothing to do with music at all.
In our minds we pause, rewind, fast-forward, jump and juxtapose.
We feel the linear rush of musical events, but we only make sense of them when fighting the sweep of the current.
Now we have a technology that works the way we listen rather than the way we hear: the musical CD-ROM.
These disks, which slip into a personal computer's latest, most fashionable accessory, combine image and sound and text.
They play music while showing pictures on the computer monitor; their "pages" of text contain "buttons" that call up other screen images and sounds; colored "hot words" can be clicked on, using a mouse, giving definitions and commentary; cursors can change shape from arrows to pointing fingers.
In fact, there is so much that is self-consciously novel about these disks and so much that allows just fanciful romping about, it is almost tempting to dismiss them as no more than pretentious videos for the MTV generation.


For Elderly, Places That Help
Various services for the elderly are available through the Department for the Aging, other city agencies and volunteer groups.
The Department for the Aging's telephone number for information and referrals: (212) 442-1000.
Here is a sampling.
HOME SHARING  NEW YORK FOUNDATION FOR SENIOR CITIZENS (212) 962-7559.
Arranges house partners, provides screening and financial advice.
MEAL DELIVERY  AGING IN AMERICA 1500 Pelham Parkway South, the Bronx, N.Y. 10461; (718) 824-4004.
BHRAGS TOMPKINS PARK SENIOR CENTER 550 Greene Avenue, Brooklyn, N.Y. 11216; (718) 638-3000.
CENTRAL HARLEM MEALS-ON-WHEELS 163 West 125th Street, Room 1320, New York, N.Y. 10027; (212) 222-2552.
Housekeeping and personal care available.
PROSPECT HILL SENIOR SERVICES 283 Prospect Avenue, Brooklyn, N.Y. 11215; (718) 499-9574.
Some housekeeping services available.
SOUTHWEST QUEENS SENIOR SERVICES 103-12 101st Avenue, Ozone Park, N.Y. 11416; (718) 847-9200.
STANLEY ISAACS SENIOR CENTER 415 East 93d Street, New York, N.Y. 10218; (212) 360-7620.
OUTINGS  PETER DELLAMONICA SENIOR CITIZEN CENTER 23-56 Broadway, Astoria, N.Y. 11106; (718) 626-1500.
Offers assistance to crime victims, health screening, shopping and chore services, and meal delivery.
PROJECT FIND -- HAMILTON SENIOR CENTER 141 West 73d Street, New York, N.Y. 10023; (212) 787-7710.
Organizes trips and offers exercise and art classes, concerts, movies and a daily lunch program.
REPAIRS  ALLEN A. M. E. NEIGHBORHOOD PRESERVATION/SENIOR TRANSPORTATION 114-02 Guy Brewer Boulevard, Jamaica, N.Y. 11433; (718) 658-6660.
DEPARTMENT OF HOUSING PRESERVATION AND DEVELOPMENT Emergency Repair Program, (212) 960-4800.
Emergency heat and water repairs, 24 hours a day.
NEW YORK FOUNDATION FOR SENIOR CITIZENS 150 Nassau Street, New York, N.Y. 10038; (212) 962-7653.
Home safety inspections and minor repairs, throughout the city.
TRANSPORTATION  AGING IN AMERICA (718) 824-4004.
Transportation throughout the Bronx for medical purposes.
HAMILTON GRANGE SENIOR CITIZENS CENTER 420 West 145th Street, New York, N.Y. 10031; (212) 862-4181.
Transportation throughout Manhattan for elderly Harlem residents who live between 110th to 155th Streets, west of Fifth Avenue.
VISITING  SENIOR ACTION IN A GAY ENVIRONMENT 208 West 13th Street, New York, N.Y. 10011; (212) 741-2247.
VISITING NEIGHBORS 401 Lafayette Street, New York, N.Y. 10003; (212) 260-6200.


Corrections
An article on Oct. 30 about special scholarship awards misidentified the university that offers the Gaebe Eagle Scout Award.
A reader's letter dated Nov. 22 points out that it is Johnson and Wales University, not Brown.


Profile; As the Rules Change in Mexico, He's a Quick Study
HE had just pulled off the deal of the year, swiping a sweet $1 billion joint venture with AT&amp;T out from under his competitors' noses -- and in the process reshaping the future of telecommunications in Mexico.
So how did Dionisio Garza Medina, the 40-year-old chairman of the Alfa group and scion of one of Mexico's most prestigious business dynasties, celebrate his coup?
He wolfed down a turkey sandwich and a Diet Coke at the AT&amp;T offices in Mexico City, where the announcement was made, before he boarded a private jet to Alfa's headquarters in Monterrey to get back to work.


Anti-Alien Sentiment Spreading In Wake of California's Measure
Voter approval of sanctions against illegal aliens in California is reshaping the nation's immigration debate, with movements forming in other states to push through similar propositions and leaders of the new Republican-dominated Congress planning early hearings on immigration-control legislation.
The California measure, Proposition 187, which requires teachers and clinic doctors to deny help to undocumented aliens and then report them to the police, has also driven a deep ideological wedge into the conservative wing of the Republican Party.


With Hockey in Limbo, Lindros Goes Back to College
If he weren't so big, he could be any other student at the Spoke, the University of Western Ontario's cavernous campus pub.
Blue jeans, bulky sweater, hiking boot/sneakers, a cap tugged low over wavy brown hair, a day-old beard.
But Eric Lindros, the Philadelphia Flyers' 21-year-old man-child, is big.
He is 6 feet 5 inches, 240 pounds, broad-jawed, thick-necked.


Saga of a Once Slow Swimmer
BRIAN HANSBURY'S teammates shake their heads when he walks by the White Plains Y.W.C.A. pool here.
Hans, as they call him, is amazing.
Here's a youngster they used to fly past at swim practice.
Once the slowest swimmer, he is now the fastest.
His story proffers hope.
"It's really the story of someone who never, ever gave up," said Ilan Noach, the Y.W.C.A.
Middies swim coach.


Gleaming Antiquities From Ancient Mesopotamia
BEFORE 3000 B.C.
Mesopotamians invented writing, built the first cities and originated a vigorous art style that is once again in focus in the West.
Over their long history through Biblical times, Mesopotamians lived between the Tigris and Euphrates rivers in lands that are now in Iraq, Turkey, Syria and Iran, and they bore the names Sumerians, Akkadians, Hittites, Babylonians and Assyrians.


Leo Strauss' Elitism Sought Excellence for All; Classicism Came First
To the Editor:
Having just completed a senior thesis on Leo Strauss and Hannah Arendt at Harvard University, I would like to respond to Brent Staples' Nov. 28 Editorial Notebook, "Undemocratic Vistas." I find that he misrepresents Strauss' writings.


Shadowboxing Socrates of the Working Class
RAMON JIMENEZ is up on the balls of his feet, shadowboxing in front of his class, rolling his shoulders, throwing out his questions like quick jabs.
"Another prisoner accuses you of stealing steaks from the kitchen, do you get to confront him? Does due process apply? You've got 24 hours to set up your defense. Should you go to a jailhouse lawyer? What's it like in there? You think you sleep till 11, watch your soaps, then work on your muscles?"
The range of experience in this John Jay College class is broad enough for there to be laughs, snickers, blank looks.
There are kids right out of high school, veteran police officers and single mothers with school-age children.
Mr.
Jimenez has a rule about that; if you bring your kids to class, they have to write him a note if your paper is late.


Poetry and the Decline Of Civilization
I read "Universal Thanksgiving for a Poet, 82"  [ Oct. 23 ] , a profile of Ann Porter, with mounting dismay.
That the octogenarian widow of artist Fairfield Porter has had a first book of poems published is pleasant news, even touching in light of her good-heartedness and valuable life.
That such a book was short-listed for the National Book Award is, however, further affirmation of our current literary malaise.


Agency Proposes Labels on Poultry Products Containing Bone
The Agriculture Department has proposed a change in its rules that would require labels on poultry products to reflect the presence of crushed bone.
Such labeling has been required on red-meat products since 1982.
Specifically, the rule, announced on Friday, would require the poultry industry to note when it has used "mechanically separated" chicken or turkey.
In that process, food processors recover the bits of meat that remain after hand boning by crushing the bones and running the mass through a sieve or other screen.


The Executive Life; A Flurry of Turnovers For Movie Marketers
PITY the Hollywood studio marketing chiefs.
No matter how bad the movie, they are expected to "open" it.
And even after a long run of box office flops, many studio heads blame marketing first and production later.
"When something works, you're a hero," said Chris Pula, president of marketing for New Line Cinema, "and when it doesn't, it's your fault, not the movie's."
New studio heads also tend to like new marketing heads.
So, it is little wonder that in a year of several high-level management shifts and some conspicuous marketing failures -- among them, "I Love Trouble" and "Quiz Show" (Disney) and "North" (Columbia) -- top movie marketing executives are being shuffled as studio's seek the perfect hand.
Caught up in the upheaval have been Mark Gill, out at Columbia; Andrea Jaffe, formerly of Fox; Bob Levin at Disney; Mr.
Pula, at New Line, and Buffy Shutt and Kathy Jones, whose contracts expired at Sony's Tristar and precipitated the whole realignment.


New Senate Chief Says His Mixing Business and Politics Is What Albany Needs
Joseph L. Bruno, the Rensselaer County Republican who is about to become majority leader of the State Senate, says he believes his dual experience as a businessman and legislator is his biggest political asset as he prepares to fight for tax cuts and less government regulation.
But those converging careers have also been Mr.
Bruno's biggest liability in his 18 years in elective politics, bringing persistent allegations of conflicts of interest and other ethical lapses.


And Still the Stonington Fleet Will Fish
AT 9 A.M. on a cold fall day, the rain had stopped but wind still whipped the Stonington Town Dock.
"Boy, it was pouring," said Arthur Medeiros, who'd been there four hours earlier when his 55-foot fishing boat, the Seafarer, went out for the day.
Now he talked with others on the dock, including two men mending a giant net and Fred Calabretta of Mystic Seaport.
"How's the fishing, Arthur?" asked Mr. Calabretta.


Esiason's Example
To The Sports Editor:
In a society where an athlete's character and substance have sadly taken a back seat to an "image is everything" mind-set, Gerald Eskenazi's "It's All in Boomer's Hands" (The New York Times, Nov. 27) poignantly and graciously depicts Esiason as a man, son and father of admirable esteem.


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
CHRISTMAS IN MUSIC
The Christmas story featuring comparative settings of the same texts from 12th century Gregorian chant through the 20th century, will be performed by Harris Becker, guitarist and lutanist, on Saturday at 8 P.M.
The recital will take place at Trinity Church, Pequot Avenue and Center Street in Southport.


Corrections
The Percentage Losers charts in the Stock Markets group on the Money page on Nov. 20 included four erroneous entries supplied by Tribune Media Services.
SPS Transaction Services, Briggs &amp; Stratton, Mellon Bank and Chipcom were not among the percentage losers for the week ended Nov. 19; the calculations failed to account for recent splits in those stocks.


Crossed Lines, Crazy Bills
Jean John has children who live in Trinidad, so she is accustomed to high phone bills each month.
But when calls to the Dominican Republic began showing up on her statements in January, she was confused.
Around the same time, she would often find herself listening to a conversation in Spanish when she picked up her receiver.
She complained to A.T.&amp; T., and at first the company forgave the calls that were not hers.
But she has continued to receive huge bills -- some for more than $1,000 -- that list calls to the Dominican Republic.
She said the company insisted she pay them in full.


Harlem Rehabilitation Struggle Leaves Casualties
THE words that best describe Gregory G. Gresham's experience in successfully renovating a vacant town house in the Sugar Hill section of Harlem as housing for himself and his wife, plus three rental tenants, are "rewarding and painful."
He uttered them a week ago in the handsomely restored though still sparsely furnished parlor floor of the building, at 760 St.
Nicholas Avenue, at 148th Street.
He bought it from the city in a negotiated sale in 1988, two years after his sealed-bid offer was rejected by the Department of Housing Preservation and Development in favor of another bidder who was never able to close.
During a three-year construction period that started in 1991, he has nurtured the structure back to habitability.
It had been vacant since the early 70's.


U.N. Says Serbs Fail to Keep Promise to Lift Obstructions
Nationalist Serbian leaders failed to follow through today on a pledge to stop blocking United Nations convoys carrying aid and military supplies for peacekeeping troops and to release about 400 peacekeepers and military observers who have been taken hostage, United Nations officials here said.
The Bosnian Serbs' failure came as separate missions were undertaken by the highest-ranking United Nations diplomat in the former Yugoslavia and the United States Ambassador to Germany to hold talks with Bosnian Government and nationalist Serb leaders on an international peace plan that the Serbs have so far rejected.


Yes, Even Now, There Are Pro-Clinton C.E.O.'s
IT is almost an oxymoron to combine the words "Democrat" and "chief executive officer." Yet there is a small, but hardy, band of Democratic business executives.
And, despite the recent Republican sweep of Congress, they are standing by their man, President Clinton, though with some reservations and concerns.
More than any other Democratic Presidential candidate in recent times, Bill Clinton in 1992 reached out to business and business responded.
From bankers on Wall Street to entrepreneurs in Silicon Valley, the Clinton-Gore campaign courted executives with the message that business had nothing to fear from a Democratic Administration.
This effort had many goals: To lend credibility to the Clinton campaign, to tap into the deep pockets of business and to gain votes that had traditionally gone to Republicans.


Newtonian Linguistics
"IT IS HARDLY NEWS that Newt Gingrich is not Mr. Nice Guy in politics," wrote my Op-Ed colleague Anthony Lewis.
"But his signals that he is going to stick to the Rottweiler game matter a lot."
Although television pundits happily wrestle each other to the ground and join in furious food fights, newspaper sages -- especially at The New York Times -- are expected to, and do, conduct their communications with a collegiality bordering on outright civility.
Though Tony and I disagree on almost everything, we alert each other to potential misreadings of our works.
In this case, we have what hypersensitive dog lovers could take to be a pejorative reference to the Rottweiler, a large black-and-tan dog named after a town in southwest Germany.
Because of their fearsome aspect (though not because of any vicious trait in the breed), these dogs have become the second most popular breed in America, and are panting hard after the most popular, Labrador retrievers.


Taking Advantage of Sweet Bay Scallops
BAY SCALLOPS from Nantucket are now in season.
A little smaller than a penny, they are the sweetest -- and most expensive -- scallops on the market.
A new dish that has been catching on in restaurants is seared scallops heaped on a mound of buttery mashed potatoes and sprinkled with white truffle oil.
Another interesting first course can be made with scallops stir-fried Chinese style with Oriental seasonings and served on a bed of crispy fried noodles.


ADAM WALINSKY, PRIVATE LOBBYIST FOR PUBLIC SAFETY
Since crime on the streets is a form of terrorism and guerrilla warfare, why not use members of the United States military, who are, after all, funded and trained to wait for something to happen?
In an interview, a soldier serving in Haiti said he often heard more gunfire in Brooklyn.


Black Architects Struggling for Equity
COLLEAGUES are few; exemplars and mentors fewer.
Business contacts are made in social settings to which one is not always invited.
Lacking experience in big projects, one is rarely entrusted with such jobs -- and therefore never gets the needed experience.
All told, it is difficult to be a black architect, even in the best of times.
And these are not the best of times.


A Donation For Harvard
Harvard University announced today that David Rockefeller, an alumnus and former chairman of the Chase Manhattan Bank, had given the university $11 million to establish a center for Latin American studies.
The center, which will focus on encouraging better understanding between countries in the Americas, grew from a series of discussions between Mr.
Rockefeller and Neil L. Rudenstine, Harvard's president, who is on a medical leave of absence.


Who Will Help the Black Man?
TWO HARLEM HOSPITAL doctors have calculated that the life expectancy of black men in central Harlem is shorter than that of men in Bangladesh.
In America, the leading cause of death among black males between the ages of 15 and 24 is homicide.
The unemployment rate in America for black males is more than twice that of white males.
Even black men with jobs and higher education do not, for the most part, receive the same pay as white men or black women.
Among recent college graduates with one to five years on the job, white men earned an average of $12.85 an hour in 1991, black women earned $11.41, white women earned $11.38 and black men $11.26.
The plight of black men in the nation's inner cities has been widely reported.
Their experience, however, does not represent that of all black men.
But the condition of the black male underclass remains the consuming preoccupation of many Americans, none more so than successful black men in America.
The Times Magazine convened six of them, from a variety of fields, at a symposium moderated by Bob Herbert, an Op-Ed columnist for The New York Times, to talk about it.


In Their Backyard; Homeless Shelter for Men in Rural Area Provokes Outrage
For roughly a decade Thomas Wall did not worry about living down a country road from a barracks-style shelter crowded with hundreds of homeless men from New York City.
He has even donated old clothes and empty refundable bottles to the shelter residents.
But a few years ago things began to change around this town of 9,100.
Mr.
Wall started finding syringes on his lawn.
One day police officers appeared at his door and asked permission to search his fields; a homeless man had assaulted a shelter guard and fled.
Recently, Mr.
Wall discarded two large trash barrels full of empty liquor bottles that had littered his property.


No Dancing. No Mah-Jongg. It's in the Lease.
Dancing and mah-jongg, the two most popular activities at the Elmhurst-Jackson Heights Senior Center, came to a sudden end two weeks ago in the latest twist in the center's struggle with its longtime landlord, a fundamentalist church.
The center operates in the basement and first floor of a building owned by the 20-year-old Christian Testimony Church, whose congregation is made up mostly of Chinese immigrants.
Jeff Lo, a church elder, explained that the activities were sinful.
Mah-jongg is gambling, he said, and in Chinese culture, dancing is closely associated with dance halls, where men can go and hire women for sex.


Technology; Thirsty New Solar Cells Drink In the Sun's Energy
RESEARCHERS using an unusual solar cell have set a new efficiency record for capturing power from the sun.
And they have high hopes for manufacturing it cheaply because it can be produced by the same factories that make computer chips.
The cell and associated systems capture and convert to electricity more than 20 percent of the energy in the sunlight that hits them.
Commercially available systems are generally only 10 to 12 percent efficient.
Scientists have achieved higher capture rates with the new cells -- although only in laboratory models of one square centimeter, not in units big enough to use in the field.


Tidings of Comfort and Dread: Poetry and the Dark Beauty of Christmas
ONE of the most beautiful American Christmas carols expresses the idea of despair underlying religious celebration:
O little town of Bethlehem,


Never Far From Power, China's Military Is Back
When Deng Xiaoping was last purged from the Chinese leadership in 1976, a senior marshal of the People's Liberation Army helped smuggle him to southern China in a windowless horse cart.
Protected by military allies, Mr.
Deng bided his time until comrades prevailed over enemies and helped him eventually become paramount leader.
Today, as Mr.
Deng's health continues to decline, two top military leaders, Adm.
Liu Huaqing, 78, and Gen.
Zhang Zhen, 80, are positioning themselves to influence China's political succession and any power struggle that might arise from Mr.
Deng's death.


Taking Advantage of Sweet Bay Scallops
BAY SCALLOPS from Nantucket are now in season.
A little smaller than a penny, they are the sweetest -- and most expensive -- scallops on the market.
A new dish that has been catching on in restaurants is seared scallops heaped on a mound of buttery mashed potatoes and sprinkled with white truffle oil.
Another interesting first course can be made with scallops stir-fried Chinese style with Oriental seasonings and served on a bed of crispy fried noodles.


ADAM WALINSKY, PRIVATE LOBBYIST FOR PUBLIC SAFETY
Walinsky's Police Corps is one of the best ideas to hit law enforcement.
It would provide a constant supply of eager, intelligent and motivated recruits.
Returning to private life after a six-year stint as a citizen-scholar-police officer, these recruits would, I believe, make superior businessmen, doctors, lawyers, judges, educators.
REUBEN M. GREENBERG Chief of Police Charleston, S.C.


Survivors Recall a Murderous Crush And the Young Lives That It Claimed
When the fight began and the bottles started flying, people stood five and six deep on the balcony and the dance floor was so packed hardly anyone could move.
Alnisa Slade noticed the fire exit was bolted and that the stampede down the narrow staircase to the outside was crushing and suffocating people.
"I wasn't going to let myself die, so I tried to control my asthma," said Miss Slade, 17, from her bed at Elizabeth General Medical Center.
She was almost down the stairs when people started piling on her.
Miss Slade hoisted herself onto the shoulders of a young man in front of her.
"That's when I went out," she said.
"I felt pressure on my stomach and my back and there was no air."


SUNDAY, December 4, 1994; The Age of Indolence
Mystery Science Theater 3000" is a cult success for Comedy Central, the cable channel. But few critics seem to have realized its awful secret. The show's combination of execrable films and obnoxiously witty commentary by the human and nonhuman silhouettes who seem to be watching the films robs the audience of its last shred of autonomy.
Once, couch potatoes could be provoked to summon up at least the mental energy needed to make wisecracks about the bad movie they were watching on the tube.
"Mystery Science" eliminates even that effort.


Is Japan's Sam Walton Up to the Job?
TWO decades ago, when Isao Nakauchi took on the giant Matsushita Electric Industrial Company, it was not just a laughable mismatch, but a Japanese-style morality play.
Matsushita is the world's largest producer of consumer electronic products and a pillar in a national industrial policy that has long put the interests of producers ahead of consumers.
Mr.
Nakauchi is merely the chairman of Daiei Inc., an operator of what are known here as superstores -- a combination of supermarkets and cut-price department stores.


Washington-to-London Concorde Flights End
After 18 years, British Airways has discontinued service on the supersonic Concorde between Washington and London, and it will use the newly available airplane to increase its Concorde charter service from Kennedy International Airport in New York.
The twice-daily Concorde service between New York and London is unaffected.
The thrice-weekly Washington service whisked travelers who paid $7,800 for a round trip between Dulles International and Heathrow Airports, traveling at up to 1,350 miles an hour so smoothly that they didn't spill their caviar and Champagne during the four-hour trip, but it fell victim to the economy, according to Margaret Vodopia, spokeswoman for British Airways.


Jodie L. Kresch, Andrew A. Fink
Jodie Leah Kresch, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Richard A. Kresch of Manhattan, was married last evening to Andrew Adam Fink, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Arnold I. Fink of Riverdale, the Bronx.
Rabbi Judith S. Lewis performed the ceremony at the Metropolitan Club in Manhattan.
Mrs.
Fink, 24, is an executive trainee at Macy's Herald Square.
She graduated from Washington University in St.
Louis.
Her father is a psychiatrist in New York.


Britain Steps Up Inspection of Ferries
The British Government's regular inspection of ferries has become more rigorous after marine safety experts examining the ships this fall found that about 35 ferries, or one of every three operating from British ports, had minor problems with their doors.
The door checks were ordered after investigators from Estonia, Finland and Sweden determined that locks on the huge front door of the ferry Estonia failed during a storm in the Baltic Sea, letting in a flood of water that sank the ship in late September, killing more than 900 people aboard.


Dana Selig, Steven L. Kahn
Dana Selig, a hearing officer for the New York City Board of Education in Brooklyn, is to be married today to Steven Lewis Kahn, an associate at Loft &amp; Zarkin, a law firm in New York.
Rabbi Shlomo Balter is to perform the ceremony at Tappan Hill in Tarrytown, N.Y.
The bride, 27, graduated cum laude from Clark University.
She and the bridegroom received law degrees from Brooklyn Law School.
She is the daughter of Karen and Benjamin Selig of Wesley Hills, N.Y.


Another Army Report Criticizes Work at Nerve Gas Incinerator
In a report that the Army sought to keep confidential, its inspector general's office has rebuked military managers in Utah for not properly overseeing civilian contractors at the nation's first nerve gas incinerator and for using a design with flaws that were discovered in a prototype.
The $450 million incinerator is being tested in preparation for full-scale operation late next year at an Army chemical munitions depot in Tooele, Utah, 25 miles southwest of Salt Lake City.


SUNDAY, December 4, 1994; Ravages of Chocolate
Another simple vice has become complicated.
Chocolate may be bad not only for your face; it may be bad also for -- gasp -- the earth!
That's evident from a recent report in the journal Audubon Activist.
Cacao is grown as a shade crop in West Africa and South America, according to Fred Baumgarten, the journal's editor, and has not hurt the rain forest.
The peril arises with a different sort of farming in Malaysia, where, he says, women who harvest the crop are threatened by the wide use of pesticides.
Meanwhile, a group in Europe says traces of a pesticide have been found in several varieties of chocolate bars and has called for a global chocolate boycott.
Good luck.


Patrols and a New Law Are Combating Airport Hustlers
Sabrina Hacker had heard all about the con artists, robbers and other criminals that make New York unwelcoming for tourists like herself.
But she wrote the whole thing off as sheer hysteria and hype.
That was until she and a travel companion caught a taxi from Kennedy International Airport to their Manhattan hotel during a visit last year.
The trip cost her $ 400: $200 cash and $200 in travelers' checks.


The World; Do Term Limits Work? Ask Mexico.
AT the first moment of the first day of his first term in office, the new President of Mexico, Ernesto Zedillo Ponce de Leon, became a lame duck, and he was not alone.
He accepted the red, white and green presidential sash Thursday in front of the 628-member federal legislature, 31 state governors and a number of Mexico's 2,392 mayors, all of them freshmen who cannot run for re-election when their current terms end.
While in the United States the urge to curb the terms of public officials is becoming a passion (22 states now restrict the time congressmen may serve), Mexico has been living with the most severe of term limitations almost since the blood of the 1910 Mexican Revolution was spilled to oust an elected dictator who stayed in office too long.


Volunteers Are Just Fine, But Not if They Take Jobs
To the Editor:
I yield to no one in my admiration for the many thousands of New Yorkers who volunteer their time to help the less fortunate.
But as a licensed tour guide, I have a very different attitude toward one volunteer operation -- the Big Apple Greeters program of the Manhattan Borough President's office, which offers visitors to the city free volunteer guides.


Elizabeth Paley, Michael Zivyak
Elizabeth Anne Paley, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard G. Paley of New City, N.Y., is to be married today to Michael Alan Zivyak, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Jeffrey L. Zivyak of Syosset, L.I.
Rabbi Chaim Etrog is to perform the ceremony at the Tarrytown House in Tarrytown, N.Y.


Pick a Mandate
Most Octobers in America are fun because neither pundits nor politicians know what the voters will do on Election Day.
Post-election Novembers and Decembers are even more exciting because the same pundits and politicians suddenly know exactly why the voters did it.
They look in the mirror and there discover the electorate's innermost thoughts and feelings.
Thus we get a media clash of mandates, a contest more instructive and certainly cheaper than the battle of poisonous paid commercials that preceded the voting.
The experts who spent October deploring the absence of any meaningful discussion of issues invariably find by mid-November that the voters sent messages bursting with meaning after all, messages that just happen to be congenial to the views of the discovering pundit or politician.


Corrections
An article on page 8 of the Travel section today, about rail service through the Channel Tunnel between Britain and France, omits a source for making reservations from the United States.
It is Britrail, which can be reached from New York City or Long Island at (212) 575-2667; elsewhere, (800) 677-8585.


Morocco
To the Editor: Ty Ahmad-Taylor's tale of the messy accident in the High Atlas of Morocco struck me with pity, compassion and irony.
I hope his wounds and leg are healing as well as his spirits.
His remembrances appeared just after my return from Morocco, so I could readily visualize the route where the misfortune occurred.
It is an adventuresome road with unexpected rains, floods, washouts.


The New Chew Review: Pit Bulls at Play
Pit bulls, the dogs with notoriously vicious reputations and incredible jaw strength, have been known to do everything from killing children to mauling police officers who try to subdue them.
Former Mayor Edward I. Koch likened the breed to "a great white shark" and sought to ban it.
Now pit bulls are being blamed for a new crime: eating swing-set seats.
"The dogs were chewing up our rubber swings," said Patrick Pomposello, the Manhattan Borough commissioner for the city Parks Department.
"It's unbelievable how these dogs chew through this two-inch thick rubber."


Habitats/North Guilford, Conn.; A Lakeside Lodge With a Goat Motif
THE brittle old blueprint, kept since 1910, identifies the huge stone lodge on Lake Quonnipaug as Goat Hill Camp; the profile of a large goat's head, with water spouting from its mouth, is carefully drawn, the centerpiece of a fountain on the north side of the house.
Goats can become an obsession here.
Starting with the three-dimensional goat's head protruding from granite columns at the entrance, the next goat spotted is either the iron silhouette atop the garage, or part of the wildly Art Nouveau bronze plaque on one of the heavy, arch-topped entrance doors.


Argentines in Shock: Judge Is Pursuing Corrupt Inspectors
In a country where payoffs, kickbacks and government corruption are a part of everyday life, recent accusations that half of this city's municipal inspectors took bribes to overlook zoning and safety violations initially came as no big surprise.
Bribes are so commonplace that motorists are regularly seen slipping police officers $20 to avoid traffic tickets.


INSIDE
The Products of Power
Newt Gingrich's consolidation of power in the House may not necessarily translate into legislative achievement.
Page 32.
The Weight of Leadership
The leave of absence Harvard's president was ordered by his doctors to take reflects the pressures faced by university executives.
Page 34.


At Work; Linking Gay Rights and Unionism
A CONFERENCE of gay trade unionists was just one of hundreds of events last June organized to coincide with the 25th anniversary of the Stonewall rebellion, the 1969 clash between the New York City Police and the patrons of a Greenwich Village gay bar that is generally regarded as the birth of the modern gay rights movement.
But out of the Pride at Work conference, as it was called, a national organization has emerged.
A leadership group of labor activists gathered in New York again late last month to formally ordain the National Gay/Lesbian/Bi/Transgender Labor Organization, the group's politically inclusive full title.
Alas, no acronym dare speak its name, and so the group will be known as Pride at Work.
It has a national mailing list of about 600 names.
It may not seem like the most propitious moment for an alliance between the two groups most likely to be marginalized by those who must now be obeyed in Washington.
The Democratic debacle is attributed in part to Bill Clinton's support for gay rights and his attempt to change the military's discriminatory sexual orientation policies early in his term.
There are undoubtedly those in the union movement, with strong ties to the Democratic Party, who would regard gay rights as a lavender albatross.
Supporting those issues, the argument would go, is to risk further alienating the gay-shy electorate.


In the Region/Connecticut; In the Aftermath, a Builder Picks Up the Pieces
WHEN the building and buying boom of the 80's dissolved in bankruptcies and foreclosures, it was the developers who, deservedly or not, took the heat for overbuilding and overpricing.
In Stamford, which had been transformed from a dowdy industrial town into a modern city, the fall was especially hard.
A parade of companies that had moved into new buildings suddenly moved out, headed for cheaper business and housing costs in the South and leaving developers with empty spaces and deep financial troubles.


Mr. Pataki on the Move
The unmistakable lack of warmth behind the public display of smiles and cordiality made clear this may not be the beginning of a beautiful friendship.
But Governor-elect George Pataki's meeting last week with New York City's Mayor, Rudolph Giuliani, at least ended the petty Battle of the Telephone, which began when Mr.
Pataki refused to return Mr.
Giuliani's congratulatory phone calls, and went churlishly downhill from there.
Their 70-minute breakfast detente, like Mr.
Pataki's stated intent to spend a good deal of time in the city as Governor, is an encouraging sign that Mr.
Pataki is prepared to move beyond a campaign that accentuated upstate hostility toward the city.
Though he and Mr.
Giuliani may never be chums, Mr.
Pataki seems to mean it when he talks about "the joined-at-the-hip relationship between the success of the city and the success of the state."


Judith C. Altmark, Jonathan A. Hyde
Judith Carol Altmark, a daughter of Rosalie and Harvey Altmark of East Northport, L.I., and Dr.
Jonathan Allen Hyde, a son of Francine and Les Hyde of Melville, L.I., are to be married today in Woodbury, L.I.
Rabbi Barton Shallat is to perform the ceremony at the Fox Hollow Inn.
The bride graduated summa cum laude from the State University at Binghamton, N.Y.
She is a director of financial analysis at Brooks Brothers in New York, the men's clothing chain.
Her father is a senior hospital sales representative with Abbott Laboratories, the medical products and pharmaceutical company.
Her mother is a special-education teacher for the Half Hollow Hills School District in Dix Hills, L.I.


Killings, Legal and Otherwise, Around the U.S.
THE popular notion that executions are a deterrent to murder appears to be as strong as ever.
In New York, where Governor-elect George E. Pataki has vowed to bring back the death penalty, 57 percent of the respondents to an opinion poll before his election said they thought the death penalty would deter other criminals from killing.
The statistics presented below -- using state homicide rates issued this weekend by the F.B.I. that cover the modern period of the death penalty -- lend little support to this view.
Take a look at the record-high murder rate for Louisiana, one of the most active states in what execution foes call the Southern "death belt."


After 6 Years, Landmark Eyesore Is Still an Eyesore
When the hotelier Ian Schrager bought the former Towers Nursing Home at 106th Street and Central Park West in 1988, neighbors were elated.
The building, built in 1884 in the style of a French Renaissance chateau, was boarded up, its windows cracked and broken, its walls crumbling, its courtyard a sea of weeds and garbage.
Mr.
Schrager and his partners, owners of chic downtown hotels, vowed to renovate it into a luxury spa and apartments.
Six years later, the landmark property is still an eyesore, but there have been some changes: the property, valued at $11 million in 1988, is now assessed at $3.4 million.
The big plans appear to be on permanent hold.
And elation has turned to a collective chagrin.


Tracey L. Isaac, Bruce M. Goldstein
Tracey Leigh Isaac, the daughter of Lynne Simon and Mark Isaac, both of Fort Lee, N.J., was married last evening to Bruce Michael Goldstein, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Morton Goldstein of East Brunswick, N.J.
Rabbi Chaim Rogoff officiated at the Short Hills, a catering hall in Short Hills, N.J.
The bride, 26, graduated from the State University at Albany and the Western New England School of Law.
She is a legal assistant at Wilf &amp; Silverman, a law firm in Short Hills.
Her father is a partner in Diamant, Katz, Kahn &amp; Company, an accounting firm in New York.


NIGHT BEFORE CHRISTMAS LITERARY CLEARANCE SALE
What if the chimney St.
Nicholas came down had not been that of Clement Clarke Moore in the 1820's but that of Walter Winchell in the 1930's?
Or Ernest Hemingway in the 50's, or Shirley MacLaine at some point in reincarnational space-time, or, closer to our own era, Jackie Collins, Jay McInerney or Clive Cussler?
Imagine!
Better, let Bruce McCall imagine it, as he does here.
Instead of reciting Moore's "Visit From St. Nicholas" while roasting chestnuts on an open fire, we'd have to force children to memorize stuff like the following frightening accounts of the night before Christmas, somewhere, somewhen.
The Nite Before Xmas  By Walter Winchell


Rison Reverses Field and Tries to Counter Bad Deeds With Good
Believe! Achieve! Succeed!
I am! I can! I will!


NEW JERSEY GUIDE
LANDMARK REOPENING
After two years of restoration work, the Newark Museum will reopen Ballantine House on Saturday as the museum presents a magic lantern show, followed by a concert next Sunday, in celebration of the occasion.
The three-story brick and limestone house, which is now part of the museum complex, was built in 1885 for the beer magnate John Holme Ballantine and was designated a National Historic Landmark in 1985.
Designed by George Edward Harney, it is an eclectic blend of Renaissance, Colonial Revival and Esthetic movement styles.


Seeing China Under Your Own Steam
MOUNT TAI is a sacred site in Asia, soaring into the clouds and teeming with Chinese pilgrims and sinewy peasant entrepreneurs straining and sweating as they haul ice cream up the 6,000 stone steps -- for sale at prices that climb as steadily and as steeply as the hillside.
Yet while Chinese regard Mount Tai as one of the most famous places in their land, redolent with a history that goes back to visits by Confucius 2,500 years ago, it rarely appears on tourist itineraries.
It has been about 15 years since China opened up its doors to Western tourists, yet foreigners still crowd into just a few big cities, seeing standard sights, without ever meeting a peasant, even though three-quarters of the nation's 1.2 billion people live in the countryside.
The tourism industry, in other words, has fostered a cocoon that allows Westerners to pass through China without ever quite stepping into it.
Since returning to the United States after five years in Beijing, I have found that the most common query I get is not about Deng Xiaoping's health but rather about how to escape this cocoon.
What I tell people, to start with, is that it has never been easier to visit the "real China" beyond the tourist circuit.
Independent travel can be frustrating, but with many hotels offering airport pickup and concierges arranging train and air tickets, few foreigners get irretrievably lost.
Certainly it is hard to imagine a safer part of the world in which to roam about.
While it is possible to take a regular tour of the main cities in China and then tack on a week of individual travel at the end, my recommendation is to go without a tour group if you are comfortable doing so.
The place to begin a self-guided two-week tour is in a Chinese-style courtyard hotel like the Lu Song Yuan or the Hao Yuan, in Beijing.
Both hotels are built in the traditional courtyards that were once home to the aristocracy, and the 17-room Hao Yuan was the residence of the former Chairman, Hua Guofeng, until he was ousted by Mr.
Deng at the end of the 1970's.
Neither is convenient by Western standards -- the staff usually does not speak English and a request for a bucket of ice may take an hour to convey before it is understood and ignored.
But the rooms are comfortable and the courtyards are full of the charms of China.
On the other hand, if you place a premium on comfort and convenience, stay at the totally modern Palace Hotel, with its pair of gold Rolls-Royces to ferry you around the city.
An alternative, also in the center of Beijing, surrounded by little shops and narrow alleys, is the Sara Hotel.
Any guidebook will tell you what to see in Beijing; my favorites are the Forbidden City, the Tibetan-style Yong He Gong temple and Tiananmen Square (including the Mao Zedong mausoleum; despite the rumors about wax, it really is Mao's corpse on display).
You might also notice the high red walls of Zhongnanhai, an old imperial compound on the Avenue of Eternal Peace less than a mile west of Tiananmen.
It is the new Forbidden City, the workplace and playground for today's Communist leaders.
Visitors are not allowed beyond the soldiers at the gate.
Several Beijing hotels and shops rent bicycles for a dollar or so a day; they are one-speed contraptions but are usually functional, and in any case it is far safer to bike in Beijing than it would be in Western cities.
Instead of sticking to the main streets, meander through the hutong, or back alleys, where residents live in one-story housing and share toilets with their neighbors.
Rooms are so cramped that people often sit in their doorways, munching on watermelon or chatting with neighbors.
Almost everybody makes a side trip from Beijing to the Great Wall, but instead of going by bus, take a taxi and an interpreter.
Your hotel can arrange an interpreter for $2.50 an hour or so, or you may simply run across an English-language student who is willing to accompany you for the day and interpret free of charge.
On the way back from the Great Wall, have the taxi driver take a dirt road randomly off the main route until you find yourself in the middle of a little village.
You will find the peasants happy to talk to you, through the interpreter, and they'll be thrilled if you have brought a Polaroid camera and can take their photos.
AFTER a few days in Beijing, take the night sleeper train seven hours west to the much-overlooked city of Datong in Shanxi Province.
Fifteen hundred years ago, Datong was the capital of the Northern Wei Dynasty, whose legacy is a spectacular cliff of carved Buddhas 10 miles outside the city.
The Yungang Grottoes include 53 caves decorated with 51,000 statues and carved reliefs, yet what is most awe-inspiring is the scale of the sculpture: stone Buddhas that soar up to 55 feet high.
To me these huge, serene statues in the middle of nowhere are as exhilarating as Europe's Gothic cathedrals, for the offer a similar mix of artistry and spirituality.
While modern Datong itself is a rather grim coal-mining metropolis -- offering a much more realistic slice of urban Chinese life than either Beijing or Shanghai -- it is also less than an hour's drive from the Great Wall.
Unlike the reconstructed parts of the wall near Beijing, the wall near Datong is the original -- a crumbling, worn mound of rocks overgrown with shrubbery 2that extends endlessly toward the horizon.
After five or six days in Beijing and Datong, head south to Taian in Shandong Province -- again by train, the means of locomotion for most Chinese traveling between cities.
One of your short rail journeys in China should be by hard seat, the cheapest class, which is how ordinary Chinese travel, but the nine-hour journey from Beijing to Taian is not the one to spend jammed in an uncomfortable railroad car as people spit on the floor and converse raucously about the large size of foreigners' noses.
Taian is the town at the base of Mount Tai, or Taishan as the holy mountain is called in Chinese.
It is possible to check your luggage by the train station and take a small bag or backpack for the overnight trip up the mountain.
Stone steps have been carved up the hillside, so it is not so much mountain climbing as stair climbing.
Most people can manage the trek up, with plenty of time for breaks and photographs, in five or six hours.
A hotel on the summit, Shenqi Guest House, has private rooms with bath and a decent restaurant; it also offers sleeping bags and rents jackets against the chill.
An alarm wakes guests at dawn to see the sun rise and proclaim, as Mao Zedong did, that "The east is red."
Confucius climbed Mount Tai and came from a nearby town, Qufu, that is still dominated by the Kong family (Confucius is a European rendering; Confucius himself went by the name of Kong).
Qufu is a typical country town, sleepy and gritty, yet it is chock full of temples and historic sites such as the family cemetery of 78 generations of Confucius's descendants.
The town is an easy side trip from Mount Tai, or you can get back on the train for the daylong journey to Shanghai.
After several days of roughing it, you may enjoy the plush luxury of a place like the Garden Hotel, in the old French Concession of Shanghai.
For the adventurous, the Chinese-run Red Flag Guest House, which used to accommodate only top party officials, now opens its bungalows to capitalists.
A charming location and a sense of history and place are the rewards, but don't expect a concierge to arrange tickets or a maid to put mints on your pillow.
Shanghai has some wonderful little privately owned restaurants and astonishing discos replete with Madonna-look-alikes, strobe lights and prostitutes who conduct their business with the help of cellular telephones.
The city also abounds with English speakers eager to ply their skills, and one or more of them will probably strike up conversations when you walk along the Bund, the historic riverfront district.
Some are aiming to change money or act as paid tour guides, but others simply want to chat in English, and you may be able to find a terrific unofficial tour guide in this way.
There are also con men on the waterfront, however: I once saw a pickpocket run down the Bund, chased by his victim and several onlookers; when a bus stopped on the main avenue, people inside jumped out to join the chase as well.
The pickpocket was tackled, beaten up and then handed over to a policeman before the bus resumed its way.
After a couple of days in Shanghai take the two-hour, 20-minute flight to Guilin, a southern city in Guangxi Province that is the jumping-off point for daylong boat trips on the beautiful Li River.
Three-day and four-day cruises on the Yangtze River in central China have become popular among foreigners as well, but the Li River is more scenic and eats up much less of a two-week vacation.
The Li River courses through spectacular rocky crags that are the inspiration for much of traditional Chinese watercolor landscapes.
Children swim naked in the river as the boats pass, and peasants till the soil with water buffalo.
The countryside is enchanting, so hire a taxi driver and an English interpreter for a half-day excursion to a nearby village, where you are likely to find mud-brick homes, a small elementary school with ramshackle desks, tiny backyard plots with pigs and chickens and flocks of little children who will make you feel like the pied piper.
If you bring a few trinkets, someone may well invite you to a dinner of stir-fried vegetables and tofu with rice.
From Guilin, take a 60-minute flight to Guangzhou, the bustling southern metropolis also known as Canton.
Ever since the Portuguese arrived in the 16th century, Guangzhou has been at the front line of interaction between China and the West, and it was partly because of intrigues among Western traders here that the Opium War broke out and Hong Kong was ceded to Britain.
The free markets of Guangzhou are among the most vibrant in the nation, and the Cantonese have a national reputation as sophisticates and gourmets.
Yet while the Cantonese make great food, they don't know where to draw the line with ingredients.
One interesting but depressing sight is the Qingping Market, where turtles, salamanders, snakes, dogs and just about everything else are sold to be eaten.
Afterward, intrepid tourists may wish to go to a snake restaurant or rat restaurant in Guangzhou.
Snakes, in particular, are regarded as a virtual health food, a Chinese equivalent of alfalfa sprouts.
For those on a two-week itinerary, it is time to move on toward Hong Kong for the flight back.
If you do not have too much luggage, take a bus or taxi for a few hours to Shenzhen, the boom town next to Hong Kong.
Fifteen years ago Shenzhen was just a sleepy farming town; now it is a dynamic industrial city with a stock exchange, glass-and-steel skyscrapers, pin-striped lawyers and hundreds of factories churning out televisions, shoes and toys for consumers around the world.
From Shenzhen it is easy to walk across the border into Hong Kong, with only brief formalities with Chinese and Hong Kong immigration officials.
On the Hong Kong side, trains take everyone to the urban areas.
Alternatively, express trains run direct from Guangzhou to Hong Kong and minimize problems for those burdened by lots of luggage.
The overland route is worthwhile simply because it conveys the feel of an endless construction zone; Guangdong Province has the fastest-growing economy in the world, and everywhere you look buildings are going up.
Westerners joke that the official local bird is the crane.
For those with an extra week, Tibet makes a delightful side trip from Beijing.
But be sure to get out of Lhasa, the Tibetan capital, and visit smaller towns such as Shigatse, site of a beautiful monastery and the traditional headquarters of the Panchen Lama, second only to the Dalai Lama in the Tibetan hierarchy.
As everywhere in China, it is fascinating to visit the nomads and peasants who make up the bulk of Tibetans.
Rural Tibet is still one of the most remote places in the world.
I once met a Tibetan woman who was puzzled when I asked her whether her village had electricity.
It turned out that she had never heard of electricity.
Most flights to Lhasa stop over in Chengdu, in Sichuan Province, the potbelly of China, and Chengdu makes a terrific break for a day or two.
It is a somewhat grimy, very typical Chinese city of narrow lanes, tiny family-managed restaurants and, in the outskirts, peasants toiling over doll-sized plots of land.
Moreover, Chengdu has, for my taste buds, the best food in China.
I once took two Americans to dinner at a hole-in-the-wall restaurant near the Jinjiang Hotel, and our table was soon laden with delicious spicydishes; there was more than the three of us could eat, yet the bill -- including beer -- was less than $5.
IN any case, wherever one goes in China, perhaps the most important thing is to spend time with the people.
In many cities, so-called English corners are set up one or more nights a week for local people to get together and practice English.
Americans are hugely welcomed.
Similarly, university campuses are a good place to meet English-speaking Chinese, and even on the streets you may meet someone who will invite you into a home for dinner.
In particular, spend at least a day in the countryside.
My most interesting moments in China were spent in the villages, and the fascination was often mutual.
On my first trip to China, in 1983, I was waiting for a train at a station in a rural part of Shandong Province, and so I sat down and began reading my guidebook.
A few peasants gathered in front of me, watching me for entertainment, as if I were a movie.
Then others approached, and soon dozens of them were sitting in a semi-circle around me, pointing and staring.
Soon nearly 100 peasants were sitting on the ground in front of me, the adventurous ones crawling in front of me to look at the cover of the book I was reading, and the episode ended only when the alarmed authorities led me to a small room and barred the audience from following.
It was an encounter between two worlds, and I found it just as extraordinary as they did.
IF YOU GO
In Beijing, an interpreter, official or unofficial, can negotiate to rent a regular taxi for the day for about $80 or a minivan (which are not allowed to pick up foreigners up at hotels) for $40.
In other cities taxis should be a bit cheaper.
Train travel is not expensive: a first-class train ticket from Shanghai to Guangzhou costs about $30.
Hotel prices are for a double room, calculated at the rate of 8.5 Chinese yuan (renminbi) to the dollar.
The country code for China is 86.
BEIJING: Lu Song Yuan Hotel, 22 Kuanjic Street, $35 a night, telephone (1) 401-1116, fax (1) 403-0418; Hao Yuan, 53 Shijia Hutong, $50, (1) 512-5557; Palace Hotel, 8 Goldfish Lane, Wangfujing, Beijing 100006, $250, (1) 512-8899, fax (1) 512-9050; Sara Hotel, 2 Wangfujing Street, $120, 513-6666, fax (1) 513-4248.
DATONG: Yungang Hotel, 21 Yingbin Dong Lu, $35, (352) 521-601, fax 524-927; Shenqi Guest House on Mount Tai, $50, (352) 223-866.
QUFU: Queli Hotel, 1 Gulou Ji, $47, (5473) 411-300, fax (5473) 412-022.
SHANGHAI: Garden Hotel, 58 Maoming Nan-Lu, Shanghai 200050, $200, (21) 415-1111, fax (21) 415-8866; Red Flag Guest House, $100, (21) 437-2170.
GUILIN: Holiday Inn Guilin, 14 South Ronghu Road, $110 to $230, (773) 223-950, fax (773) 222-101 or call (800) 465-4329.
GUANGZHOU: China Hotel, centrally situated on Liuhua Road, $140, (20) 666-6888, fax (20) 667-7014; the Dongfang Hotel, next door, comfortable but with indifferent service, $124, (20) 666-9900, fax (20) 666-2775.
CHENGDU: Jinjiang Hotel, 36 Renmin Nan Road, with an open-air market outside, $89 to $155, (28) 558-2222, fax (28) 558-2308.
LHASA: Holiday Inn, $80, a bit out of the center but the most comfortable, phone 322-21 or (800) 465-4329; Snowlands Hotel has Spartan accommodations but is conveniently situated, $15, 236-87.


TRAVEL
WHAT price travel writing?
One might have asked such a question in 1987, when for the first time there were more people going in and out of London's airports -- a staggering 57 million -- than actually lived in the whole of Britain.
But then, just as travel was clearly becoming a commonplace and the world was running out of new areas to explore, suddenly, unpredictably, the Soviet Union broke up, its ebb tide leaving vast tracts exposed.
From Estonia to Mongolia, it was potentially a traveler's bonanza.
Ancient cities like Samarkand, Bukhara and Tashkent, free of the bureaucratic quagmire of Homo sovieticus, winked invitingly at adventurous beachcombers.
Appealingly, this would not turn out to be a one-way traffic.
For once, the travel writer, sometimes criticized for being a selfish loner evading domestic responsibilities and plundering poorer countries for the glory of his own ego, could be making a real contribution to the country he was in.
These new republics needed stories; their people, in the urgent task of finding new identities, needed reacquainting with both old and recent myths.
Because of the often dire economics of these places, and their citizens' lack of experience and research tools, it would be foreigners who would start the process -- as well as communicate what they found to the wider world, in the true tradition of Marco Polo.


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS  Swedes Clinch Cup  Jonas Bjorkman and Jan Apell clinched the Davis Cup for Sweden yesterday by defeating Yevgeny Kafelnikov and Andrei Olhovskiy of Russia in a hard-fought doubles match, 6-7 (4-7), 6-2, 6-3, 1-6, 8-6, in Moscow.
Sweden, which won its fifth Davis Cup, took an unbeatable 3-0 lead in the three-of-five-match series.
Bjorkman and Apell, the recently crowned ATP Tour doubles champions, won the match by breaking the serve of Olhovskiy, who had double-faulted at deuce. (AP) Capriati in Australia: Jennifer Capriati, who recently ended a hiatus from tennis, will play in the Australian Open in January.
Before the Grand Slam event, she plans to play in the New South Wales Open, Paul McNamee, the Australian Open tournament director and her former coach, said yesterday. (AP)


Exotic Melange of Tastes From Malaysia
CHINA GOURMET in Hicksville, a seafood restaurant in an unpretentious shopping center, has taken a culinary cruise on the South China Sea, with stops in Malaysia, Thailand and Singapore.
The better-than-average storefront spot, which had offered Cantonese dishes, closed briefly in October and reopened last month with a Malaysian chef and a menu featuring the food of Southeast Asia.
Cantonese fare is still available, but now there are also unusual dishes of a sort rarely, if ever, found at a moderately priced eat-in carryout restaurant on the Island.


3-D Memories
To the Editor:
William Grimes's article brought back memories that I had long forgotten.
Before World War II, possibly about 55 years ago, there was a 3-D movie program in the science and industry museum at Radio City.
Red-and-green viewing glasses were furnished; I still have a pair of them, with instructions on the left side on how to hold them to view properly.


The Nation; Burned in the Capital's Hot Sun
WEBSTER L. HUBBELL once was the epitome of power and probity in Little Rock, whether it was briefly heading the Arkansas Supreme Court or drafting an ethics law for his close friend the Governor, Bill Clinton.
After Mr.
Clinton was elected President in 1992 Mr.
Hubbell continued his role as his ethical gatekeeper, quietly screening Cabinet nominees.
When Mr.
Hubbell and three other senior partners left the Rose Law Firm to join the Clinton Administration it seemed like a natural transition, from state capital to nation's capital, and a new era, the Washingtonization of the Rose firm.
No one could have foreseen the perils that lay ahead.
No one could foresee that lives would be tainted, even ruined, and that the firm itself would be put under a cloud.


Diverse Dreams Come Together in a Vacant Lot
Their origins range from Nevis in the West Indies to Mali in West Africa to Teaneck, N.J., west of the Hudson, but fate and politics have brought them together at the Harlem Vendors Market, where they hawk wares as diverse as themselves.
Whatever their pasts and dreams, the vendors agree that business has been in steep decline since September, when Mayor Giuliani relocated them from 125th Street to a vacant lot at 116th Street and Lenox Avenue.
"There are no banks nearby, so people have nowhere to get money," said Mendae Mahu, an immigrant from Sierra Leone.
"There are no restaurants that draw the crowds."


Art
THE art book has gone through changes in recent years.
Exhibition catalogues were once slender volumes with an essay or two, plus illustrations.
Now catalogues can be phone books that cost more than most museumgoers can afford.
Whom, I sometimes wonder, are they for?
Restoration projects were not always considered newsworthy, so there wasn't a book market based on them.
Now a project need not be the cleaning of Michelangelo's Sistine Chapel to get its own lavish volume, with scientific articles about the chemicals used and sedimentary discoveries made.
Someone interested in Florentine Renaissance art can learn that ammonium carbonate becomes an efficient softening agent for protein temperas when properly diluted by water.


Sports of the Times; Art Monk Streaking Toward the N.F.L. Archives
IF Art Monk clutches a pass today against the Patriots, the artistic wide receiver (who celebrates his 37th birthday tomorrow) will be surrounded and hugged by his Jets' teammates.
Moments later, the ball will be tossed to the sideline for him to keep as a memento of his enduring skill.
"With that reception," a voice on the press box intercom at Foxboro Stadium will announce, "Art Monk now shares with Steve Largent the National Football League record of catching at least one pass in 177 consecutive games."


Correction
An article last Sunday about the choreographer Bill T. Jones misstated his association with the Lyons Opera Ballet.
Mr.
Jones is the resident choreographer of the company, not its director.
The company's artistic director is Yorgos Loukos.


A New Art Form May Arise From the 'Myst'
FOR THE TIME BEING I AM IGNORING THE alien pods, the racing cars, the intergalactic battles and the irradiated mutants.
I have put aside the laser gun, the bombs, the Asian martial arts weapons, the requirement that I press buttons on a controller to pound a muscle-bound biker into a pulp.
Instead, I am standing in a garden, lulled by the sound of waves from the nearby ocean.
The light is eerie, crisp and slightly unreal.
Each surface has a polish and sheen that makes it seem untouched by human or natural forces.
I am seemingly alone in a world in which ordinary objects are the magical products of an advanced technology.
Yet in the midst of this pastoral paradise, there are also archaic machines with gears and levers that thump and grind, and giant pre-electronic switches.
There is a mixture of the pre-modern and the post-modern, a sense of surreal antiquity recalling early science fiction.
I have entered the world of "Myst."


Ewing Hits For Only 3, But Knicks Rebound
After the Knicks' 25-point thrashing in Orlando on Friday night, Pat Riley characterized the humiliating defeat as an early-season wake-up call for his team.
Last night, at least, Charles Smith, Anthony Mason and a cadre of role players answered the call.


Togetherness


Backcourt From Kansas Trips Up Another No. 1
Kansas 81, Massachusetts 75
Coach Roy Williams was in a hurry after his Kansas Jayhawks had beaten the No. 1 team in the country in the inaugural John Wooden Classic in Anaheim, Calif., yesterday.
Williams and his players had places to go and a game to see after beating Massachusetts, 81-75.


BENEFITS
Premiere of Polanski Film  MONDAY -- Sigourney Weaver is to speak and Ben Kingsley is to attend the premiere of their new film "Death and the Maiden," directed by Roman Polanski.
The screening at 7 P.M. at Sony Theaters Lincoln Square, Broadway at 68th Street, will be followed by a buffet supper and reception from 9 to 11 P.M. at the Vivian Beaumont Theater at Lincoln Center.
The evening is to benefit the Lawyers Committee for Human Rights.
Tickets, $75, from (212) 629-6170, extension 180.
Children's Holiday Party  MONDAY -- The Museum of the City of New York, Fifth Avenue at 103d Street, will hold its annual children's holiday party from 2 to 5 P.M.
During the afternoon children can create a puppet, decorate a cupcake or make a snowflake.
There will also be a raffle and appearances by Santa Claus, Paddington Bear and Babar the Elephant.
Tickets, $40, from (212) 534-1672, extension 254.
An Honor for Lena Horne  MONDAY -- Since 1907, some 3,000 artists, composers, writers and film makers, including E. L. Doctorow, Aaron Copland and Leonard Bernstein, have come to the MacDowell Colony in Peterborough, N.H., to work on projects.
The colony will hold a black-tie fund-raising dinner and a salute to Lena Horne at the University Club, 1 West 54th Street, starting with cocktails at 7 P.M.
Charlayne Hunter-Gault will be the master of ceremonies, and Barbara Cook, Bill Cosby and Billy Taylor will perform.
Tickets, $500, from (212) 535-9690.
Inner-City Scholarship Fund  MONDAY -- The Inner-City Scholarship Fund will sponsor an award dinner that will honor Rupert Murdoch, the chairman of the News Corporation.
The black-tie evening will begin with cocktails at 6:30, followed by dinner at 7:30 at the Waldorf-Astoria.
Tickets, $500, from (212) 753-8583.
Dixon Place Benefit  MONDAY -- A benefit for Dixon Place, a performance space on the Bowery, will be held at Exit Art, 548 Broadway (Prince Street).
Performers include Cathay Che, the Five Lesbian Brothers, Mark O'Donnell, Orson Welk and Rae C. Wright.
The evening will begin with cocktails at 6.
Tickets, $30, from (212) 219-3088.
Art Honors  MONDAY -- The Guild Hall of East Hampton, L.I., and its Academy of the Arts will honor Eric Fischl, the painter; William Gaddis, the writer, and Gene Saks, the director and actor, at the Plaza.
The black-tie evening will begin with cocktails at 7, followed by dinner.
Tickets, $350, from (516) 324-0806.
En Garde Arts Benefit  MONDAY -- An evening featuring performances by Michael J. Fox, Marla Maples Trump, Sarah Jessica Parker and Madeline Kahn will benefit En Garde Arts, a New York theater company.
The performances will take place on the 51st floor at 55 Water Street, near Old Slip, and will include short theater pieces, one by Wendy Wasserstein.
The evening will begin at 7 with cocktails, followed by dinner at 8 and the performances at 9.
Tickets, $300, from (212) 941-9793.
Bezalel Academy Benefit  MONDAY -- The Bezalel Academy of Art and Design in Jerusalem will honor the architect I. M. Pei with its Jerusalem Prize for Arts and Letters.
J.
Carter Brown, the director emeritus of the National Gallery of Art, will present the award at a black-tie dinner-dance at 6 P.M. at the Pierre.
Tickets, $500, from (212) 935-1900.
For Music Scholarships  TUESDAY -- The Sylvia and Danny Kaye Playhouse at Hunter College will honor Regina Resnik, the mezzo-soprano, at a benefit for the Regina Resnik Scholarship Fund for music students at Hunter.
The evening will begin at 8 with a tribute and a reception.
Tickets, $250, from (212) 772-4085.
Cancer Society Benefit  TUESDAY -- The American Cancer Society will benefit from a performance of "Sunset Boulevard." The evening will begin with a buffet supper at 6 at the Marriott Marquis, followed by the performance at 8 at the Minskoff Theater.
Tickets, $250, or $175 for the show alone, from (212) 237-3890.
Ballantine House Gala  TUESDAY -- The Newark Museum will celebrate the renovation of the Ballantine House, an 1885 landmark that now houses its decorative arts collection, with a black-tie cocktail reception at 6 P.M., followed by dinner in the museum's Engelhard Court at 8.
Free valet parking will be available at the South Wing entrance between Washington and Central avenues, and cars will be parked in an attended lot.
Tickets, $300, from (201) 596-6550.
Sculpture Center Honors  TUESDAY -- The Sculpture Center in New York will honor Coosje Van Bruggen and Claes Oldenburg at a dinner-dance in the Delegates' Dining Room at the United Nations.
The event will begin at 7 P.M. with cocktails, followed by dinner, the awards and dancing.
Tickets, $300, from (212) 879-3500; reduced-price tickets for admission at 10 P.M. are available for artists.
Joan Baez Sings  TUESDAY -- Joan Baez will sing at the annual benefit for the Children's Health Fund at the New York Hilton.
The evening will begin with cocktails at 6:30, followed by dinner at 7:30.
Tickets, $500, from (212) 245-6570.
Helping Homeless Women  TUESDAY -- The Antonio Olivieri Center for Women will be the beneficiary of an evening at the Michelangelo Hotel, 152 West 51st Street.
The event will begin at 7 P.M. with cocktails and a celebrity auction, followed by dinner at 7:45 and dancing until 11.
The Rev.
C.
Hugh Hildesley will be the auctioneer.
Tickets, $100, or $65 for guests 35 and younger, from (212) 289-4933.
Benefit at Christie's  WEDNESDAY -- A benefit exhibition will be held at Christie's, 502 Park Avenue (59th Street), to help support the art departments of New York City schools as well as the National Parenting Association.
Susan Sarandon will be among those honored.
The event will begin with cocktails and a viewing of artwork by New York City children at 6 P.M., followed by a short program.
Tickets, $100, from (212) 362-7575.
Ailey Company Celebrates  WEDNESDAY -- The Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater will open its four-week season at City Center, 131 West 55th Street, with a benefit performance and dinner-dance.
The performance will begin at 7 P.M., followed by dinner and dancing at the Pierre.
Tickets, $750, from (212) 767-0590, extension 321.
Miracle on 23d Street  WEDNESDAY -- Wondercamp, a nonprofit entertainment and activities center for children and their families, will benefit from a holiday party at the center, 27 West 23d Street.
The event, which will begin at 6 P.M., will include cocktails, a buffet dinner and performances by clowns and jugglers.
Tickets, $1,000 per family (or per group), from (202) 338-3844.
Spanish Institute's Gala  WEDNESDAY -- The Spanish Institute will hold its annual Gold Medal Gala at the Plaza.
The black-tie evening will begin at 7:30 with cocktails, followed by dinner and dancing.
Tickets, $500, from (212) 628-0420.
A Baroque Evening  WEDNESDAY -- The Baroque Splendor benefit for the educational and outreach programs of the Orchestra of St.
Luke's is to begin with a 7:30 P.M. cocktail reception at the Dakota, 1 West 72d Street.
At 8 P.M. there will be an all-Bach concert by the orchestra, followed by a buffet supper.
Black tie.
Tickets, $150, from (212) 840-7470.
Mariah Carey to Sing  THURSDAY -- The Fresh Air Fund will benefit from a holiday performance by Mariah Carey at the Cathedral of St.
John the Divine, Amsterdam Avenue at 113th Street.
The evening will begin at 6:30 with a reception, followed by the performance at 8.
Tickets, $100, from (212) 221-0900.
For Human Rights  THURSDAY -- The International League for Human Rights will hold a fund-raising dinner at the United Nations Delegates' Dining Room.
The evening, which will begin with cocktails at 6:30, will honor John Hume, a member of Parliament from Derry, Northern Ireland, and William J. Flynn, the chairman of Mutual of America, an insurance company.
Tickets, $250, from (212) 684-1221.
A Tree Sale in Brooklyn  THURSDAY -- Heartshare Human Services of New York will be the beneficiary of a reception and auction at the Brooklyn Union Gas Company, Jay Street near Willoughby Street in downtown Brooklyn.
Auction items will include 30 decorated trees and one-of-a-kind ornaments.
The event will begin with cocktails at 6:30 P.M.
A buffet dinner will follow.
Tickets, $25, from (718) 330-1101.
No charge for children under 12.
And the Bluenotes, Too  THURSDAY -- Harold Melvin and the Bluenotes are to perform at the Sheraton New York Hotel at a dinner-dance for the Crohn's and Colitis Foundation.
The event, which begins with cocktails at 6:30 P.M., will honor Paul Tagliabue, the National Football League's commissioner, among others.
Tickets, $375, from (212) 679-1570.
Old Westbury Gardens Benefit  FRIDAY -- A preview of the Christmas decorations at Westbury House, the Phipps mansion that is the centerpiece of Old Westbury (L.I.) Gardens, will benefit the mansion's restoration fund.
At 5:45 P.M., the holiday lights will be turned on and the choir from the Church of the Advent in Westbury, L.I., will sing.
A reception and a sale at the gift shop will follow at 6.
Tickets, $20, from (516) 333-0048.
Cystic Fibrosis Benefit  FRIDAY -- The East Balcony at Grand Central Terminal will be the setting for a winter gala to benefit the Cystic Fibrosis Foundation.
The event will include cocktails at 8 P.M., followed by a buffet dinner, dancing and a silent auction for trips, dinners and other prizes.
Tickets, $65, from (212) 986-8783.
Holiday Concert  FRIDAY -- The Brooklyn Youth Chorus will present its third annual Winter Holiday Concert at St.
Ann and the Holy Trinity Church, Clinton Street at Montague Street, Brooklyn Heights.
The evening will begin at 5:30 with a preconcert reception in the Guild Room, 122 Pierrepont Street, followed by the concert at 7:30 at the church, and at 9 by a jazz concert by the Robert Miller Group and Barbara King.
Tickets, $100, or $10 for adults and $5 for children for the concerts alone, from (718) 243-9447.
Celebration With Paul Cadmus  SATURDAY -- The National Academy of Design will benefit from a 90th birthday celebration for the artist Paul Cadmus.
The evening at the academy, 1083 Fifth Avenue (89th Street), will begin at 6 with a panel discussion, led by Chuck Close, with Mr.
Cadmus.
A champagne reception will follow at 7, with dinner at 8:30.
Tickets, $250, or $100 for the program and reception alone, from (212) 369-4880.
Ballet School Benefit  SATURDAY -- The New York City Ballet's 2 P.M. performance of "The Nutcracker" will benefit the scholarship program of the School of American Ballet.
The performance at the New York State Theater at Lincoln Center will be followed by a holiday party on the Promenade that cast members will attend in costume.
Tickets, $225;(212) 877-0600, extension 409.
For Life and Breath  SATURDAY -- The National Jewish Center for Immunology and Respiratory Medicine will honor James D. Kuhn, the president and chief operating officer of Newmark &amp; Company Real Estate, at a black-tie dinner-dance at the Grand Hyatt Hotel.
The evening will begin at 6:30 with cocktails, followed by dinner and dancing at 8:30.
Tickets, $600, from (212) 382-0711.
Chance for Children  SATURDAY -- The Little Orchestra Society will be the host for a two-part fund-raiser for its Chance for Children program, which provides free concert tickets and arts education for New York City elementary students.
The evening will begin at 7 with a candlelight Christmas concert at the Greek Orthodox Archdiocesan Cathedral of the Holy Trinity, 319 East 74th Street, followed by a dinner-dance and a silent auction at the Westbury Hotel, Madison Avenue at 69th Street.
Peter Duchin's orchestra will play.
Tickets, $350, from (212) 704-2100.
Shall They Dance?
SATURDAY -- The Westchester Arts Council will benefit from a gala evening at the Westchester County Center in White Plains.
The event will begin at 6:30 P.M. with cocktails and a silent auction, followed by dinner and dancing to the Duke Ellington Orchestra and the Dorsey Brothers Orchestra.
Items to be auctioned will include trips, art and tickets to cultural and sports events.
Black tie.
Tickets, $250, from (914) 428-4220, extension 225.
For Boys Harbor  SATURDAY -- The Junior Committee of Boys Harbor will hold its annual Holiday Ball at the Landmark on the Park, Central Park West at 76th Street, beginning at 9 P.M.
Tickets, $50, from (212) 427-2244, extension 588.
Benefit for School Volunteers  NEXT SUNDAY -- The New York City School Volunteer Program, an organization that trains volunteer tutors for public school students, will be the host for a benefit performance of "A Christmas Carol." The musical adaptation of the Charles Dickens story, with lyrics by Lynn Ahrens and music by Alan Menken, will be presented at the Paramount at Madison Square Garden.
The event will begin with a pre-performance party at 3:30 P.M. at the Madison Square Club, followed by the show at 5.
Tickets for the party and performance, $150 for adults and $125 for children or $100 for adults and $75 for children for the performance alone, from (212) 213-3370.
For Cancer Research  NEXT SUNDAY -- The Israel Cancer Research Fund will honor Dr.
Alfred Rosenbaum, a New York radiologist, at its 18th annual Tower of Hope Ball at the Pierre.
The black-tie evening will begin with a cocktail reception at 6, followed by dinner and dancing.
Tickets, $350, from (212) 969-9800.
Ballet for Unicef  NEXT SUNDAY -- Unicef will benefit from the 5 P.M. performance of the New York City Ballet's "Nutcracker" at the New York State Theater at Lincoln Center.
Tickets, $125, from (212) 759-0760.
Children's Museum Benefit  DEC. 12 -- The Children's Museum of Manhattan will benefit from a black-tie dinner at the Plaza.
The evening will begin with cocktails at 7, followed by dinner and entertainment by Andrea McArdle and the All-City High School Choir.
Tickets, $500, from (212) 245-6570.
Vrrooom, Vrrooom!
DEC. 12 -- The American-Italian Foundation for Cancer Research will honor the five Fendi sisters -- Paola, Anna, Franca, Carla and Alda -- at a dinner and auction at the Waldorf-Astoria.
The evening, which will raise money for skin cancer research, will begin at 6:30.
Items to be auctioned will include driving lessons at the Ferrari school in Mugello, near Florence; trips, and Italian-made goods.
Tickets, $500, from (212) 628-9090.
Honors for Two Mayors  DEC. 13 -- Ehud Olmert, the Mayor of Jerusalem, and Rudolph W. Giuliani, the Mayor of New York, will be honored by the American Committee for Shaare Zedek Medical Center in Jerusalem at a reception and dinner at the New York Hilton.
The evening will begin with cocktail reception at 5:30, followed by dinner.
Tickets, $150, (212) 354-8801.
Helping the City's Parks  DEC. 13 -- The City Parks Foundation will benefit from a screening of "Rudyard Kipling's 'Jungle Book,' " a new Walt Disney live-action film.
The screening will begin at 6 P.M. at the Sony Theaters Lincoln Square, Broadway at 68th Street.
Dinner will follow at the American Museum of Natural History.
Tickets, $500, from (212) 360-1399.
Award for Michael Bloomberg  DEC. 14 -- The Citizens Union of New York will honor Michael R. Bloomberg, the founder of Bloomberg Financial Markets, at a dinner at the Waldorf-Astoria.
The evening will begin with a reception at 7.
Tickets, $375, from (212) 227-0342.
For Troubled Youth  DEC. 14 -- Mothers for More Halfway Houses, an organization that advocates help for gifted but troubled youths, will benefit from a cocktail reception from 6 to 8 P.M. at Mortimer's restaurant, 1057 Lexington Avenue (75th Street).
Tickets, $125 or $75 for guests 40 and younger, from (212) 288-6567.
Helping the Homeless  DEC. 15 -- A holiday benefit for Food for Survival and for the New York Cares Coat Drive will be held at the 479 Gallery, 594 Broadway, just south of Houston Street.
The evening will begin at 7 with a recital on a toy piano by Wendy Mae Chambers and will continue with other musical performances.
Admission will be the donation of a usable coat or blanket or $5 at the door.
Reservations: (212) 877-7843.


ABOUT BOOKS
Gifts With Messages
AT gift-giving time, let buyers of books think aboutthe message a gift may send.
In the tradition of the powerful pen, Eileen P. Flynn has written a book with an admittedly controversial theme.
In "Catholicism: Agenda for Renewal," she says in her preface that she plans to change theRoman Catholic Church by "a radical transformation of its patriarchal culture."


Male Glee Club Giving Free Yonkers Concert
THE longest-lived performing arts organization in Yonkers, the 69-year-old Yonkers Male Glee Club, sings Hanukkah tunes, holiday carols, popular songs and a medley from "Showboat" today at 3 P.M. at a free recital at Museum Junior High School.
The pianist Francis Brancaleone, the music critic for Gannett Suburban Newspapers, and his wife, the soprano Elsa Jean Davidson, will contribute music by Cole Porter and Victor Herbert.
No tickets are required, but more information about the Glee Club can be obtained from Jack Prill at 961-8985.


Coney Island Cry: Save Our Shoal!


BEHIND THE WHEEL/Dodge Avenger; Under a Tough Name, a Soft Heart
BACK in the 80's, when Dodge and Plymouth brought forth a couple of clunky, uninspired sedans and named them Shadow and Sundance, I remember thinking that the light was playing tricks with someone's eyes.
The jazzy names just didn't fit the lackluster products.
But naming automobiles has always been a peculiar art.
For a long time, birds, animals and even fish (remember the A.M.C. Marlin?) were honored.
There have even been parts of critters; the Eagle Talon comes to mind.
Then came a wave of computer words: Acura, Sentra, Infiniti, Lumina, etc.


Requiem for the Upper Crust
THE COLLECTED STORIES OF LOUIS AUCHINCLOSS 465 pp.
Boston: Houghton Mifflin Company. $24.95.


Muslim Vs. Muslim Vs. Serb
The streets of this ghost town in the northern end of the Bihac pocket were empty today, except for a man running for cover as shelling and heavy machine-gun fire reverberated through the adjacent mist-filled valleys.
After more than three weeks of fighting, a combined force of Serbs and Muslims opposed to the Bosnian Government has advanced into the western half of the town.
But fierce exchanges during a visit today suggested that the Bosnian Army was putting up stiff resistance.


Taking Advantage of Sweet Bay Scallops
BAY SCALLOPS from Nantucket are now in season.
A little smaller than a penny, they are the sweetest -- and most expensive -- scallops on the market.
A new dish that has been catching on in restaurants is seared scallops heaped on a mound of buttery mashed potatoes and sprinkled with white truffle oil.
Another interesting first course can be made with scallops stir-fried Chinese style with Oriental seasonings and served on a bed of crispy fried noodles.


LETTING GO OF PAYNE WHITNEY
David Hellerstein's article "Letting Go of Payne Whitney" (Nov. 6) triggered delightful memories of my days there as a head nurse in the 1950's.
I had just completed an intense yearlong assignment in a "typical" state psychiatric hospital.
The day I reported for duty at Payne Whitney, I was told fresh uniforms would be delivered to my room three times a week, at no cost to me.
And there was also maid service -- no need to make my own bed.
I started in February and discovered I would be allowed a month's vacation, with pay, in May, if I would agree to return for a full year.
My generous salary was augmented by pleasant activities.
If I could spare time on my day off, I might accompany patients to social activities.
In this way, I managed to run up rather large shopping bills for the special clothes I needed to attend Broadway plays, cocktail parties, dinners, country weekends.
Under no circumstances was there to be any indication that I was a nurse, with a patient.


Taking a Sharper Look at Lawn Care
IF the lawn has not had its dose of fertilizer this fall, there is no time to waste.
The task should be done promptly.
Tradition has it that lawn fertilizer should be spread by the end of November.
But the recent spate of mild weather has fooled many gardeners.
Lawn-keeping researchers believe that one late fall application is all that the lawn should need for an entire year.
They say that this sort of application economy goes a long way toward lawn health -- but also keeps excess fertilizer out of the water system since less is lost to the environment through runoff.


ADAM WALINSKY, PRIVATE LOBBYIST FOR PUBLIC SAFETY
Walinsky's idea would save the taxpayers money and reduce crime on the streets a hundredfold.
The wall of opposition to his Police Corps is the greedy cop unions: the richest, most insulated and pandered-to group in government.
Add to this the politicians who have a phobia about change and who haven't had an original idea in ages.
ROBERT GUY ARTHUR Kings Park, L.I.


Making Major Repairs
I AM IN THE MIDST of major renovations to the house I have lived in for 20 years.
The roof is being replaced.
So are the rotted dormers and countless sagging window frames.
The former breezeway between the house and the garage, which serves as my office, is being completely torn apart because the walls and windows were collapsing.


U.N. Chief Gets Note On Karadzic 'Regret'
Radovan Karadzic, the leader of the rebel Bosnian Serbs, has sent a letter to Secretary General Boutros-Boutros Ghali expressing his "deep regret" that their planned meeting in Sarajevo did not take place and asking for a meeting "in the near future."
Dr.
Karadzic's failure to meet with Mr.
Boutros-Ghali on Wednesday was widely seen as a snub of the Secretary General, who wanted the meeting held at the Sarjevo airport.
Dr.
Karadzic reportedly insisted on meeting at Pale, the Bosnian Serb headquarters near Sarajevo.


SUNDAY, December 4, 1994
The border between the Imperial Valley of California and Mexico dramatically illustrates how social and economic forces have modified the landscape.
The photograph above shows neat croplands to the north (fed by the All American Canal, in turn fed by the dwindling Colorado River) and a sprawl of industry and housing to the south, a result of a concerted effort by Mexico to draw foreign industry.


A Synagogue Finds a Home in a Church That Has Now Come Full Circle
On a recent Saturday morning at Congregation Or Zarua's new synagogue on East 82d Street in Manhattan, about 90 people paused between portions of the Torah reading to discuss the implications of the passages on their daily lives.
Unusual in most synagogues, this scene repeats itself several times each Saturday when members gather to pray on the Sabbath.
Even more unusual, though, was the location where this scene unfolded.
Until six months ago, the synagogue's sanctuary had been a church.
During renovation last summer, Or Zarua's members found an old memorial plaque with Hebrew inscriptions that led to a stunning discovery: The church they had just purchased from the Protestant First Waldensians had been built in the late 19th century as a synagogue.


Respite From Holidays: Bach, Haydn and More
IT takes courage to present non-holiday concerts in December, but several such events are on the week's agenda.
On Tuesday evening at 8, Simone Pedroni, gold medalist at the most recent Van Cliburn International Competition, gives a recital in Woolsey Hall at Yale.
The 25-year-old Italian pianist is repeating the program of his Carnegie Hall debut last month, playing suites of Bach and Schoenberg, sonatas by Rachmaninoff and Haydn.
For reservations, call 776-1444.


Corrections
The lines on the World Stock Markets graph on the Money page on Nov. 20 were mislabeled.
The Britain index was at 200 in late November, and the world index was at 175.


F.Y.I.
30 Flrs., No Vu Q.  If you look carefully at the skyline of lower Manhattan, you'll see a tall, windowless building.
What is it, and why no view?
A.
The building, at 33 Thomas Street, is part of ATT's giant Worldwide Intelligent Network, which is responsible for directing an average of 175 million phone calls a day, said Virginia Gold, a company spokeswoman.


Correction
The "Gazeteer" chart on Nov. 20 with an article about living in Co-op City cited three bus routes incorrectly and misstated a fare.
Express service to midtown Manhattan is provided only by the BxM7 line of the New York Bus service, not the Bx26, Bx28 and Bx30.
The fare is $4, not $3.50.


Memories of a Tough, Fair-Minded Friend
He was only 26, but they remembered Raymond R. Cannon Jr. yesterday as a good cop and a good man: daring under fire, sensitive to people on his beat, an athlete with brash smile and a passion for fairness, who loved police work and believed in the fraternity of officers willing to die for one another.
Officer Cannon put his life on the line Friday, interrupting a holdup at a Brooklyn bicycle shop, and was mortally wounded in a fusillade of gunfire that began without warning and ended with one suspect dead and three teen-agers captured.
Under withering gunfire, three fellow officers carried Officer Cannon out, but he died at a hospital a few hours later.


Data Bank/December 4, 1994
Data Bank/December 4, 1994
Personal Income
Oct.
Sept.
Aug.
Monthly percent change
1.4
0.6
0.4
Personal Spending
Monthly percent change
0.7
0.2
0.8
Construction Spending
Monthly percent change
0.9
1.7
-0.4
Index of Leading Indicators
Monthly percent change
-0.1
0.1
0.5
Employment
Nov.
Oct.
Sept.
In thousands
124,608
124,236
123,600
Unemployment/Rate
In thousands/percent
7,328 (5.6)
7,600 (5.8)
7,715 (5.9)
Gross Domestic Product
III Q'94
II Q'94
I Q'94
1987 Dollars, in percent
3.9
4.1
3.4
Weekly Jobless Claims
Nov. 25
Nov. 18
Nov. 11
In thousands
317
329
326


Newt's Potboiler
IF YOU WERE WORRIED that Newt Gingrich was a Neanderthal, relax.
He's actually a Renaissance man.
A Renaissance Trekkie, even.
In the midst of saving the country from counterculture McGovern-niks, the next Speaker of the House is also making his mark in belles-lettres.
"I write on airplanes -- it's my version of golf," he says, "a way of breaking out, thinking differently. I think I'm in fact a much broader and more complex person than the stereotypes suggest."


PLAYING IN THE NEIGHBORHOOD
PROSPECT HEIGHTS Even a Humble Electrolux Gets Time on a Pedestal
Some might call it a vacuum cleaner.
But in a design context, that old Electrolux might just be art.


Who Should Decide About Hospital Stays?
Insurance companies want maternity patients out of the hospital in one or two days  [ "Q&amp;A: The Importance and Significance of the Community Hospital"  [ Oct. 16 ] .
I cannot think of a more heartless, mean-spirited, menacing and uncaring way to treat a newborn baby than to send him home from the hospital with a mother who has not been given a chance to recover from childbirth.


Professor Accused of Harassment Is Reinstated
Trustees of the University of New Hampshire have settled a free-speech case by reinstating a professor suspended for classroom remarks that the university considered a form of sexual harassment.
The trustees agreed on Thursday to pay the professor, J. Donald Silva, 59, $60,000 in back pay and damages, plus $170,000 in legal fees.
The university also agreed to remove from his records any reference to his suspension and the charges against him.


Where to Give the Gift of Time in the Five Boroughs
The holidays are a time of giving.
And the gift of time can be very precious.
The following is a list of some organizations around the five boroughs that can use help this holiday season and beyond.
NEW YORK CARES 116 East 16th Street, Manhattan.
New York Cares requires a one-hour orientation at which volunteers receive a monthly calendar that lists 100 to 200 volunteer opportunities to help at 100 to 150 organizations.
No long-term commitment required.
Orientation is by appointment only.
Office hours: Monday through Friday, 9 A.M. to 5 P.M. (212) 228-5000.
THE VOLUNTEER REFERRAL AGENCY 161 Madison Avenue, Manhattan.
The agency requires a half-hour interview for prospective volunteers to properly place them with more than 500 organizations throughout the boroughs.
Interview by appointment only.
Office hours: Monday through Friday, 11 A.M. to 5 P.M. (212) 745-8249.
BIDE-A-WEE 410 East 38th Street, Manhattan, or 3300 Beltagh Avenue, Wantagh, L.I.
This is a privately financed organization for abandoned or unwanted pets.
Bide-a-Wee never destroys its animals.
Volunteers can assist in walking and caring for the animals, raising money, writing newsletters, clerical work and many other opportunities.
Training depends on the job.
Office hours: Manhattan and Long Island locations, Monday through Friday, 9 A.M. to 5 P.M.
Manhattan, (212) 532-6395.
Long Island, (516) 785-4199.
SAMARITAN HOT LINE The holiday season is especially difficult for some New Yorkers, and New York's only 24-hour suicide prevention line is in constant need of good listeners.
Volunteers must have a telephone interview, complete 24 hours of training and then commit themselves to four shifts a month, including one weekday shift of 11 P.M. to 8 A.M.
Volunteers must be 21.
Donations welcome. (212) 673-3041.
G.M.H.C.  (Gay Men's Health Crisis), 129 West 20th Street, Manhattan.
The name may be deceiving because the Gay Men's Health Crisis helps everybody with AIDS.
Volunteers take part in all aspects of helping the ill from home care to clerical work in the G.M.H.C. office.
Volunteers must complete a two-day training session.
Office hours: Monday through Friday, 10 A.M. to 6 P.M. (212) 337-3593.
NOW (National Organization for Women), 22 West 21st Street, Manhattan.
Needs volunteers both for daytime and nighttime work.
They can handle the help line, do clerical work or at night be an advocate.
Office hours: Monday through Friday, 9 A.M. to 5 P.M.; (212) 807-0721.
PARTNERSHIP FOR THE HOMELESS 305 Seventh Ave, Manhattan, will train volunteers for any of its seven programs for the homeless.
Ask for Jennifer Brady for more information.
Office hours: Monday through Friday, 9 A.M. to 5 P.M. (212) 645-3444 x 118.
GOD'S LOVE WE DELIVER895 Amsterdam Avenue, Manhattan.
God's Love needs delivery people for a Christmas Eve meal.
It is also preparing gift baskets for homebound men, women and children with AIDS and will accept toys, and new articles of clothing.
In Manhattan, volunteers do not need a car.
For other boroughs, delivery person must have a vehicle.
In general, God's Love needs van assistants and weekday delivery help.
Office hours: Monday through Friday, 9 A.M. to 5 P.M. (212) 865-6500.
POWARS (Pet Owners With AIDS/ ARC Resource Service), P.O.
Box 1116, Madison Square Station, Manhattan, 10159.
Powars is a privately financed volunteer organization to care for the pets of people with AIDS.
Volunteers are needed for dog walking, veterinarian visits, clerical work, grant writing and public relations.
Volunteers must complete two training sessions.
Hours: Flexible.
General office: (212) 744-0842; Volunteer Coordinator: (212) 924-2932.
THE BRONX ZOO 2300 Southern Boulevard, The Bronx.
The Friends of Wildlife Conservation will train volunteers once a week for 12 weeks to assist in guided tours of the zoo and all facets of the animal education program.
Office hours: Monday through Sunday, 9 A.M. to 5 P.M. (718) 220-5141.
VICTIMS SERVICES AGENCY 2 Lafayette Street, Manhattan.
Victims Services offers support and counseling to victims of domestic violence, rape, incest, muggings and other violent incidents.
Volunteers are trained in accordance with the job they choose.
Opportunities include counseling, child care, client intake, clerical and answering the hot line.
Office hours: Monday through Friday 8:30 A.M. to 5 P.M. (212) 577-1287.
COALITION FOR THE HOMELESS 89 Chambers Street, Manhattan.
The Coalition has several mobile soup kitchens that each feed at least 750 a night and need volunteers.
No training required.
Office hours: Monday through Friday, 9 A.M. to 6 P.M. (212) 964-5900.
R.S.V.P. (Retired Senior Volunteer Program), locations in all five boroughs.
R.S.V.P. fills 10,000 volunteer spots annually.
Volunteers are ages 55 and older.
Openings include tutoring positions, museum docents and food delivery people.
R.S.V.P. will match experience to a needy organization.
Office hours: Monday through Friday, 9 A.M. to 5 P.M. (212) 674-7787.
MIRACLE HOUSE P.O.
Box 30931, Old Chelsea Station, New York, N.Y. 10011.
Miracle House provides housing and support to the out-of-town family and friends of New Yorkers with AIDS.
Volunteers go through a two-hour training program.
Office hours: Monday through Friday, 9 A.M. to 5:30 P.M. (212) 799-0563 x 229.
LITERACY VOLUNTEERS 121 Avenue of the Americas, Manhattan.
Literacy Volunteers of New York City has programs in Manhattan.
Volunteers can either teach reading after an eight-week training program or do clerical work beginning immediately.
Office hours: Monday through Friday, 9 A.M. to 5 P.M. (212) 925-3001.
Speak with Sally Ashley.
COVENANT HOUSE 460 41st Street, 690 Eighth Avenue or 427 West 52d Street, Manhattan.
Covenant House offers housing for homeless or runaway youths (under 21 years of age).
Volunteers have a variety of choices like handling the 24-hour hot line, clerical work and working directly with the young people.
Training varies in relation to job.
Four-hour-a-week commitment required.
Office hours: Monday through Friday, 9 A.M. to 5 P.M. (212) 727-4917.


Japan Protests U.S. Stamp On A-Bombs
Japanese officials have sharply criticized a plan by the United States Postal Service to issue a commemorative stamp depicting the atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki.
The stamp, to be issued next year for the 50th anniversary of the end of World War II, shows a picture of a bomb's mushroom cloud and carries the caption, "Atomic bombs hasten war's end, August 1945."


Family, Family and Family
WHEN Rosa Priore orders her son Rocco out of the kitchen in "Saturday, Sunday, Monday" at the Long Wharf Theater ("Get out or I'll break this plate over your head," Rosa screams), an uneasy theatergoer may feel like a captive onlooker at a private family blowup.
Especially since Rosa has already sent out the threat: "I'll slap you black and blue if you disrespect your father."
Yet Eduardo De Filippo's play, in a new translation by Thomas Simpson, is so Italianate in essence -- Neapolitan to be precise -- that such an eruption comes with the territory.
It is not supposed to tap into anyone's contemporary American hypersensitivity about dysfunctional families and abusive relationships.


Corrections
The Mutual Funds column on Aug. 21, responding to a reader's inquiry about calculating 10-year average annual returns, misstated the cumulative and average annual returns for a hypothetical $1,000 investment.
For a fund that returns 5 percent, 10 percent and 15 percent over three years, the investor in Year 3 would have $1,328.25, not $1,318.25, for a cumulative return of 32.825 percent and an average annual return of 9.92 percent.
A reader's letter written in September to point out the error was overlooked during the columnist's absence due to illness.


Wanted: Pier With a View
The neighborhoods of Clinton and Chelsea stretch along three miles of waterfront.
But most of it is barred to the public and blocked from view, and residents cherish the few spots amid the jumble of ship terminals, decrepit piers and old buildings used for storage and parking that afford them access to its unburnished charms.
And they lobby for more.
Now, two projects along the Hudson are frustrating residents: One, a plan to permanently dock a floating heliport, would obstruct Clinton's only public pier.
The other project is the redevelopment of Chelsea's pier buildings, which, contrary to some expectations, will continue to wall off the river for several blocks.


CONFLICT IN THE BALKANS: THE POLICY Colliding Missions -- A special report.; U.S. and Bosnia: How a Policy Changed
It was the Sunday after Thanksgiving when Anthony Lake sat down in his Massachusetts farmhouse to work on a confidential memo to President Clinton, conceding reluctantly that American policy in Bosnia had run into a brick wall.
For months, Mr.
Lake, Mr.
Clinton's national security adviser, had been talking about the need to combine the threat of force with the effort of diplomacy to protect towns designated by the United Nations as "safe areas" in Bosnia and quell the fighting.
Now Bihac, a Muslim town in northwestern Bosnia that the United Nations had promised to protect, was on the verge of falling to the Serbs.


Coates Catches Passes and Praise
Seemingly from nowhere, Ben Coates of the New England Patriots has become perhaps the best tight end in pro football.
He leads all National Football League tight ends and all American Conference receivers with 80 catches in 12 games.
He has helped drive a team with limited talent to a 6-6 record and a key game against the Jets here today.
How good is Ben Coates? Listen to Coach Bill Parcells:


Puerto Rican Artists Bridge Two Worlds Apart
IT is said to be the Gateway to the Bronx, but because of the congestion surrounding Hostos Community College's location at 149th Street and Grand Concourse it has never looked the part.
That has changed, however, now that the college has acquired its Center for the Arts and Culture and other new buildings, plus a walkway bridging the Concourse.
Naturally, the expansion makes for more congestion and will doubtless continue to do so until the campus's renewal is complete -- in time for the millennium.
Nevertheless, interested parties can at least take advantage of the concert hall, repertory theater and art gallery -- all spanking new and all celebrating the college's 25th anniversary.


The Beatles Meet The Bootleggers On Their Own Turf
AMERICAN BEATLES FANS thought they were in clover back in the 1960's when new albums and singles were pumped out every few months and films, tours and appearances on "The Ed Sullivan Show" kept the Fab Four in view.
But by 1970, when the band split up and its legacy was undergoing serious examination, it became clear that America had seen only part of the picture.
Imported records showed that the early American albums were truncated distortions of the British originals.
And bootleg recordings of British radio shows brought even hotter news.
These pirated disks revealed that while Americans were hanging by their radios awaiting the hits, British listeners regularly heard the Beatles performing live on the BBC.
Between 1962 and 1965, the band played 88 songs on British radio, most in multiple versions for a total of more than 280 performances.
Included were 36 songs the group never recorded for its record label, EMI.
It is no exaggeration to say that these radio recordings add significantly to our knowledge of what made the Beatles tick: even the familiar songs were played in arrangements that were harder-edged than the fussed-over studio versions.


Leo Strauss' Elitism Sought Excellence for All; Who's a Leostraussian?
To the Editor:
I graduated from the University of Chicago.
Consequently, here at another university, people stop me on the street and insist that I admit to being a "Straussian" -- or more diverting, a "Leostraussian." All this is perplexing to undergraduates.


SERVICE WITH A SNEER
Denny's determines that a large percentage of the customers who leave without paying are black.
The restaurant chain also has trouble with rowdiness by blacks.
Why shouldn't Denny's be allowed to ban a group that has caused problems?
It is merely making a prudent business decision.
Most retailers will not accept personal checks with low numbers and no printed name and address.
Not all of these checks are bad, and it is unfortunate that honest people must be penalized.


Taking On Ticketmaster Over Pricing
To the Editor:
If you wanted a ticket to anything, you would go to Ticketmaster.
Pearl Jam is 110 percent right.
If the group wants to sell its tickets for under $20, who is Ticketmaster to stop it?
I just hope the judge feels the same way.
JAMES CASTELLANO  Jackson Heights, Queens, Nov. 9


Tanks Take On New Role as Artificial Reefs to Attract Fish
NEW JERSEY is participating in a nationwide cooperative program between the Department of Defense, the National Guard and Federal and state environmental groups by taking outdated Army tanks and dumping them into coastal waters to form artificial reefs to create habitats for fish.
The program of using old war materiel is called Reef-Ex (for Reef Exercise), and officials say it will improve and extend the life of artificial reefs and rebuild the environment and economy of coastal states.


Strong as Nails (And Soft Of Heart)
IT IS FIVE YEARS SINCE JUDITH Jamison strode into a studio at the Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater headquarters, in New York, and announced to waiting reporters that she had been chosen to be the artistic director of the company.
Only a few weeks had passed since Ailey's death.
She greeted the writers with both warmth and impenetrable reserve.
There was not much to say, and she didn't.
Time would tell.
Surprisingly few things about the company have changed.
The Ailey troupe that opens on Wednesday for its annual winter season, through Jan. 1 at City Center, in Manhattan, has a somewhat younger, sleeker, speedier look, comparable to that of the Jamison Project, the popular modern dance troupe Ms.
Jamison headed when she took over the Ailey.
Hot, cool and charismatic as ever, the dancers may sometimes miss the subtler nuances of Ailey's narrative choreography, but they are, as Ms.
Jamison says admiringly of at least one company member, unfailingly "fierce."


NOTABLE BOOKS OF THE YEAR: 1994
This list has been selected from books reviewed since the Christmas Books issue of December 1993.
The list suggests only high points in the main fields of reader interest, and it does not include titles chosen by the editors of the Book Review as the Best Books of 1994.
Books are arranged alphabetically under subject headings.
Biographies and memoirs of people known for their contributions in fields other than literature and history are listed in appropriate categories.
Art, Music &amp; Popular Culture
AS SEEN ON TV: The Visual Culture of Everyday Life in the 1950s.
By Karal Ann Marling. (Harvard University, $24.95.) Themes of the mythic decade -- Disneyland, tail fins, Elvis and others -- shrewdly observed by a witty, rompish historian.


Art Irritates Life; Some Hope Artists Will Imitate Cosby
Bill Cosby is welcome any time. Madonna and Wesley Snipes are not.
So say residents of the photogenic brownstones that line the streets of Hamilton Heights.
The well-kept buildings are full of the architectural details producers love: front steps and stoops, wrought-iron railings and window boxes.
But residents complain that many film crews block tenants from their homes, commandeer prime parking spaces and leave litter and damage behind.
Some have even become a little aggressive.
"There are people who will lean out their windows and bang pots when they start to film," said Christina Lee, a member of Community Board 9.
Fed up, civic leaders are trying to set up a system in which those who film in the community board district would make some kind of contribution: donating library books, planting trees or giving money to neighborhood groups.
"Residents of the neighborhood make an extraordinary effort to preserve old buildings, to come up with gorgeous front stoops and front gardens, and do whatever is needed to make their neighborhood a lovely place," Ms.
Lee said.
"The film makers go in and film, leave their garbage behind, and disappear, never to be heard from again."
As incentive to shoot movies and television shows in New York, the city offers free permits and help coordinating productions.
The Office of Film, Theater and Broadcasting gives producers suggestions for filming sites, clears their plans with the sanitation and transportation departments and even provides protection through a 27-member movie and television police unit.
The film makers pay for other expenses they incur, like moving parking meters or changing street lamps.
While film makers are encouraged to notify neighborhoods about their work, they do not have to, said Julianne Cho, a spokeswoman for the film office.
Regarding donations, she said: "That's an arrangement that would be made outside our office. There is no precedent in our office for this kind of thing."
On his own, Mr.
Cosby gave $1,000 to the Convent Avenue Neighborhood Association after filming his television mystery show there last summer, and residents say the entertainer kept inconveniences to a minimum.
By contrast, residents say the crew of a movie starring Mr.
Snipes tried to block residents from their homes on Convent Avenue between 143d and 144th Streets.
Also last summer, when Madonna shot a music video at 270 Convent Avenue, residents say crew members tried to keep them from entering their lobby, and then mistakenly told owners of the co-op apartments that they had gained permission from their landlord to do so.
"There were some hard feelings and also a confrontation," said Wil Buckery, treasurer of the Convent Avenue Neighborhood Association.
"A member of the board of directors of the building had to approach the Madonna people and sit down and talk eyeball to eyeball about what the true situation was."
Ms.
Lee, an entertainment lawyer, said the community board wanted to begin telling producers that contributions are "a tradition." And board members say they can describe Mr.
Cosby's donations and how makers of the television series "N.Y.P.D. Blue" sent kindly worded letters to residents before they filmed and thank-you notes afterward.
J.K.B.


Nov. 27-Dec. 3; A Long Bridge Across the Years
Grandparents: The very word conjures cuddly images of silver-haired retirees doting on adored toddlers, of baby sitters who are always there when needed.
For children, grandparents can be that ideal mix -- almost parents, but they'll wink if you don't finish your broccoli.


IT'S NOT THE ONLY ALIEN INVADER
Alan Burdick's article about nonindigenous species in Hawaii misrepresented the effort of People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals to end the Nature Conservancy's cruel animal-snaring program ("It's Not the Only Alien Invader," Nov. 13).
Our objection to the conservancy's term "alien pests" is not, as your article implies, that we think the animals are indigenous.
It is that, despite the availability of more humane animal-control methods, the conservancy persists in using one of the cruelest means ever devised.
The snare's wire noose cuts a deep gash in a struggling animal's neck.
Struggling increases the pain and deepens the wound, so some animals lie still, unable to seek food or shelter, or to end their pain.
Maggots breed in the still-living animal's wound and enter eyes, nose and mouth.
The animal lingers for many days before dying of infection, starvation or dehydration.
DAVID CANTOR People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals Washington


Taking On Ticketmaster Over Pricing
To the Editor:
Ticketmaster has a great alibi that it has to pay oodles of money for equipment and salaries, but I still think Pearl Jam is right.
I mean, how many kids can pay $35 for a concert ticket?
MADHU PARTHASARATHY  Jackson Heights, Queens, Nov.9  James Castellano, Rosann Feller and Madhu Parthasarathy are sixth-grade students at the Garden School in Jackson Heights.


BEST SELLERS: December 4, 1994
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
40
THE CELESTINE PROPHECY, by James Redfield. (Warner, $17.95.) An ancient manuscript, found in Peru, provides insights into achieving a fulfilling life.
2
3
24
POLITICALLY CORRECT BEDTIME STORIES, by James Finn Garner. (Macmillan, $8.95.) Classic tales respun to avoid offending current sensibilities.
3
2
7
INSOMNIA, by Stephen King. (Viking, $27.95.) A widower and a widow, victims of sleeplessness, behold sinister forces at work in their small Maine town.
4
1
WINGS, by Danielle Steel. (Delacorte, $23.95.) A woman pursues her ambition to become a record-setting aviator in pre-World War II America.
5
4
14
DEBT OF HONOR, by Tom Clancy. (Putnam, $25.95.) Jack Ryan and C.I.A. agents vs. a Japanese plot to strike America's territory and economy.
6
5
4
THE LOTTERY WINNER, by Mary Higgins Clark. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $22.) Stories about a couple who win a lottery and devote themselves to solving crimes.
7
6
9
TALTOS, by Anne Rice. (Knopf, $25.) The survivor of a species of witches copes with his heritage; a sequel to "The Witching Hour" and "Lasher."
8
14
2
GOD'S OTHER SON, by Don Imus. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $23.) A 1981 novel about Billy Sol Hargus, a lecherous television evangelist from Texas.
9
12
2
DARK RIVERS OF THE HEART, by Dean Koontz. (Knopf, $24.) A man and a woman, who meet by chance, must flee a powerful Government agency.
10
11
121
THE BRIDGES OF MADISON COUNTY, by Robert James Waller. (Warner, $16.95.) A photographer and a farmer's lonely wife in Iowa.
11
10
11
NOTHING LASTS FOREVER, by Sidney Sheldon. (Morrow, $23.) Three women doctors in San Francisco contend with lovers, betrayers and killers.
12
13
19
THE GIFT, by Danielle Steel. (Delacorte, $15.) A woman's visit to a small town changes many lives.
13
8
2
THE CRYSTAL STAR, by Vonda N. McIntyre. (Spectra/Bantam, $21.95.) A "Star Wars" novel in which Princess Leia tracks the kidnappers of her children.
14
1
STAR TREK GENERATIONS, by J.M.
Dillard. (Pocket, $20.) Capt.
Jean-Luc Picard and Capt.
James T. Kirk must track down a scientist at large with a dangerous weapon; plus an account of the filming of the movie.
15
7
6
LORD OF CHAOS, by Robert Jordan. (Tor/Doherty, $25.95.) The sixth volume of "The Wheel of Time," a fantasy saga.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Nonfiction
1
1
5
CROSSING THE THRESHOLD OF HOPE, by John Paul II.
Edited by Vittorio Messori. (Knopf, $20.) The Pope discusses matters of belief, suffering and hope.
2
4
9
DON'T STAND TOO CLOSE TO A NAKED MAN, by Tim Allen. (Hyperion, $19.95.) Anecdotes and meditations on life by the star of "Home Improvement."
3
3
13
COUPLEHOOD, by Paul Reiser. (Bantam, $19.95.) Essays on the ups and downs of marriage by the television star and stand-up comedian.
4
5
10
JAMES HERRIOT'S CAT STORIES, by James Herriot. (St. Martin's, $16.95.) A collection of tales.
5*
2
5
THE BELL CURVE, by Richard J. Herrnstein and Charles Murray. (Free Press, $30.) Ways in which differences in intelligence affect American life.
6
7
12
BARBARA BUSH: A Memoir, by Barbara Bush. (Drew/Scribners, $25.) The former First Lady's life.
7
9
8
THE HOT ZONE, by Richard Preston. (Random House, $23.) The discovery of a lethal virus.
8
10
50
THE BOOK OF VIRTUES, by William J. Bennett. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $30.) Moral stories adapted from the Greeks, the Bible, folklore and elsewhere.
9
6
8
DOLLY, by Dolly Parton. (HarperCollins, $25.) The autobiography of the country singer.
10
8
5
NICOLE BROWN SIMPSON, by Faye D. Resnick with Mike Walker. (Dove Books, $14.95.) The former wife of O.J.
Simpson as remembered by a friend.
11
2
GUNS, CRIME, AND FREEDOM, by Wayne R. LaPierre. (Regnery, $22.95.) The executive vice president of the National Rifle Association argues against gun control.
12
11
6
ALL THE TROUBLE IN THE WORLD, by P.J.
O'Rourke. (Atlantic Monthly, $22.) A humorist considers problems like overpopulation, famine and plague.
13
12
39
MIDNIGHT IN THE GARDEN OF GOOD AND EVIL, by John Berendt. (Random House, $23.) The mysterious death of a young man in Savannah, Ga.
14
13
2
STRANGE JUSTICE, by Jane Mayer and Jill Abramson. (Houghton Mifflin, $24.95.) The nomination and confirmation of Clarence Thomas.
15
1
THE WARREN BUFFETT WAY, by Robert G. Hagstrom Jr. (Wiley, $24.95.) An account of the career of the man reputed to be the world's most successful investor, and the strategies he has pursued.
16*
15
9
BASEBALL, by Geoffrey C. Ward and Ken Burns. (Knopf, $60.) An illustrated history of the game.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous
1
1
80
MEN ARE FROM MARS, WOMEN ARE FROM VENUS, by John Gray. (HarperCollins, $23.) Ways to improve communication and relationships between the sexes.
2
2
32
IN THE KITCHEN WITH ROSIE, by Rosie Daley. (Knopf, $14.95.) Recipes by Oprah Winfrey's cook.
3
3
10
MAGIC EYE III, by N.E.
Thing Enterprises. (Andrews &amp; McMeel, $12.95.) Oscillating designs in color.
4
1
THE BUBBA GUMP SHRIMP CO.
COOKBOOK. (Oxmoor House, $14.95.) Seventy-five shrimp recipes, said to have been inspired by Forrest Gump.
Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending Nov. 19, at 3,050 bookstores plus wholesalers serving 28,000 other retailers (gift shops, department stores, newsstands, supermarkets), statistically weighted to represent sales in all such outlets nationwide.
An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
And Bear in Mind (Editor's Choices of other recent books of particular interest) .H.
LAWRENCE: The Story of a Marriage, by Brenda Maddox. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $30.) Lawrence's violent life with the formidable Frieda Weekley, who bedded him 20 minutes after she met him, makes for absorbing if unappetizing reading.
THE DIVINE CHILD: A Novel of Prenatal Rebellion, by Pascal Bruckner. (Little, Brown, $21.95.) A wonderfully appalling story by a French novelist about a monster in utero.
IN PHARAOH'S ARMY: Memories of the Lost War, by Tobias Wolff. (Knopf, $23.) The follow-up volume to Mr.
Wolff's memoir "This Boy's Life" is a series of small, elegant, personal sketches of his year in Vietnam.
THE LAST SHOT: City Streets, Basketball Dreams, by Darcy Frey. (Richard Todd/Houghton Mifflin, $19.95.) Mr.
Frey examines the myth of deliverance through basketball on the courts of Coney Island, where black youths compete to be exploited by coaches, colleges and, in the rarest cases, by professional sports.
LOST PURITAN: A Life of Robert Lowell, by Paul Mariani. (Norton, $27.50.) This approach to the "real" character of a protean confessional poet uses letters and diaries to reveal a writer whose fascination with preachers, statesmen and generals hints at restlessness with his own art.
MAKING MALCOLM: The Myth and Meaning of Malcolm X, by Michael Eric Dyson. (Oxford University, $19.95.) Malcolm X is the thread that stitches together these eloquent, freewheeling essays on hip-hop culture, black films and the tragic lives of poor black men.
THE MASTER OF PETERSBURG, by J.M.
Coetzee. (Viking, $21.95.) The hero of Mr.
Coetzee's grimmest novel yet is Dostoyevsky himself, trapped in generational and political clashes, trying to scrape meaning from the death of a son.
ON THE EDGE: The Clinton Presidency, by Elizabeth Drew. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $24.) Through interviews with the White House staff, Ms.
Drew has put together a devastating picture of bumbling incompetence.
THE PRIVATE LIFE OF CHAIRMAN MAO: The Memoirs of Mao's Personal Physician, by Li Zhisui. (Random House, $30.) A detailed recounting of Mao Zedong's prodigious hankerings for fatty pork, young women and sleeping pills.
SEARCHING FOR MERCY STREET: My Journey Back to My Mother, Anne Sexton, by Linda Gray Sexton. (Little, Brown, $22.95.) An intimate account of growing up the daughter of a mad, child-abusing, suicidal, brilliant poet, and of resolving such an upbringing from the inside out.
WASHINGTON THROUGH A PURPLE VEIL: Memoirs of a Southern Woman, by Lindy Boggs with Katherine Hatch. (Harcourt Brace, $24.95.) An engrossing narrative of the life of a former Congresswoman, whose large share of family tragedy has been offset by the comfort and power of her big, gregarious family.


Cab Hailed By Dinkins Rides On By
It has happened before -- even to a man of the stature of former Mayor David N. Dinkins -- and it happened again: a cabdriver's refusing to stop for him, but picking up a white person just down the block.
"This is not a new thing," Mr.
Dinkins said yesterday.
"It happens all too frequently in our town."


Alberti, On the Road To Cyberspace
WAS THE WHOLE glorious Renaissance the result of a bad date?
A visitor to the magnificent Alberti show at Mantua's Palazzo Te begins to wonder.
Joseph Rykwert, the show's curator (along with Anne Engel), refers teasingly in his catalogue essay to "an early, unhappy romance," and Alberti's subsequent career -- in music, mathematics, writing and architecture -- can be perversely read as an epic campaign to shut out feeling.
Indeed, one comes away from the show with the strong impression that this great architect of humanism didn't like humans very much and was somewhat disgusted to be one.
Leon Battista Alberti (1404-72) wanted to cultivate himself to such utter perfection that he would become virtually a god.
And what a divine show he makes -- the first exhibition ever devoted to this model Renaissance Man!
There has never been an Alberti exhibition before, Mr.
Rykwert writes, because his achievement "seemed (if anything) too plain and obvious, over familiar." Why rediscover a figure who was never lost to time?
For half a millennium, Alberti has occupied a secure niche.
The author of "De Re Aedificatoria" (1452), the first architectural treatise of the Renaissance, Alberti showed how classical forms could be adapted to the needs of his day.
The Roman triumphal arch, for example, instead of being a freestanding structure, could be treated as a facade.
When used in a church, the arch would signify the Christian triumph over death.


Joy in Discovery as Images Come to Life


Erick Hawkins, Lover of Beauty
ERICK HAWKINS, WHO WAS 85 when he died on Nov. 23, was one of those rare choreographers who teach audiences to look at dance in a new way.
I remember my outrage when I first saw his company in Paris in 1963.
The intimate and jewel-like Theatre Recamier seemed desecrated by the apparent lack of activity on stage.
There was no dramatic imagery in the conventional sense, and virtuosity was, at best, concealed.
Nor was there the kind of experimental collage of unrelated movements then coming into vogue.
The aura of the performance was rooted more in ceremony than in spectacle.
Above all, the choreography, expressed in an unusually fluid idiom, proceeded at an unhurried pace.


Art Imitates Life
To the Editor:
In his article "When It Comes to Film Biography, Everyone's a Critic"  [ Nov. 20 ] , Richard Bernstein misinterprets our celebration of Dorothy Parker's determined and poetic survival by casting it off as poisonous cynicism.
For example, he brings into question Harpo Marx cavorting at lawn parties as his celebrated movie character, when by all accounts Harpo was a willing and enthusiastic "performing seal" at such affairs.


A New 'Nutcracker' Ushers In a Season
STAGE right at the Performing Arts Center here was aflutter with small silvery creatures awaiting their rehearsal cue.
Then dozens of little girls danced into the spotlight, transformed suddenly into luminous angels for the Purchase College production of "The Nutcracker."
The newly choreographed ballet, performed yesterday for the first time with the Purchase Symphony Orchestra playing the Tchaikovsky score, is a joint production of the school's dance division and the division of continuing education.
It can be seen today at 1 and 4:30 P.M.
The dancers include soloists from the American Ballet Theater, the Purchase Dance Corps and 200 children.


Singapore
To the Editor: On Oct. 9, my wife and I returned from two weeks in Singapore and Malaysia.
On the same day, "What's Doing in Singapore" called it "a fine place to relax . . . after the smoggy exoticism of Bangkok, Jakarta or Manila."


FILM: Two Women Stand Tall in 'Vanya on 42d Street'; In Sonya, a Portrayal of Almost Unbearable Vulnerability
AT THE END OF "VANYA ON 42D Street," Louis Malle's film about Andre Gregory's production of the Chekhov play, a young actress named Brooke Smith delivers an extraordinary speech.
Playing the homely, lovelorn Sonya, whose hopes for earthly happiness have just been shattered, she tries to console her suicidal Uncle Vanya (Wallace Shawn) with a picture of the heavenly rewards that await them after their dreary lives on a shabby Russian estate.
In the nearly three minutes it takes Ms.
Smith to deliver Chekhov's words, Mr.
Malle's unblinking camera never leaves her.
Her expression travels from misery to rapture, from fierce resignation to tender pity.
It is the capstone to a performance of almost unbearable intimacy and vulnerability, a sequence Mr.
Malle said he recognized as "quite exceptional" the moment he shot it.


Alabama's No. 1 Dream A Point Shy
Alabama's perfect season, and a chance to win a second national championship in three years, came crashing down today in the din of the Georgia Dome, where the Florida Gators answered two haunting questions.
Could they come from behind?
Could they survive a struggle to the finish?
At last, Florida's giddy, redemptive response was yes.
The Gators outlasted the Crimson Tide, 24-23, in a Southeastern Conference championship game won by Chris Doering's 2-yard touchdown reception from the shaken quarterback Danny Wuerffel and preserved by Eddie Lake's interception of a Jay Barker pass with 51 seconds to play.
Alabama, which had been tied or behind during the second half in 7 of its 11 victories this season, finally experienced an unsuccessful comeback effort.


Susan L. Dwyer, C. Q. Cabana
Susan Lynn Dwyer, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert J. Dwyer of Summit, N.J., was married there yesterday to Christopher Quintin Cabana, a son of the late Mr. and Mrs.
Francis F. Cabana.
The Rev.
Brian J. O'Connell, the president of Niagara University, officiated at St.
Teresa of Avila Roman Catholic Church.
Mrs.
Cabana, 27, is a vice president and regional marketing director for Putnam Mutual Funds in Cleveland.
She and her husband graduated from St.
Anselm's College.
Her father is an executive vice president and a national sales director for Dean Witter, Discover &amp; Company, a securities investment company in New York.


Freshman, 46, Makes Football Team
CHUCK ROSEBERRY walked into the football office at Kutztown University to ask the head coach, Al Leonzi, if he could try out for the team.
Mr.
Leonzi, sitting behind a desk cluttered with film clips and scouting reports, began asking the questions he usually asks walk-on candidates: "Do you have a tape? Do you have any films? Do you have any references from your high school football coaches?"


Educating Drunken Drivers
THERE was not a sound in the room as Cono Giardina described the car crash that killed his 24-year-old daughter, Cara, in November last year.
Cara was returning home from an engagement party when her vehicle was struck by a drunken driver.
Speaking with emotion, Mr.
Giardina said: "I am a victim, but all of you are potential victims. Victims of your own choosing."


Cleanest Guns in the West
HAPPY TRAILS Our Life Story.
By Roy Rogers and Dale Evans with Jane Stern and Michael Stern.
Illustrated. 252 pp.
New York: Simon &amp; Schuster. $23.50.


Sports of The Times; Clubs Want Your Money Right Away
THE TICKET applications are sitting on Frank Sullivan's desk.
He can renew his four season tickets for the Cleveland Indians in 1995 for all 81 home games for the modest sum of $5,400.
But before he sends the money, he has got one little question: What happens if the baseball owners go through with the ugly scenario of putting replacement workers in major league uniforms?
Does Frank Sullivan get part of his $5,400 back?


Meredith Meade, Robert Winawer
Meredith Anne Meade, the daughter of Arlene and Alan Meade of North Brunswick, N.J., was married last evening to Robert Evan Winawer, a son of Gail T. Winawer of Livingston, N.J., and the late Joel M. Winawer.
Rabbi Barry Friedman performed the ceremony at the Westbury Hotel in New York.
Mrs.
Winawer is studying for a master's degree in educational psychology at New York University.
She graduated from Boston University.
Her father is a civil engineer at Schoor &amp; DePalma, consulting engineers in North Brunswick.
Her mother is the general manager of Blackmore's Inc., a manufacturer of health and beauty products in North Brunswick.


A Revolution Couched in Beautiful Melodies
TO GRASP THE SINGULAR qualities of Franz Schubert's piano writing, one need look no further than the first few measures of his great Sonata in B flat (D. 960).
A characteristically simple and lovely theme glides into being, touching on only a few elementary degrees of the scale.
But it is all cast in octaves, doubled in the right hand and echoed in the left; this is melody with height and depth, a sound mass that hovers. (Liszt wrote octave doublings to increase the power of his thematic material; Schubert used them to broaden his music in space.) At the end of the phrase, the spell is broken: a trill rumbles low in the bass, casting an inexplicable gray shadow.
Schubert was a composer of beautiful melodies, as the legend goes.
He was also something entirely different: a revolutionary who worked with blocks and layers of sound, harmonies adrift in space, jumps and breaks in musical logic, savage shifts of mood.
Nowhere is his double personality more evident than in his remarkable cycle of piano sonatas.
They show the composer at his most complex, most wayward, most searching; they are the blueprints of a new musical order he did not live to build.


Visiting Duke Turns Back Illinois by Way of Alaska
Duke 70, Illinois 65
Trajan Langdon, the freshman from Alaska, scored all 12 of his points in the second half and made 2 clutch free throws and a key pass in the final 70 seconds as No. 6 Duke held on to beat Illinois, 70-65, in Chicago.


In the Japan of the Imagination
VISITORS to Japan almost always want to see two countries: The high-tech, all-electronic Japan that seems perpetually ahead of the rest of the world, and the "real" Japan, villages of rice farmers, fishermen and craftsmen who weave thatched roofs and make tatami mats for the floors of traditional wooden houses.
Of course, the division is never so stark in reality as it is in the mind.
The weekend farmers whom you glimpse tilling the fields on the island of Kyushu, wearing traditional baggy pants and wooden thongs, often have day jobs at a nearby Toshiba plant.
Visitors to the most sacred cities, like Kyoto or Ise, site of one of the country's revered shrines, are often shocked to step off the train and see a tangle of shopping arcades and boxy concrete hotels that make so many once-distinctive Japanese towns virtually indistinguishable.


COOKING
SO many accomplished cooks thank one or another of their parents for inspiration and wisdom that it gets to sound a bit hollow, like gratitude at the Academy Awards.
But James Villas, the estimable food and wine editor of Town &amp; Country magazine, pays homage to his mother with such intensity -- sometimes bordering on defensiveness -- that you have to pay attention.
The vehicle for his encomium is his latest book, MY MOTHER'S SOUTHERN KITCHEN: Recipes and Reminiscences (Macmillan, $25), written with his mother, Martha Pearl Villas, as the secondary author, although she seems to be the dominant character.
Because of Mr.
Villas's penchant for inviting some of the country's foremost food authorities to stop by and sample his mother's wares, her reputation as a terrific cook who doesn't mess with tradition has been broadcast far and wide.


Kotite Tries Not to Feel the Heat of Eagles' Losing Streak
The Eagles fans in Philadelphia are calling for his head.
Rumors are swirling that, regardless of how the team finishes this year, the owner, Jeff Lurie, will dismiss him and replace him with Jimmy Johnson.
The other rumor is that if he is dismissed, he could end up as the coach of the Carolina Panthers, an expansion team.
Rich Kotite hears it all and shrugs. If any of it bothers him, he's not letting on.


List of School Repairs Grows
SCHOOL districts on Long Island are repairing, renovating and adding to their buildings, reversing the trend of a decade ago, when many districts closing buildings because of declining enrollments.
"What has happened over the years is that schools, in an attempt to save money, put off repairs and renovations to building," the president of the Nassau-Suffolk School Boards Association, Dr.
Bruce Brodsky, said.
"You get to a point in your cycle that you simply have to get the work done. You can't ignore your infrastructure."


This Is Cinerama
To the Editor:
Despite the headline "Is 3-D Imax the Future or Another Cinerama?"  [ Nov 13 ] , the Cinerama process is not mentioned in William Grimes's article.
But the implications are that the two processes can be directly compared and that Cinerama was a flop.
Neither is correct.


Countdown; The Rage to Kill Those Who Kill
SENTIMENT in favor of capital punishment is sweeping the land.
This week five executions are scheduled -- three in Texas, one in Missouri and one in Indiana -- meaning that if there are no last-minute stays (always a possibility) the nation will pass yet another milestone in the modern era of the death penalty.
Since the Supreme Court allowed states to resume executions in 1976, in no calendar week have more than four executions taken place.
With states like New York moving to bring back the death penalty and moves afoot to streamline the judicial process so the condemned can no longer drag out their appeals, it seems an appropriate time to ask, once again: Will all this killing do any good?
Will it deter crime?
Is it cost effective?
Or are we simply talking about retribution here -- real Old Testament stuff?


Opportunity Beckons Outside Industrial Park
To the Editor:
The Oct. 30 article, "Industry Fills Tremont Park but Avoids Going Further," may leave your readers with the impression that there is little industrial activity in the area surrounding the Bathgate Industrial Park.
The reality is a mixed environment where many substantial businesses do exist.


The Nation; Pious in Public and Proud of It
AMERICA is a nation where public expressions of religion seem always to be in season.
Across the country, city councils begin the most routine business sessions with an invocation.
Athletes, fresh from the warfare of the playing field, bow heads and join hands in the locker room as they would in a church.
And the vigilance of civil libertarians notwithstanding, creches still pop up on public property at Christmastime.


ALSO INSIDE
MAKING IT WORK 3 A cargo ship may spend days at sea, but, navigationally speaking, the hardest part comes at the very end.
Enter the pilots.
NEW YORKERS &amp; CO. 4 These Japanese come not for business, but to escape Japanese business.
The East Village is the center of their world.
PLAYING IN THE NEIGHBORHOOD 18 Siberian rock in the Village; rail romance at the New York Botanical Garden.
LETTERS 23 The future of Bathgate; guided tours and a thousand points of light.
GOOD EATING 24 A Brooklyn ramble: Williamsburg to Boerum Hill to the Slope, Mediterranean to Caribbean to Andaman Sea.
SOAPBOX 25 Why a writer from Puerto Rico isn't a Puerto Rican writer.
Plus, New York through an infant's eyes.


Ibrahima Diallo, Rebecca Wadsworth
Rebecca Elizabeth Wadsworth, the daughter of Susan and Charles Wadsworth of New York, was married yesterday to Ibrahima Diallo, a son of Aisseta and Amadou Diallo of Abidjan, Ivory Coast.
Dr.
Arthur Dobrin, a leader of the Ethical Culture Society, performed the ceremony at the Essex House in New York.
The bride, 23, is a graduate of Pine Manor College.
Her mother is the director and founder of Young Concert Artists Inc. in New York, an organization that presents new classical musicians.
The bride's father, the pianist, is the founding artistic director of the Chamber Music Society of Lincoln Center and the artistic director of chamber music concerts at the Spoleto Festival USA.


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: December 4, 1994
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
29
INTERVIEW WITH THE VAMPIRE, by Anne Rice. (Ballantine, $6.99.) The 1976 novel that began "The Vampire Chronicles."
2
3
YOU BELONG TO ME, by Johanna Lindsey. (Avon, $6.50.) An arranged marriage between two reluctant partners in 19th-century Russia.
3
12
DISCLOSURE, by Michael Crichton. (Ballantine, $6.99.) An executive who rejected his boss is accused by her of sexual harassment.
4
3
BAD LOVE, by Jonathan Kellerman. (Bantam, $6.50.) The psychologist-detective Alex Delaware tracks a series of violent deaths.
5*
5
MR.
MURDER, by Dean Koontz. (Berkley, $6.99.) A mystery writer's happy family life -- and the madman determined to take his place.
6
10
THE VAMPIRE LESTAT, by Anne Rice. (Ballantine, $6.99.) Eerie carryings-on in a tale ranging from ancient Egypt to the 20th century.
7
1
SLOW WALTZ IN CEDAR BEND, by Robert James Waller. (Warner, $4.99.) From Iowa to India: the romance of a professor and a colleague's wife.
8
2
A DANGEROUS FORTUNE, by Ken Follett. (Island/Dell, $6.99.) A young student's mysterious drowning in Victorian England.
9
25
THE SHIPPING NEWS, by E. Annie Proulx. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $12.) A man mourns his adulterous wife in Newfoundland.
10
10
VANISHED, by Danielle Steel. (Dell, $6.99.) The abduction of a young boy creates a crisis.
11
1
FORGET ME NOT, by Elizabeth Lowell. (Avon, $5.50.) A widow returns to the Wyoming mountains where she lost her husband and finds a new soul mate.
12
14
SMILLA'S SENSE OF SNOW, by Peter Hoeg. (Dell, $6.50.) In Copenhagen and Greenland, a woman investigates a child's death.
13*
11
THE DOOR TO DECEMBER, by Dean Koontz. (Signet, $6.99.) A young girl disappears.
14
6
A HOLIDAY OF LOVE, by Judith McNaught, Jude Deveraux, Arnette Lamb and Jill Barnett. (Pocket, $5.99.) Four romantic stories.
15
23
WITHOUT REMORSE, by Tom Clancy. (Berkley, $6.99.) John Kelly tries to rescue prisoners held in North Vietnam.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
NonFiction
1
11
EMBRACED BY THE LIGHT, by Betty J. Eadie with Curtis Taylor. (Bantam, $5.99.) A woman's near-death experience.
2
10
HAVING OUR SAY, by Sarah L. Delany and A. Elizabeth Delany with Amy Hill Hearth. (Dell, $5.99.) Two black sisters, both of them over 100, reflect on their lives.
3
6
WOULDN'T TAKE NOTHING FOR MY JOURNEY NOW, by Maya Angelou. (Bantam, $5.50.) Essays on life and death, good and evil.
4*
47
CARE OF THE SOUL, by Thomas Moore. (Harper Perennial, $12.) A psychotherapist discusses spirituality and everyday life.
5
578
THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott
Peck. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $10.95.) Inspiration.
6
6
SEE, I TOLD YOU SO, by Rush Limbaugh. (Pocket, $6.99.) More comments on the state of the nation by the talk show host.
7
14
A HISTORY OF GOD, by Karen Armstrong. (Ballantine, $14.) The development of monotheism over the past 4,000 years.
8
45
WHERE ANGELS WALK, by Joan Wester Anderson. (Ballantine, $10.) Stories about angelic intervention in human affairs.
9
4
A MARRIAGE MADE IN HEAVEN ...
OR TOO TIRED FOR AN AFFAIR, by Erma Bombeck. (Harper Paperbacks, $5.99.) Thoughts on 44 years of marriage.
10
94
I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS, by Maya Angelou. (Bantam, $4.99.) The poet's depiction of her childhood and adolescence.
11*
4
ARMORED CAV, by Tom Clancy. (Berkley, $15.) A "guided tour" of an armored cavalry regiment.
12*
10
DAKOTA, by Kathleen Norris. (Houghton Mifflin, $9.95.) A celebration of the changing life and terrain of the Great Plains.
13
6
FURTHER ALONG THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $12.) A discussion of spiritual growth.
14
12
PRIVATE PARTS, by Howard Stern. (Pocket, $6.99.) The memoirs of the radio and television personality.
15
29
MAMA MAKES UP HER MIND, by Bailey White. (Vintage, $10.) Life in a Georgia town.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Advice, How-To and Miscellaneous
1
9
HOMICIDAL PSYCHO JUNGLE CAT, by Bill Watterson. (Andrews &amp; McMeel, $12.95.) A collection of "Calvin and Hobbes" cartoons.
2
10
CHICKEN SOUP FOR THE SOUL, compiled by Jack Canfield and Mark Victor Hansen. (Health Communications, $12.) Stories meant to "open the heart and rekindle the spirit."
3
1
THE CURSE OF MADAME "C," by Gary Larson. (Andrews &amp; McMeel, $8.95.) A collection of "Far Side" cartoons.
4*
194
THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE, by Stephen R. Covey. (Fireside/S&amp;S, $12.) Principles to practice in the pursuit of success.
Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending Nov. 19, at 3,050 bookstores plus wholesalers serving 38,000 other retailers, statistically weighted to represent sales in all such outlets nationwide.
An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.


Iverson Helps Hoyas Win
Georgetown defeated DePaul, 74-68, today behind 31 points from the freshman Allen Iverson.
Iverson controlled the entire game in stretches, but also went cold in spurts, not just missing shots, but turning the ball over as he had done in the loss to Arkansas.
Nevertheless, he scored 16 of the Hoyas' last 20 points.
He got great help from George Butler, the senior guard who scored 19 points, 15 in the second half.


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
Giant Balancing Acts
NO sales guides exist when the business is selling rocks, and only large rocks, like one ton or heavier.
"People come in they say, 'We'd like to have a rock,' " Joseph Cosenza said.
"I say pick it out yourself. Picking a rock is like picking a woman."
Displaying them can be just as tricky.
To entice people to shop at High Farms, his rock-selling business on the corner of Clay Pitts and Elwood Roads in East Northport, Mr.
Cosenza turns his rocks into sculptures.
With the help of an associate, Raymond Schleider, he balances the rocks, one atop another, making formations that cause car drivers to do double takes.


Past Lessons Help Pataki In Preparing For Power
As incumbency looms and George E. Pataki roams the Capitol's backstage trying to gauge the best and the worst of what he has won, the Governor-elect is already applying some hard-learned lessons of his first 25 years in politics.
These begin simply enough with his small-town talent honed as Peekskill's Mayor for studiously remembering people and reaching out by name, particularly to some of the shyer state workers in the marbled office warrens as he passes through these days on the way to see their nervous bosses.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-27  STORY OF A POLICY SHIFT  The shift in American policy in Bosnia came about as American officials realized that the effort for further NATO air strikes was failing and recognized the need to turn more toward diplomacy. 1  BATTLE FOR A BOSNIAN TOWN  Fighting continued in a town in northwest Bosnia as Serbs and their renegade Muslim allies pressed an attack and Bosnian Army troops put up fierce resistance. 22


The Executive Computer; 3 Ways to Be Unplugged Right Now
THE Federal Communications Commission will begin auctioning off pieces of the nation's airwaves this week, a process that is expected to lead to a new generation of digital wireless voice and data "personal communications services" for millions of people with hand-held devices.
But it will take at least two years, and probably much longer, before people will actually be able to use these new services.
Yet even now, users of portable computers have several reasonable options for conducting their business wirelessly.
There are at least three competing services that use different types of transmission equipment, software protocols and modems.
But each one provides similar data communications capabilities.


Q. &amp; A.
Actions of A Co-op On Probate Q What are the responsibilities of the board of directors of a cooperative or a condominium housing corporation under circumstances where a sole resident shareholder has died, and there is no clear indication as to who has inherited the apartment?


The Myth of 'Negative Stories'
Michael and Arianna Huffington emerged last week to explain their $28 million defeat in the California Senate race.
A turning point, Representative Huffington said, was the "week or two we suffered a lot of negative publicity" as a result of the press "ganging up" on the candidate and his wife.
Mr.
Huffington's critique bears closer examination.
Over the past year, a kind of linguistic pollution has crept into the American political discourse.
Candidates and their minders have twisted the language to define a category of "negative stories," the publication of which is inherently unfair.
In fact, when candidates and political professionals talk about "negative stories," they are usually referring to journalism that gives readers information that the campaigns wish they did not have.


Gale M. Barlow, Thomas Hagele
Gale Marklove Barlow, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Ronald Clifford Barlow of New Canaan, Conn., was married yesterday to Thomas Michael Hagele, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas Olein Hagele of Rye, N.Y.
The Rev.
Richard Mayberry, an Episcopal priest, officiated at Christ's Church in Rye.
The Rev.
Leslie Ivers, a Roman Catholic priest, took part in the ceremony.
Mrs.
Hagele, 31, graduated from St.
Lawrence University and is a vice president of product management in Brooklyn for the Chase Manhattan Bank.
Her father retired as the president of the Morehouse-Barlow Company, a publisher of religious books in Wilton, Conn.


Nov. 27-Dec. 3: Staying in the Navy; Victory for Gay Sailor Leaves Issue Unresolved
It may only be a matter of time before the Supreme Court decides whether it is constitutional for the military to oust gay soldiers and sailors, but it will not be in the case of Petty Officer Keith Meinhold.
Last week, the Clinton Administration decided not to challenge an appeals court decision that had blocked the Navy from discharging Petty Officer Meinhold, who said in a 1992 television interview that he is gay.


Jessica Ballantyne and William Gerber
Jessica Marie Ballantyne, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Edward L. Ballantyne of Suffern, N.Y., was married yesterday to William Alan Gerber, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Lewis Gerber of Wyncote, Pa.
The Rev.
Carlson Gerdau, an Episcopal minister, performed the nondenominational ceremony at the Hotel Thayer in West Point, N.Y.
The bride, 26, graduated from Wesleyan University, as did the bridegroom.
She was until recently a publicity specialist at Basic Books, the publishing company, in New York.
Her father is the head of the copy desk of the financial news section of The New York Times.


HAND DELIVERED
Baubles, bangles, Burmese rubies -- just in time for the holidays.


5 Brothers and Sisters Die in a House Fire in Hempstead, L.I.
A fire swept through a wood-frame house in Hempstead, L.I., yesterday, trapping five young brothers and sisters who died from smoke inhalation and burns as their parents desperately tried to reach them, officials said.
The fire also injured the children's mother, father and grandmother, and four volunteer firefighters, all of whom were taken to hospitals.


Wall Street; Where Shoplifting Bolsters Profits
AH the sweet sounds of Christmas.
The merry music in the local mall.
The kids cooing at Santa.
The ho-ho-hos, the bells, the -- ZAP.
Oh yes, we almost forgot: the crooks getting nailed as they attempt to slither out the door with unpaid merchandise.


How This Ship Came In
AT 10 minutes before 7 last Sunday night, a driving rainstorm moved across New Jersey, throwing out 35 mile-an-hour winds and pushing slowly east.
At the same time, an incongruous figure in pink shirt, paisley tie, wool coat and leather-bottomed shoes leaped from the pitching deck of a small launch in the Atlantic and attached himself to a rope ladder.
The ladder was hanging from the side of the Pol Baltic, a Greek-flag container ship out of Baltimore, and Capt.
James R. Canvin, harbor pilot, was going to work.


Residential Resales
In the following reports, the "listed at" price is the asking price when negotiations began that ended in the sale.
Time on market is from most recent listing to contract.
MANHATTAN


Avis and National Offer Headlights for Daytime
Avis and National Car Rental are phasing in day running headlights as a standard feature.
When the car's ignition is turned on, the lights come on at 80 percent of full power.
Studies in the United States, Canada and Scandinavia have shown that using headlights at all times reduces two-car accidents; day running lights have been required on Canadian cars since the 1990 model year.


Mixing It Up: Five Easy Pieces
Two designer successes -- the Chanel two-piece salt-and-pepper tweed dress and jacket and Oscar de la Renta's three-piece paisley ensemble -- suggest the multiple uses of investment dressing.
Chanel's dress can be worn on its own, or the jacket can be mixed with separates for a more nonchalant style (bottom center).
Below, the outfit is worn as it was shown on the runway.
The paisley ensemble by de la Renta (above), includes a three-quarter-length coat trimmed in fake fur.
It is worn above with the matching jacket and pleated skirt.
At top right is the fake-leopard-trimmed version with a sweater and skirt.
At bottom right, the suit is worn without the coat.
Other ways of wearing it include mixing the paisley pieces with solid-color skirts and sweaters.


The Kremlin Asserts Itself By U.N. Veto
Russia's veto of a United Nations resolution on the Balkan war on Friday night was a sharp reminder that Moscow insists on playing a major role in defining the post-cold-war security order.
It was only the second time that Russia used its veto power in the Security Council since the collapse of the Soviet Union three years ago, and it was the first such veto since the war in the former Yugoslavia began.


Resortica
The following is made up of bits and pieces of text taken verbatim from travel brochures and guides to exotic vacation spots.
The excerpts have been arranged to create a description of the resort of resorts, the ultimate destination, but the text is real.
Only the location names have been changed -- to "Resortica."
GREAT IDEA FOR A ONE-WEEK vacation!
Lake Como?
Majorca? the Algarve?
Wrong.
Resortica.
In these surroundings is much of interest to see together with things to do and much to eat in fine style!
Nature, experience -- this is possible in Resortica!
It's an example you want?
Well, here we are then.
You stay at the Romantic Hotel Santis -- an elegant portrayal of hospitality.
Sit on the beach.
Study the tides.
Throw your shoes.
Feasting is followed by dancing and it is this that enthralls both the participant and the onlooker.
Browse in our shop and small museum of footwear.


Elizabeth Glaser Dies at 47; Crusader for Pediatric AIDS
Elizabeth Glaser, who waged a tireless campaign to draw attention to pediatric AIDS after she unknowingly passed the disease on to her daughter and son, died yesterday at her home in Santa Monica, Calif.
She was 47.
The cause was complications from AIDS, said Josh Baran, a spokesman for the family.


POSTINGS: For 800,000 Passengers a Year; A Bridgeport Ferry Terminal With a View
For years, most passengers waiting in Bridgeport, Conn., for the Bridgeport and Port Jefferson Ferry from Long Island have sat in their cars.
There was no terminal in which they could seek shelter.
But there soon will be.
Construction is to begin this month on a two-story, 6,500-square-foot Bridgeport ferry terminal building, said Edward Oppel, executive director of the Bridgeport Port Authority.
Work is scheduled to be completed by July 4, Mr.
Oppel said.


Peace Moves In the Mideast Cheer Turkey
As they survey the stirrings of peace in the Middle East, Turkish diplomats are pondering whether their own country might not be poised to revive some of its former glory as a regional power.
Yet when Prime Minister Tansu Ciller voyaged through the region in November, she quickly discovered the kind of powder keg that could confront Turkey.
An impromptu visit to Libya inspired Western worries that she was legitimizing Col.
Muammar el-Qaddafi; in Palestinian-run Gaza she raised eyebrows and ire by speaking of Israel as the "promised land" of the Jews, and she provoked a furor on the Israeli right by calling on Palestinian leaders in East Jerusalem because the visit was viewed as symbolic recognition of a would-be Palestinian state.


SUNDAY, December 4, 1994; Getting Older
Turning 100 isn't what it used to be.
Once, it meant a guaranteed birthday greeting from Willard Scott, the weatherman on the "Today" show, who squeezes in centennial birthday salutes between news of camellia festivals and low-pressure systems.
No longer.


Business Diary: November 27- December 2
THE ECONOMY For Better or Worse, a New Era in World Trade  The world was watching last week as American politicians did their odd little rain dances on that endlessly discussed world trade pact.
President Clinton called the old, humbled Congress back for a bittersweet farewell to deal with the issue, and after he pacified Bob Dole with some last-minute tinkering, the House and then the Senate gave their overwhelming blessings.
Now this nation's main trading partners, like Japan and Europe, can act, too -- they were waiting for Washington.
Then what?
Will the pact, as Mr.
Clinton said, keep America "moving forward" to "create more high-wage jobs"?
Or will it, as some critics contend, allow a global group to undercut American laws if they are seen as harmful to trade?
The pact isn't perfect, said George Mitchell in his farewell.
But "these are the only trade partners we have. We don't trade with Mars."


Thai Rice Barge Reborn As Luxury Cruise Ship
Next month, a 52-foot-long remodeled rice barge will begin plying Thailand's Chao Phraya River for one- or two-night luxury cruises between Bangkok and Ayutthaya.
The remodeled barge, the Mahohra Song, with Asian art, Persian rugs, and decks and walls of teak, padua and mahogany, will be operated by the Marriott Royal Garden Riverside hotel in Bangkok.
There are four air-conditioned staterooms each with bath, a large lounge, a dining area with open bar and a forward sun deck.


Playing And Paying: Revel With A Cause
IT was, the stockbroker said, his first visit to a topless nightclub.
He was sitting there in the dark with a lot of other men, drinking and staring up at the stage, as women with cash stuffed in their garters shimmied under colored lights.
After a while, he added some bills of his own.
And he grinned, thinking of how he would explain things at home.
"I'll say, 'Honey, I was at a charity event,' " said the broker, who gave his name as Anthony Charles.
The name may have been a phony, but the story was true.


Laura A. Poler, Michael Ward
Laura Alford Poler and Michael DeCourcy Ward, management consultants, were married yesterday at Old South Church in Boston.
The Rev.
James W. Crawford, a minister of the United Church of Christ, performed the ceremony, in which the Rev.
Edward O. Miller Jr., an Episcopal priest, took part.
The bride works at Arthur D. Little Inc. in Cambridge, Mass.
The bridegroom works at Bain &amp; Company in Boston.


Medicine Woman


Bergen Catholic Is Upset by St. Peter's for Title
Fred Stengel, the coach of New Jersey's No. 1-ranked high school team and the No. 5-rated football squad in the nation, knew his Bergen Catholic team might be in for a long afternoon even before the Parochial Group 4 championship game with St.
Peter's began at Giants Stadium today.
"I looked over at the size of them during warm-ups and thought that we might be in trouble," said Stengel, singling out the 6-foot-4-inch, 290-pound tackle William O'Donnell and the 6-5, 270-pound lineman John Horsfield.
"They knocked us off the ball all afternoon."


Neighbors Say State Can't Save Beaches by Selling Off Shoal
At a time when the badly eroded beaches of Coney Island are undergoing a costly replenishment, neighborhood residents are fighting to keep a state agency from trying to sell off a chunk of the ocean floor that some experts say might protect those same beaches from further damage.
"I saw what the ocean can do on Dec. 11 two years ago," said Howard Feuer, the district manager of Community Board 11, recalling the storm that battered much of the shoreline.
"If they dredge this stuff, that could mean that a northeaster could move right down the Narrows into the Verrazano Bridge."


This Slow Starter Is Now Hot Property
HE DID NOT COME OUT OF nowhere, exactly.
But 10 years ago, most American concertgoers would have drawn a blank if asked to identify Mariss Jansons, the Latvian conductor.
At the time, his best-known work was a recording of Tchaikovsky's Fifth Symphony with the Oslo Philharmonic, which he has directed since 1979 and which is celebrating its 75th anniversary with an American tour, including concerts on Wednesday and Thursday evenings at Carnegie Hall.
That Tchaikovsky disk, acclaimed by the British press, was largely overlooked in the United States.
But since 1986, when EMI began recording Mr.
Jansons and promoting him as a hot property, he has made great headway on both sides of the Atlantic.
He has made 18 recordings for EMI, ranging from standard repertory to music of Arthur Honegger and Johan Svendsen.
Besides the Oslo Philharmonic and the St.
Petersburg Philharmonic, of which he is associate principal conductor, EMI has recorded him with the London Philharmonic and Philharmonia Orchestras, the Royal Concertgebouw Orchestra of Amsterdam and the Philadelphia Orchestra, and has projects scheduled with the Vienna and Berlin Philharmonics.


Walters's 3-Pointer Doesn't Fall, But Nets Do
"Game slippage," Rex Walters called it.
The Nets shooting guard used the terminology to explain his recent lack of offensive prowess, including the errant 3-point attempt with 5.8 seconds to play tonight that would have tied the game.
The Nets know whereof Walters speaks.


Born to Be Wild. Scratch That. Born to Be Mild.
JERRY RUBIN'S death last week must have reminded the generation that came of age in the 1960's not only of its own mortality, but also of the distance that some of its members have traveled from the shining ideals they once professed.
Mr.
Rubin was the antic, self-appointed revolutionary of the 1960's, who with his Yippie sidekick Abbie Hoffman pricked the pomposity of more than a few American institutions, showering the floor of the New York Stock Exchange with dollar bills and campaigning to elect a pig president.
But by middle age, Mr.
Rubin was promoting networking parties for young professionals and a powdered beverage called Wow.
He even worked briefly on Wall Street.


Reassuring an Insecure Europe
After the disarray over Bosnia, the national security crowd in Washington seems to be seized with the question of how to save NATO.
They should instead be asking how to ease the insecurity in Eastern Europe and Russia.
To do so, they need to be clear about the wellsprings of that insecurity.
The newly freed nations need political and economic reassurance, not military alliance, and a helping hand to bring them into the community of democratic nations.


Fashion


Law and Mortar
New Yorkers tend to look back to a misty era when life in the city was better.
For some, the golden years were that brief time after World War II when you could actually take an evening stroll in Central Park.
For others, it was Eloise at the Plaza or the Bronx before Robert Moses.
Edith Wharton deplored the "hideous" chocolate-colored brownstone of the 1870's and Henry James thought the good times were pretty much over by 1906 when the skyscraper, a "monster of the mere market," went up.
Two recent novels, "The Alienist" by Caleb Carr and "The Waterworks" by E. L. Doctorow, seem to take perverse solace in the fact that city life in the Gilded Age was even darker and more depraved than it is now.
Their New York is more like Defoe's London during the Great Plague, with poisoned sewers spewing into the streets and city wagons loaded with corpses.
The truth is, life in New York has always been something of a mixed bag.
And to survive it, you need to know what to look at and, just as importantly, what to ignore.


Road Building and Its Ripples
REBUILDING roads has costs beyond the financial.
In Coram a crew has disturbed an area around two historic sites at the intersection of Routes 112 and 25.
In Stony Brook residents protested when a plan to add turning lanes at the State University of New York threatened a site of geological interest.
And in Smithtown crews killed centuries-old trees while rebuilding the bridge carrying Routes 25 and 25A over the Nissequogue River.
"We are losing our historic areas," Planning Director Frank DeRubeis of Smithtown said.
"It's a constant fight. From the highway man's point of view, we are naive. They want to build good roads, and the trees get in the way."


A Noteworthy Collection
This selection of paperbacks is from the New &amp; Noteworthy column since the 1994 summer reading issue.
ACROSS THE BRIDGE: Stories By Mavis Gallant.
Carroll &amp; Graf, $10.95.
New tales by a master, most set in Paris and Montreal.


Writer's Death in Iran Calls for an Inquiry
To the Editor:
The announcement by the Government of Iran that the prominent writer and satirist Ali Akbar Saidi Sirjani had died of a heart attack in detention ("Leading Dissident Writer in Iran Dies After 8 Months in Detention," news article, Nov. 28) requires further clarification.


The 1995 Season, in Three Not-So-Easy Steps
When Commissioner Gary Bettman locked out National Hockey League players, he said he didn't want to see happen to hockey what had happened to major league baseball -- the season interrupted, the post-season wiped out.
Now Bettman and the N.H.L. stand not much more than 10 days away from losing the entire season.
It will be in the next 10 days, too, that major league baseball and its striking players will find out about their season -- the 1995 season.


Elisa J. Lefkowitz, Kenneth Greenberg
Elisa Jean Lefkowitz, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Elliot J. Lefkowitz of Scarsdale, N.Y., is to be married today to Kenneth Greenberg, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Ernest E. Greenberg of Tappan, N.Y.
Rabbi Arnold S. Turetsky is to perform the ceremony at the Essex House in New York.
The bride, 28, is a lawyer who practices with her father in New York.
She graduated cum laude from the University of Michigan and received her law degree from Yeshiva University.


D. H. Sternberg, Michael Beloff
Deborah Helene Sternberg, the daughter of Julius and Pauline Sternberg of Cos Cob, Conn., is to be married today to Michael Evan Beloff, the son of Herb Beloff of Bayside, Queens, and Natalie Douenias of Manhattan.
Rabbi David Holtz is to perform the ceremony at Tappan Hill in Tarrytown, N.Y.
The bride, 29, is an associate at Pittleman &amp; Associates, a legal search firm in New York.
She graduated from Bryn Mawr College and received an M.B.A. degree from New York University.
Her father, who is retired, was the director of budget and payroll at Baruch College of the City University of New York.
Her mother is the principal of Greenacres Elementary School in Scarsdale, N.Y.


Congressional Memo; Strong Speaker, Strong House? One Doesn't Necessarily Follow the Other
The way Newt Gingrich is consolidating power, he is about to become the strongest Speaker of the House since Thomas Brackett Reed and Joseph G. Cannon around the turn of the 20th century and possibly even since the great Henry Clay in the early days of the Republic.
The main effect may not be felt in legislative productivity.
That, historians say, has risen and fallen over the years with little regard to the strength or weakness of the Speaker.


Ruffles and Flourishes
Celebrations of friendship, good will and good works.


Conversations / Joe Slovo; Apartheid's Fading Communist Foe Wins Mortgages for the Masses
PROBABLY there is no living white man in South Africa as widely revered or as fiercely reviled as Joe Slovo, chairman of the South African Communist Party, former guerrilla commander, the first white elected to the African National Congress leadership, and now the Minister of Housing in the Cabinet of President Nelson Mandela.
To the downtrodden, who have named squatter camps in his honor, he was Mr.
Mandela's white right hand in the conquest of apartheid.
To the whites who presided over apartheid he was an agent of satanic revolution, a man more alarming than Mr.
Mandela himself, because Mr.
Slovo was a devoted client of the Soviet Union -- and a traitor to his skin.


All the World On Tiny Disks
WHAT will a CD-ROM do for the passionate traveler on your list that a good guidebook can't -- besides bringing on an attack of technophobe anxiety? (We're not talking about your cyber-speaking 19-year-old nephew.)
I looked at two from the point of view of the marginally computer literate: PICTURE ATLAS OF THE WORLD (DOS; Macintosh and Windows available early 1995; National Geographic Society, $99) and ADVENTURES (Windows, Deep River Publishing, $49.95).
After a brief period of stage fright, I actually found the process fun, a kind of visual game-with-mouse that was easy to use. (But when the National Geographic's DOS version suddenly disappeared from the screen, I needed a techie to help me out.)


With 400 Pieces, Aeroflot Is a Passenger Puzzle
THE biggest problem with Aero flot these days besides discomfort, chaos, unpredictable schedules, poor security and overriding uncertainty about safety -- is that no one really has a very good handle on what Aeroflot actually is.
The Soviet Union's Aeroflot was by far the world's largest airline, serving both domestic and international routes, until the end of 1992, when the empire died.
With the division of the country, regionalization and privatization, the old Aeroflot has been broken up into nearly 400 separate companies.
There is only one company still legally named Aeroflot, Aeroflot Russian International Airlines, which does not fly domestically.
It had a spotless accident record for eight years until a pilot's son getting an impromptu flying lesson crashed a new Airbus A-310 into a Siberian hill in March, killing 75 people.


Flavors of Santa Fe Spice Up East End
SANTA FE JUNCTION is a standout.
Its scrumptious Southwestern food is a rarity on the East End, where trendy Tuscan and cutting-edge seafood spots reign.
Rare, too, is the restaurant's unusual late-fall opening.
A vast majority of Hampton restaurants make their debuts around Memorial Day.
Then, they are quickly besieged by summer crowds that do not let up till Labor Day.
Santa Fe Junction's late October arrival gives it an opportunity to fine tune its service and food over the winter.


Nov. 27-Dec. 3; Remembering


And She Also Knew How To Paint
BEING A LADY MAY HAVE gone out of style with white gloves and virginity, but once there was an art to it, and Art was then a ladylike accomplishment.
As early as the 16th century, Baldassare Castiglione's "Courtier" recommended that women learn to draw and paint.
High-born ladies, even royal ones, did.
Such notables as the Queen of Bohemia in the 17th century and Mme. de Pompadour in the 18th displayed their accomplishments in this line, and a good drawing style became a virtue on the order of a talent for embroidery or music.
By the 19th century, when drawing had become such an accepted part of a gentlewoman's education that instruction could be obtained from a drawing manual, George Eliot thought feminine piano playing and painting were just too, too ladylike; she referred to them in "Middlemarch" as "small tinkling and smearing."


In Sharp Anecdotal Relief, a Regional Tale
HISTORICALLY SPEAKING, THE American "black experience" is like any other American experience, but different.
From the start, under slavery, black family structure was imperiled, education was self-education, and spiritual traditions had to go underground to survive.
Many remarkable artists are working hard today to connect that history to the present, as exhibitions like the Whitney Museum's "Black Male: Representations of Masculinity" suggest.
The photographer Carrie Mae Weems is one of the strongest voices in that show, and a midcareer retrospective at the Institute of Contemporary Art in Philadelphia through Jan. 8. confirms that she is an artist of unusual interest.


Gregorian Chants
To the Editor: I read with interest your Q &amp; A item on Gregorian chant at the abbey in Solesmes (Aug. 14), since I was planning to visit the abbey on one of my tours of French Romanesque architecture.
Now having been there and heard a Mass sung in Gregorian chant, I feel admirers of medieval music and architecture should know about Fontgombault Abbey, 38 miles east of Poitiers, which I visited several years ago.
The Fontgombault monks belong to the same Benedictine community as Solesmes, but the architecture is much better, since it has a superb well-restored 11th-century Romanesque church far superior to the uninteresting church and ugly 19th-century abbey at Solesmes.
In these surroundings, the Gregorian mass at Fontgombault was more impressive than at Solesmes, even though Solesmes was where the Gregorian revival began 160 years ago.


Beneath an Odd House In Greenport
In the interest of accuracy in reporting I feel obliged to correct some glaring errors in "Greenport of Yore in Tour of 8 Houses"  [ Oct. 9 ] .
While I cannot vouch for the veracity of the description of all the houses in the article I must correct you about the "History of the White Lions Inn." No one by the name of S. L. Lyons ever lived there.


HENRY ROLLINS, PUNK MOGUL
I don't understand why Rollins's self-absorbed, too-busy-to-brush-his-teeth-in-the-bathroom life style warrants an article.
Having read it, however, I hope for his sake, or, at least, for the sake of his credibility as an artist, that his account of how "Ode to MTV" was composed is the accurate one.
Otherwise I'm expected to believe that this blather was the result of "a lot of hard work," the assessment offered by his fellow "poet" Bob Holman.
In the confines of MTV, I don't doubt that such juvenile drivel passes for creativity.
But surely there's more to Rollins than "Oh MTV Unplugged." Yes?
JOHN C. WESTROPP Baltimore


Grants Cheer Hudson River Museum
HAPPY shrieks rang out of the administrative offices of the Hudson River Museum here one recent morning, when staff members learned that the museum, which is celebrating its 75th anniversary, had received a planning grant of $27,600 from the National Endowment for the Humanities.
The grant, staff members said, will help the museum mount an interdisciplinary show in 1996 about the railroad's transformation of the county.
The news followed word of two other prestigious awards.
The largest, announced in July, is a $357,000 Federal grant -- to be matched by $80,000 from the city of Yonkers -- for further restoration of the Glenview Mansion, the 19th-century villa where museum history unfolded for 45 years.
Now connected to the main building by a walkway, the mansion held the museum's displays -- including a stuffed circus elephant and a live alligator -- from 1924 until the new wing was opened in 1969.


A Late Bloomer Is Battling Time to Play in PGA
If he can make it all the way through to Monday, he will be the oldest man ever to get through the Qualifying School for the regular PGA Tour.
Right now, he looks it.
He has the flu.
A rubber sleeve is pulled tight on his right elbow for the tendinitis.
Antibiotics and anti-inflammatories are in his golf bag, next to the hot pack.
Back in the condo, his portable transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulator -- a T.E.N.S. unit -- sits on the table.
"It is hell," Bruce Fleisher said in a raspy voice, "getting old."


Egypt to Hang 2 for Killing Tourists
An Egyptian military court today condemned two Muslim militants to hang for killing two German tourists and two Egyptians at a resort in September.
The verdicts, part of a Government crackdown on the Muslim militant movement, raised the number sentenced to death since 1992 to 60.
The military court sentenced 14 other men to terms ranging from 5 to 15 years.
Five are fugitives.


Taking a Sharper Look at Lawn Care
IF the lawn has not had its dose of fertilizer this fall, there is no time to waste.
The task should be done promptly.
Tradition has it that lawn fertilizer should be spread by the end of November.
But the recent spate of mild weather has fooled many gardeners.
Lawn-keeping researchers believe that one late fall application is all that the lawn should need for an entire year.
They say that this sort of application economy goes a long way toward lawn health -- but also keeps excess fertilizer out of the water system since less is lost to the environment through runoff.


'Quality of Life' Officer Is Beaten by Youths in Village
A police officer assigned to his department's effort to improve the quality of life in Greenwich Village was assaulted by youths early yesterday morning as he approached his car after getting off work, the police said.
Officer Gregory Chieu, 27, had just finished his 6 P.M. to 2 A.M. shift at the Sixth Precinct when he walked to his car, which was parked at the corner of Christopher and Hudson Streets, Police Commissioner William J. Bratton said yesterday.


BENNINGTON MEANS BUSINESS
Leonard O. Newmark's Nov. 13 letter to the editor may have generated a misconception about Bennington College.
The cover photograph for Mark Edmundson's article "Bennington Means Business" (Oct. 23) does not appear in any college publication, but was commissioned by The New York Times Magazine.
The photographs in our college publications, by contrast, offer a fair and accurate representation of Bennington's students -- a wonderfully diverse group if ever there was one.
ELENA RUOCCO BACHRACH Dean of Admissions and the Freshman Year  Bennington College Bennington, Vt.


Merchants Hope and Shoppers Wait and See
DESPITE all the fanfare late last month in stores around the county marking the official start of another holiday buying season, Sandra Parada and other shoppers like her paid little heed.
"I'm biding my time," said Mrs.
Parada, who was unmoved by the Christmas music and sales promotions in stores along Central Avenue, where she was shopping with her children, Dariush, 5, and Nicole, 7.


European Federalism: A la Carte Or Prix Fixe
France's presidential election campaign is barely under way, but this country's place in Europe is already emerging as a central issue, with the outcome of the vote certain to influence the pace of Europe's unity drive through the end of the century.
Under President Francois Mitterrand, France has been a key promoter of regional integration.
Mr.
Mitterrand himself helped design the Treaty on European Union, which was signed in the Dutch town of Maastricht three years ago and set the stage for turning the 12-nation bloc into a federation.


Death and the Matriarch


Garden Gifts, Top of the Line to Bottom of the Pot
INSIDE the Smith &amp; Hawken store in SoHo last week, I felt like a ravenous German shepherd in a room full of smoked hams.
But it would have been hard to pick up a $795 teak garden bench in my teeth and run out the spade-and-fork-handled doors.
The store, at 394 West Broadway, south of Spring Street, opened Nov. 25.
It sells the same birdbaths, antique pots, topiaries and British Wellies pictured in the Smith &amp; Hawken catalogue.
But somehow, sitting in a $395 Giverny chair (it's supposedly like Monet's favorite bench at Giverny) is more dangerous than just looking at a pinup.


RUNNING LATE
I hope Andrea Todd's "Hers" column "Running Late" (Nov. 6) was not meant to inspire women runners to adopt the sort of gratuitous, risky defiance she conveys to her readers.
She makes the error of equating sensible caution with self-victimization.
I am a female runner, and I arrange to run during the day not because I am terrified but because I am smart.
New York is dangerous after dark, for men, women and children.
To face the facts and deal with them intelligently might be a wiser approach to the problem of safety in this city.
ELIZABETH R. FRANCIS Bronx


Newest Sport on Campus: Steal That Research Lab!
Far removed from an athletic field, Yale University and the University of Texas went head to head last month in a battle of prestige and standing.
Texas won.
The prize: an internationally renowned laboratory that studies newly discovered viruses and that had been at Yale for 29 years.
Texas lured away the lab and its two leading researchers by arguing that they would fit perfectly with the tropical-diseases laboratory at the university's medical school in Galveston.


Streetscapes/Readers' Questions; An 1896 Sliver in SoHo and a Golden AT&amp;T Statue
This is another in a series of columns answering questions from readers about New York's changing streetscapes.
A Sliver in SoHo
Q.
I always admire some facet of the "sliver building" at the southwest corner of Broome Street and Broadway.
The AIA Guide does not list it.
Who was the architect? . . .
Paul Claudato, Roosevelt Island.


Little Shop of Snacks
For hungry guests who want something lighter and quicker than a restaurant meal or room service, Hyatt Hotels is testing a new alternative, Sarah's Pantry.
This convenience store stocked with snacks, coffee and light take-out meals, recently opened at Chicago's Hyatt Regency O'Hare.
And eventually Hyatt plans to install light-bite stores at both its business and resort hotels.


For Arbitragers, the Game Is Afoot Once Again . . . but Rewards May Not Be as Sweet as in the 80's
LAST month's collapse of Conseco Inc.'s bid to acquire Kemper Corporation is the kind of event that professional speculators in takeover stocks dread.
Many of these high-stakes investors, known in the business as risk arbitragers, bought Kemper stock at prices as high as $60 a share, hoping to make a killing by the time the deal closed at Conseco's offering price of $67.
But when Conseco withdrew its offer on November 21 because it couldn't muster the financing, Kemper's stock plunged, closing Friday at $40.25 a share.


Morocco
To the Editor: After reading Ty Ahmad-Taylor's article, "Encountering Morocco Head-On" (Nov. 6), I am reminded of Larry Blyden, a Broadway actor and game show panelist, who died in an auto accident while on a Moroccan vacation many years ago.
For the most part, roads are safe and well maintained in Morocco.
One should not, however, expect hospital care to be as sanitary and efficient as in the United States.
You are in a developing country with different standards of cleanliness.
Mr.
Ahmad-Taylor is lucky to be alive.
ELLIOT J. MORITZ  Chestnut Ridge, N.Y.


St. John's Uses Victory As Confidence Builder
This was just the kind of tuneup St. John's Coach Brian Mahoney was hoping for.
With the Big East opener against Pittsburgh just two days away, the Red Storm needed to have the kind of game against Niagara University that would build confidence as well as polish skills.


NEW YORKERS &amp; CO
Under Pressure, Bank To Open South Bronx Branch
Last summer, when Dime Bancorp and Anchor Bancorp announced their plans to merge, Inner City Press/Community on the Move, a nonprofit organization based in the Bronx, took a familiar stance.
Charging that the two banks had failed to serve residents properly in the Bronx, Inner City moved to block the merger, relying on the Community Reinvestment Act, which compels banks to lend in the communities they serve.


Rebel Muslims Advance, Backed by Serbs


Gifts to Park Below the Tree
"You know," my son said the other day, "talking to my friends, it seems a lot of car guys have gotten into computers in a big way."
I hadn't thought about it, but he was right.
A lot of us who used to talk about dual exhausts and ponies under the hood now lust for faster processors, 16 megs of RAM and gigabyte hard drives.
It's a natural progression, and computers have long since found their way into automobiles and into our lives.


Accessible Broadway: The Cheap Seats
Tickets to Broadway shows may cost $65 or more these days, but reduced-price tickets for many shows are available at the two TKTS booths -- the main one in Duffy Square at 47th Street and Broadway, and the satellite booth at 2 World Trade Center.
Tickets for selected shows are sold, beginning at 3 P.M. on the day of performance for evening shows and at 10 A.M. for Wednesday and Saturday matinees, noon for matinees on Sunday.
Tickets cost either 50 percent or 75 percent of box-office prices, determined by the producers, plus a $2.50 service charge per ticket.
Only cash and traveler's checks are accepted.
Information: (212) 768-1818.


Nov. 27-Dec. 3; A Gene Offers Food for Thought
In this, the fattest season of the year, science offers up the best possible excuse for gluttony: a gene with the plain-vanilla, tact-free name of "obese."
Studying a strain of mice that can grow up to five times the mass of the average mouse, Dr.
Jeffrey M. Friedman of the Rockefeller University in New York and his colleagues have discovered the genetic basis of the bloat.


Want to Know Why Pizza Beats Steak?
THE Red Lion Ristorante on Route 7 in Ridgefield, reopened after a kitchen fire and seven-year hiatus, now has an open, airy and light interior.
Roomy booths have old-fashioned fringed lampshades and green marble-top tables.
A central dining gazebo, outlined in lights and hung with plants, is reminiscent of a Mississippi riverboat lounge.
The menu has also changed from one that was mostly steaks, chops and seafood of lesser interest than the entertainment to Italian with an emphasis on pizzas and pastas, with a few meat and chicken dishes and seafood specials.


Corrections
A picture caption on Nov. 20 with an article about Koch Industries misstated the approximate date of a photograph of the Koch brothers at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
It was taken in the late 1960's, not the late 1950's.


Three Killed in Collision With Garbage Truck


A Culinary Ramble Around Brooklyn
BRAWTA CAFE (718) 855-5515; 105 Bond Street, Boerum Hill; $; no credit cards


There is Life Outside Manhattan
To the Editor:
In "Still in the Dark on Diversity" (At Work, Nov. 6), Dr.
Joanne Miller says: "If it's not happening in New York, it's probably not happening anywhere." I am the county attorney for Hillsborough County, Fla., and be assured that diversity is happening in my office in Tampa.
I have six supervisors -- one white woman; one black, Haitian woman; one African-American man; one Hispanic man, and two white men.
I am a white woman -- the first female county attorney in Hillsborough County and the youngest ever to hold my office.
More than 50 percent of the lawyers on my staff are women.


Nov. 27-Dec. 3: A Victory for Clinton; Senate and House Agree To Ease Curbs on Trade Around the World
If President Clinton can claim one resounding success over the last two years, it is in economic foreign policy.
First came the North American Free Trade Agreement with Canada and Mexico and then, at American urging, a regular summit of the Asian economic powers.
Last week was the biggest, and longest-brewing, success of all: passage of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade, a 124-nation deal for freer trade -- there is a long way to go to free trade -- around the world.
The deal cuts tariffs dramatically, including those for farm products, every country's sacred cow.
It protects patents and copyrights and creates a worldwide trade policeman, the World Trade Organization.
It was the W.T.O. that nearly undid the deal: People as different as Ralph Nader, Patrick Buchanan and Ross Perot said the organization was a new global bureaucracy that could seek changes in any American law that it deems a barrier to trade.


Stepping Out, Into the Big Time
WITH the roar of 75,606 football fans blasting in his ears, Steve Hubbard of East Northport raced onto the field at Giants Stadium.
The green New York Jets cap on his head matched the green Astroturf at his feet.
But colors blurred for Mr.
Hubbard as he tried to take in the surroundings as he took to the 35-yard line.
Ever since his days on the football team at Northport High School, Mr.
Hubbard had dreamed of being part of a professional game.
And what a game it was.
The Jets were playing for first place in the American Football Conference East division.
Their game against the Miami Dolphins was the biggest of the season.
But not a Jet was in sight as Mr.
Hubbard ran onto the field last Sunday.


From Armory to Boudoir; Cheerleaders' Exorcism
UPTOWN -- Brendan Gill, who turned 80 in October, is an edifice of civility in a city of attention-grabbing speculators.
On Nov. 30, the genial author and architecture critic for The New Yorker, who locked arms and raised a fuss with Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis to save Grand Central Terminal in the 1970's, was honored by the Municipal Art Society with the first Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis Award.
Moments before the black-tie birthday celebration was to begin, Mr.
Gill was standing inside the Seventh Regiment Armory on Park Avenue, getting more excited by the building's interior than he was about the event in his honor.


Lynne S. Magee, Edward Dintrone
Lynne Suzanne Magee, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Glenn E. Magee of Bronxville, N.Y., was married there yesterday at the Dutch Reformed Church to Edward Joseph Dintrone, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Pasquale J. Dintrone of Yonkers.
The Rev.
Phoebe T. Kitson-Davis, a minister of the Dutch Reformed Church, officiated, and the Rev.
Fred J. Conoscenti, a Roman Catholic priest, took part in the ceremony.
The bride, 28, is the marketing manager for CK One Fragrances at Calvin Klein Cosmetics in New York.
She graduated from Franklin and Marshall College and received an M.B.A. from New York University.


Emily C. Green, Andrew Schneider
Emily Claire Green, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Ira Green of Bethesda, Md., was married there last evening to Andrew James Schneider, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
James A. Schneider of Hazleton, Pa.
The Rev.
Jan P. Lookingbill, a Lutheran minister, officiated at the Strathmore Hall Arts Center.
Rabbi Harold S. White took part in the ceremony.
Mrs.
Schneider, 28, is a patent attorney for the United States Energy Department, in Oak Ridge, Tenn.
She graduated magna cum laude from Bryn Mawr College and received her law degree from George Washington University.
The bride's father retired as a senior health care policy analyst at the Federal Agency for Health Care Policy and Research, in Rockville, Md.


Admirers Remember Firkusny As 'Great Artist and Great Man'
A memorial tribute to the pianist Rudolf Firkusny on Friday evening attracted an overflow crowd of friends, colleagues and admirers to Paul Recital Hall at the Juilliard School, where Mr.
Firkusny taught for three decades.
Some stood; others watched on closed-circuit television outside the hall.
"My father never much liked this kind of event," the pianist's son, Igor Firkusny, said from the stage, stressing the life-affirming qualities and good humor of his father, who died on July 19 at 82.


Planning for A Winter Break
DID travelers from the Northeast learn to plan ahead after last winter's 17 snowstorms?
One big company selling Caribbean tours believes so, saying that Northeasterners now suffer from "snowblower syndrome": They stare uneasily at televison commercials for shovels, then rush to order tickets to the Caribbean for January and February.
Callers are saying that the Farmer's Almanac is forecasting a worse winter this year, travel agents report.
American, Carnival, Continental, Delta and USAir may be reading from the same book: They are adding seats to the Caribbean.
So it seems likely that except for Presidents' Week, Feb. 19 to 25, a tough ticket already, travelers who start now will be able to find January and February flights to the Caribbean, and hotels to go with them, frequently in the form of packages.
The prices are higher than in October, but not through the roof yet.


SUNDAY, December 4, 1994; The Gift of Clams
So he already sponsors a manatee and a wolf.
He adopted a whale long ago.
He has his name on a seat in the theater.
What do you give the guy who supports everything?
Several unusual sponsoring opportunities are available to shoppers this holiday season:
A star: name one through the Ministry of Federal Star Registration (not the one astronomers use).
Cost: $55.90.
Call (800) 528-STAR.


Linda J. Connal, Peter F. Duncan
Linda Joan Connal, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Allan B. Connal of Old Greenwich, Conn., was married yesterday to Peter Fitzgerald Duncan, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
John F. Duncan of Greenwich, Conn.
The Rev.
Robert Albert performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at St.
Clement's Church in Stamford, Conn.
Mrs.
Duncan, 34, is a freelance video-graphics artist.
Her father, a former chief operating officer of ESPN, the cable television network, and a former vice president of NBC Sports, is the president of Concom Inc., a television production company in Old Greenwich.
Her mother is a sales associate at the Coldwell Banker/Schlott real estate company in Greenwich.


Journal; Panic on Broadway
When "Angels in America" closes at today's matinee, it will be the most resounding final curtain in the history of the Broadway theater.
In its wake, not a single new American drama will be running on Broadway.
Yet this tragedy may soon give way to a new, white-knuckle melodrama gathering steam in the wings.
Much has happened, much of it behind the scenes, in the six weeks since Neil Simon made his epochal decision to take his next play Off Broadway rather than risk Broadway's punitive economics.
Panicked investors have fled some of the season's few remaining productions; the once-monolithic Broadway Establishment is cracking.
As power shifts, so does the likelihood of a gory management-labor showdown that could finally start Broadway's revival -- or plunge Times Square into darkness by next year's tourist season -- or both.


Nov. 27-Dec. 3: Trouble Aplenty; Rapper's Life Mirrors Music
Tupac Shakur's life has often mirrored the violent gangster rap that made him famous, and never more so than last week.
In fact, the week's quick cuts from one image of Mr.
Shakur to the next seemed borrowed from the rapid-fire pace of music videos.
Mr.
Shakur was convicted on Thursday of felony sex abuse charges for groping a 19-year-old woman in his Manhattan hotel room last year.
The verdict came a day after Mr.
Shakur was shot at a Manhattan recording studio in what the police say was a random robbery.
The 23-year-old rapper and his co-defendant, Charles Fuller, were convicted of three counts of sexual abuse.
Mr.
Shakur could be sentenced to a maximum of 2 1/3 to 7 years in prison.
The two were acquitted of the more serious charges of sodomy, attempted sodomy and weapons possession.
CHARISSE JONES


K. A. Caldwell, P. M. O'Connor 3d
Kimberly A. Caldwell, a daughter of Barbara L. Caldwell of Arlington, Va., and Charles S. Caldwell of Jalisco, Mexico, was married yesterday to Paul M. O'Connor 3d, a son of Eileen P. and Paul M. O'Connor Jr. of Greenwich, Conn.
The Rev.
Denis M. Mathews performed the ceremony at St.
Mary's Roman Catholic Church in Greenwich.
Mrs.
O'Connor, 28, graduated from Pennsylvania State University and received a law degree from Georgetown University, as did the bridegroom.
She is an associate at O'Sullivan Graev &amp; Karabell, a New York law firm.


EDITOR'S CHOICE
Two novels, a volume of short stories, a memoir, two histories, two biographies and two treatises on science for lay readers are among this year's roster of Best Books -- along with an extended meditation on the colonial quest, its origins and consequences that the publisher called a novel but the author did not, a kind of freedom-of-choice entry.
Of course, the list is not that neat, anyway; one biography is a foray in the continuing intellectual struggle over American history, and the memoir is a commentary on the same science taken up in the two scientific books.
The science is, broadly, evolutionary biology or, specifically, sociobiology, which, once it gets into your brain, can really spook you about genetics.
For instance, once the list was alphabetized, it suddenly became apparent that the principal subjects of the first two books were both short, loquacious and bowlegged men.
More ominously, the alphabet clumped the three books on sociobiology together in the list.
There are other patterns here, but perhaps they will not bear thinking about.
The writers of the books chose their subjects and titles, and the editors of the Book Review chose the Best Books; none of this was done by a pool of genes.


A Pocketful Of Mechanics
Angelo Trippiedi is a muffler man.
Always has been.
Fifty years ago, he was working on cars in about the same spot he works now on Cropsey Avenue, only now he has his own place.
Back then, he was a minority among the lumberyards that lined the avenue between Neptune Avenue and the Belt Parkway.
Now he owns one of the oldest of dozens of repair shops that are crammed into six blocks in the area, making it the veritable auto repair capital of Brooklyn.


In 'Disclosure,' Clear and Present Gizmos
THE FILM "DISCLOSURE," opening on Friday, is based on a novel by Michael Crichton that was notorious for its discussion of sexual harassment in the office.
The film, which stars Demi Moore and Michael Douglas and was directed by Barry Levinson, has a setting as faddish as its subject: Digicom, a high-tech company that builds and programs computers.
Tom Sanders (Mr. Douglas) works in a glass office with a door that locks electronically.
He carries a tiny cellular phone that holds its charge all day.
When Tom receives E-mail, the E appearing on his computer screen is three-dimensional and revolves, like another world.
This is only the beginning.
Wearing a headset and standing on a very small trampoline, characters are pitched into virtual reality, an imaginary scenario that looks and sounds like real life.
Once they are there, sophisticated computer software enables them to interact with this fake world as if it were real life.
Presumably, they could be transported anywhere.
And what have the whiz kids at Digicom chosen to represent in their virtual world?
A New Orleans whorehouse?
The Charge of the Light Brigade?
No.
A corridor lined with filing cabinets.
That's right, filing cabinets.


Saw the Show? Buy the Trinket
IT WAS A TYPICAL EVENING AT THE Palace Theater on Broadway, where another performance of "Beauty and the Beast" was about to begin.
At curbside, taxis pulled up with late arrivals.
At the box office, breathless theatergoers checked their tickets.
And in the crowded lobby, by the long glass counter where a staff of six peddled "Beauty and the Beast" compact disks, silk ties and sweatshirts, the air crackled with the conversation of the contemporary theater:
"How much is the T-shirt?"


Dancing for Music
A benefit for BAM's Next Wave Festival and Artists with AIDS, Nov. 30.


POSTINGS: 9 of 48 Cove Club Apartments Sell; Developer Targets Hong Kong Buyers
When the developer of the Cove Club at Battery Park City decided recently that the time was ripe to sell the building's remaining 48 apartments, he returned to Hong Kong, where, three years ago, he had sold half of the building's 163 units to investors within a month.
Before last weekend's two-day sale, Andrew Goodstein was quoted in The Hong Kong Standard predicting he would sell all 48 apartments, which had been kept by him and his partners and rented out since the building was completed in 1991.
He sold nine.
Eight one-bedroom apartments brought prices ranging from $169,000 to $206,000, Mr.
Goodstein said, and a two-bedroom penthouse was sold for $410,000.
Mr.
Goodstein, the president of Goodstein Properties of Manhattan, attributed the smaller-than-expected number of sales to the competition in Hong Kong: There were 31 other dealers offering properties, mostly in London, Australia and Canada, on the same weekend.
He also blamed the recent interest-rate rise and declines in the stock market.


Northern Ireland
To the Editor: As pleasing as your article about Northern Ireland was, in referring to its beauties, comforts and hospitality I must humbly suggest as my mother (born and reared in County Tyrone) was wont to say: "Run away off and come on again."
You missed Ardtara, a country house hotel in County Londonderry, and in so doing deprived yourself and your readers of a treat.


Limbaugh's Talk Isn't Environmentally Correct
To the Editor:
Frank Rich's Nov. 27 column on Rush Limbaugh's post-election commentaries misses the most important point about Mr.
Limbaugh.


World Markets; The Newest Hot Spot? The Middle East
AMERICANS finally have a chance to bet on the emerging and burgeoning stock markets of the Middle East, thanks to Foreign and Colonial.
In October, the London-based fund management group created the first investment fund registered with the Securities and Exchange Commission and devoted to this neglected area of the world, with assistance from Nomura Securities International, Paine Webber and JW Securities.
The Foreign and Colonial Emerging Middle East Fund Inc., as it is called, is a peanut-sized closed-end fund with a total initial capitalization of just $42 million, only 22 percent of which is currently invested.
It finished the week trading in New York at $14.125, slightly down from its initial offering price of $15 a share.


Children's Books
THE CHRISTMAS ALPHABET Written and illustrated by Richard Sabuda.
Unpaged.
New York: Orchard Books. $19.95. (All ages)


Tours of West Africa
The rich cultural heritage of West Africa is the focus of two tour itineraries early next year.
Travel Plans International is offering two-week tours of Senegal and Mali, with departures on Jan. 18, Feb. 1, Feb. 15 and March 1.
Highlights of the tour include the flower and basketry markets of Dakar; a tour of Goree Island, once a major West African slave-trading center; a day in Timbuktu, a nexus of the trans-Saharan caravan trade and a center of Moslem culture; the mud mosque in Djenne and tours of remote Dogon villages.


A Long Career as the Girl Next Door
CAMERA-ready at a respectable age for a child star, Amy Hargreaves has been in television commercials since she was 11.
Hers is one of the pretty young faces of an appealing ordinariness familiar to viewers of commercials for Cheerios, AT&amp;T, Oreos and other well-known brands.
Now, at 24, she has moved on to acting Off Broadway and in television and feature films.
As the female lead in "Brainscan," a movie about an interactive murder video game, Ms.
Hargreaves, as usual, plays the girl next door, but partly disrobes for her hyperfantasizing peeping neighbor.
Riding the demand for vulnerable-looking countenances as foils to electronic wizardry, she also appears in "Ride for Your Life," the first interactive movie made by a major studio, Sony Pictures.
The movie is to be released soon.


Old in New York, And Struggling
For many elderly New Yorkers, survival is a ritual of hunger, loneliness and frustration.
Private charities, including those aided by The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund, say the need is overwhelming, but resources are limited.
Article, page 56.


Singapore
To the Editor: "What's Doing in Singapore," although thorough in its compilation of tourist attractions, was somewhat lacking in its practical advice to American visitors.
I would recommend first that Americans read Prime Minister Goh Chok Tong's National Day speech, in which he reiterates the ruling People's Action Party's platform of protecting Singapore from Western values.
Second, as a lawyer, I would suggest that Westerners get a copy of Singapore's penal code, to become familiar with the maze of statutory offenses and related schedule of fines.


Dreaming of the National Hockey League


Nov. 27-Dec. 3: Violent Life, Violent Death; Slaying of Dahmer Leaves Questions and Emptiness
Just after Jeffrey L. Dahmer was found beaten to death near a toilet in a Wisconsin prison Monday morning, the authorities said there was only one suspect: a 25-year-old inmate who has claimed to be the son of God.
On Thursday, the authorities said the death of Mr.
Dahmer, a serial killer, cannibal and necrophiliac, and that of another murderer beaten in the same attack could have been a conspiracy involving as many as three inmates.
Prison officials also said they were investigating the actions of two guards and a third prison employee, who left the inmates unattended for up to 20 minutes.


Native Warmth
GARDEN CAFE ($25 and Under) (718) 857-8863; 620 Vanderbilt Avenue, Prospect Heights; $; American Express, Mastercard, Visa


Cynthia A. Raftis, John N. Katopodis
Cynthia Anastasia Raftis, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Spiros G. Raftis of Pittsburgh, was married yesterday to Dr.
John Nonda Katopodis, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Nonda Katopodis of Stamford, Conn.
The Rev.
Andrew Maginas performed the ceremony at St.
Catherine's Greek Orthodox Church in West Palm Beach, Fla.
Mrs.
Katopodis, 32, is a real estate developer for Carnegie Office Park, a real estate development in Carnegie, Pa.
She graduated from the University of Pittsburgh.
Her father is the founder and chief executive of the Red Valve Company, makers of industrial valves in Carnegie.


Prints From a Lifetime of Work
SYLVIA WALD'S is not an underground reputation but it might as well be as far as the general art public is concerned.
Yet the artist has a record that goes back 55 years to her first solo show, at the ACA Gallery in Manhattan, and is held in high regard by print connoisseurs -- understandably so, to judge by the evidence presented at the New Britain Museum of American Art.
The exhibition, one of three current attractions at the museum, originated last year in a slightly larger form at Hirschl and Adler Gallery in Manhattan.
It numbers about 36 silk screen prints and woodcuts interspersed with some charcoal drawings, most done between 1950 and 1970.


A Harvard Leave Highlights Pressures of University Life
When Neil L. Rudenstine donned the black robe for his inauguration as the 26th president of Harvard University in 1991, he was widely celebrated as the dream candidate: handsome and youthful-looking, intellectual but energetic, the consummate university administrator.
A Renaissance scholar, he brought with him degrees from Princeton, Oxford and Harvard, as well as 20 years of experience as a dean and provost at Princeton and three years as a foundation executive.
Now, the 59-year-old president is on a leave of absence ordered by his doctors to recover from severe fatigue and exhaustion, and to undergo tests.
The announcement this week was greeted with surprise, as well as speculation that something more serious must be behind the decision.
But university officials said that nothing was being hidden, and that a public announcement was warranted because he had so many high-profile appointments scheduled.


The Nation; One Liberal Is Still Talking
WHEN Hillary Rodham Clinton first spoke publicly about the Democrats' devastating electoral loss last month on a trip to the Philippines, it was to say she wasn't sure what it meant.
Then, in Indonesia, she said she didn't want to talk about it.
Back in Washington last week, she suggested it might not mean much at all.
Accepting an award from the National Women's Law Center for her work on health care, Mrs.
Clinton urged her fellow liberals to redouble their efforts to insure access to health care, equal pay and privacy without seeming threatening -- a challenge not unlike her own.


Sound Bytes; Mainstreaming New Media
AS a reporter and photographer for The Christian Science Monitor and then for The International Herald Tribune, and as a documentary film maker, Stewart McBride met many artists involved with new technology.
Eastman Kodak hired him in 1991 to help create the first digital art center, the Center for Creative Imaging in Camden, Me.
As a founding director, Mr.
McBride helped develop a curriculum to educate artists in new imaging and multimedia technologies.
After Kodak sold the center in 1993 to Brace Management, which subsequently folded it, Mr.
McBride left to found United Digital Artists, a new-media agency in Manhattan that represents high-technology artists, as well as software programmers and technology consultants.


Condos Lead The Way To Gains in House Sales
FOR Westchester realtors, this has been a very good year.
The number of house sales and the dollar amounts in the third quarter of the year were the highest of any quarter reported by the county's Board of Realtors.
All four residential sectors -- single-family houses, rental apartments, cooperative apartments and condominiums -- tracked by the board posted double-digit sales increases compared with the third quarter of last year.
Condominium sales led the way with a 36 percent increase.


4 Die in Stampede at Club Crowded With Youths
Scores of young people fleeing a brawl in an overcrowded nightclub early this morning became trapped in a narrow stairwell, where they were crushed amid a suffocating mass of bodies that kept growing as others surged to get out.
Four people were killed, including a 13-year-old girl, and more than 20 were injured, the authorities said.
Witnesses reported a scene of confusion and terror, of dazed girls begging for help under piles of four or five bodies, of teen-agers who in their panic unknowingly trampled their friends.
Police officers who first responded could not enter the front door because it was clogged, so they began dragging the unconscious into the safety of the cold night air.


PHOTOGRAPHER'S JOURNAL


SUNDAY, December 4, 1994; Double Dutch
Double dutch jump-roping may be urban girls' answer to boys and basketballs.
The sport has its moment each December at the Double Dutch Holiday Classic, scheduled for this afternoon at the Apollo Theater in Harlem, where the Gazelles, at right, will be competing with about 40 other teams.
One new trend in jump-roping is to add music, producing double dutch "fusion," says David Walker, founder of the National Double Dutch League.
"Fusion makes the Classic hot," he says.
Among the six teams in the advanced and novice "Fusion" classes are the DDDD's, Jumping Sensations, Jazzy Jumpers and Pepper Steppers.


This Week's Numbers
Last
Consensus
Period
Estimates
(I.D.E.A. INC.)
Mon.
New-home sales, Oct., thous., ann. rate
703
687.5
Auto sales, Nov., millions, ann. rate
7.1
7.0
Wed.
Nonfarm productivity, 3d qtr., pct. chg.
2.7
2.9
Consumer credit, Oct., chg., $ billions
10.6
11.0
Thur.
Weekly jobless claims, thousands
317
325
Fri.
Consumer sentiment index, Nov.
91.6
92.0
This Week's Development
Wed.
Fed releases beige book
*4*Alan Greenspan to testify to Congress's Joint Economic Committee
Thur.
Bundesbank Council meeting


Cider That Tastes Clean and Crisp
Re: "A Fall Ritual Updated: Making Cider at the Farm," Nov. 6:
I am fortunate to have fallen upon the Nettie Ochs Cider Mill while wandering around Livingston one afternoon and had the most incredibly fruity and crisp cider I have ever tasted.


Thin Line Between Friend And Foe
At some point during the Giants' game against the Cleveland Browns today, someone will have a serious flashback.
Offensive lineman William Roberts of the Giants is best friends with Cleveland linebacker Pepper Johnson.
They used to be teammates with the Giants.
Cleveland linebacker Carl Banks played for Bill Belichick in New York before eventually joining Belichick in Cleveland.


The Nation; On the Hill, It's Revolutionaries Against the Odds
THE Gingrich revolution has had its Mao Zedong (Republican of Georgia) for quite a while.
But it wasn't until Friday that Newt Gingrich found his Zhou Enlai, Trent Lott of Mississippi.
With his election as second-ranking Senate Republican, Mr.
Lott is ready to serve Mr.
Gingrich as general, spokesman to the supposedly more civilized world of the Senate, and above all, companion on a new Long March.
In Mr.
Gingrich, the Speaker presumptive, the effort to overthrow the welfare state has a theoretician and phrase-maker on the grand scale.
"What is ultimately at stake in our current environment is literally the future of American civilization as it has existed for the last several hundred years," he proclaimed not long ago.


Some Day (Soon) His Name'll Be in Lights
BY his own account, Yuri Naumov is just "a provincial Siberian boy who left home to become a rock 'n' roll star." His story is actually a little more complicated.
As a teen-ager in Novosibirsk, Siberia, Mr.
Naumov learned how to play guitar and write song lyrics by listening to bootlegged copies of the Beatles' "White Album" and tapes of Led Zeppelin.
And when in 1983, as a freshman in a local medical school, he was asked by some fellow students who were forming a rock band to show them some of his lyrics, he did so in a flash.


Blue Collars


On Sunday; Expert Advice: Mr. Cheap On the Prowl
WE caught up with Mr.
Cheap in Washington, where he's cataloguing what's cheap there besides talk.
Bargain guidance was urgently needed for holiday shopping.
Mr.
Cheap, whose previous books include "Mr. Cheap's New York," at first started raving about some "gorgeous buys" in five-year-old hotel suite furniture he unexpectedly found being auctioned by the Ritz-Carlton at a Beltway warehouse: "You should see the four-poster beds!"
Hold on, Mr.
Cheap, we're not talking tax-and-spenders-slept-here sort of bargains.
We're talking strictly New York, stocking stuffer, memorable but CHEAP.


I Want My MTV, And Maybe a Silk Shirt
YOU MAY HAVE NOTICED recently that some shows on MTV, Nickelodeon and VH-1 are moving a little more slowly, that 800 numbers are flashing on the screen during prime-time shows and that the hosts are more pandering than usual.
This, some say, may be the future of cable television.
It all depends on your wallet and how much you like to open it in the privacy of your home.
Since August, MTV Networks -- which also owns VH-1 and Nickelodeon -- has been trying out a home-shopping show called "The Goods" on all three of its channels.
The program is a radical step for television, not just because it's a shopping show direct ed at a market untapped by QVC and the Home Shopping Channel (those rest homes for the eelskin wallet and the two-carat kunzite-stone ring), but also because it's part of regular prime-time programming.
Though MTV describes it as a test program -- irregularly scheduled but frequently repeated -- "The Goods" has already outlasted the life expectancy of the average sitcom.
The next installment, recommending the year's "best" records as holiday gifts, will be shown on VH-1 at 8 P.M. on Dec. 15.


The Neediest Cases; An Array of Troubles Afflicts the Elderly Poor
If her chiming wooden clock did not prove otherwise, Elizabeth Malon would insist that time slows down in old age.
Ninety-seven years old and partly blind, she spends her days wandering through a dark apartment in Queens, fending off illness, boredom and depression.
For weeks on end, Mrs.
Malon's only contact with the outdoors is the sunlight that filters through her thick curtains.
A woman from her church delivers a hot lunch four days a week, sometimes lingering for small talk.
Other visitors are rare.
Of Mrs.
Malon's 4 children, 15 grandchildren and 26 great-grandchildren, only a few call regularly.


Leo Strauss' Elitism Sought Excellence for All
To the Editor:
Brent Staples's "Undemocratic Vistas" (Editorial Notebook, Nov. 28), on the ill effects of the writings and teachings of Leo Strauss, seems to suffer from the same anti-public-spirited animus that he accused the conservative followers of Strauss of having.


A Time to Give, To Everybody
Once -- and not all that long ago -- it was considered an insult to tip an American worker.
American workers felt that only effete, shoe-licking European lackeys accepted bits of cash flung at them by the rich.
In America, workers were too proud, too dignified, to be bribed to do their jobs well.
"Tipping," says Judith Martin, who is the etiquette expert Miss Manners, "was very un-American. Americans were paid for what they did, and didn't take hand-outs."


JAMES GALIPEAU, STREET REDEEMER
David Chanoff's description of James Galipeau's work, doing one-on-one probation, is a story of individual heroism ("James Galipeau, Street Redeemer," Nov. 13).
Institutionally, the New York City probation department is working to reshape services to more than 80,000 probationers.
The decision to provide a particular level of supervision -- from checking in at a kiosk to group counseling to intensive one-on-one supervision -- is based on a sophisticated risk-assessment procedure.
At a time of severe fiscal constraint, the department is "walking the walk" of reengineering government.
ALAN GARTNER New York


Taking a Sharper Look at Lawn Care
IF the lawn has not had its dose of fertilizer this fall, there is no time to waste.
The task should be done promptly.
Tradition has it that lawn fertilizer should be spread by the end of November.
But the recent spate of mild weather has fooled many gardeners.
Lawn-keeping researchers believe that one late fall application is all that the lawn should need for an entire year.
They say that this sort of application economy goes a long way toward lawn health -- but also keeps excess fertilizer out of the water system since less is lost to the environment through runoff.


SERVICE WITH A SNEER
Denny's race discrimination practices were undoubtedly painful to the victims.
However, I can't help thinking the purpose of racial harmony would better be served if the claimants and attorneys decided to contribute the $54.4 million in settlement fees toward the creation of a nonprofit foundation for racial sensitivity education.
ALICIA KITSUSE Virginia Beach, Va.


A Freighter in a Movie
The Aranui, a 343-foot freighter that island hops throughout French Polynesia, may qualify as the love boat of the 90's after its starring role in the movie "Love Affair," with Warren Beatty and Annette Bening.
In the film, the pair falls in love aboard ship.
In real life, the freighter, operated by the Compagnie Polynesienne de Transport Maritime, makes regular 16-day trips from Tahiti to Rangiroa, carrying 2,000 tons of cargo and about 100 passengers.
Accommodations include air-conditioned cabins, a pool, video room, sundeck and library.
But the Aranui is not a luxury liner, a spokeswoman emphasized.
"Its purpose is to take food and supplies to the islanders." And the dining room and bar shown on the ship in the movie were built in Hollywood.
Trips start at $2,860 a person.
Call (415) 541-0677.
TERRY TRUCCO


Putting a Cap on a Toxic Error
In the 1960's, the city carved 81 acres out of its largest park to open the Pelham Bay Landfill.
In the 1970's, oil refineries discovered they could bribe sanitation workers to let them dump toxic waste there.
The dump closed in 1978, in the face of changing environmental attitudes.
In the 1980's, when the illegal dumping was discovered, neighbors began wondering if there was a connection to the increasing number of people being diagnosed with leukemia and other diseases.


Photography
IF photography as we have long known it is about to be replaced by a limp electronic gerund, "imaging," why do publishers continue to satisfy our cravings for pictures with a multitude of finely printed volumes ranging from delicate to disturbing?
This season's harvest suggests not only that the recession in photography book publishing is over, but also that the ballyhooed electronic revolution remains a gleam in the distance.
The most promoted electronic title having to do with photography, a CD-ROM planned to accompany the book "Passage to Vietnam" (Against All Odds Productions/Melcher Media/Publishers Group West), is now optimistically promised for February, four months after the book's publication date.
Museums may be busy digitizing their collections of photographs, but few of these electronic archives have the makings of a best seller.
The books that fit on traditional holiday coffee tables are sufficient consolation for anyone searching for new ways to look at photographs, however.
Major collections of the lifetime work of Robert Frank and Andre Kertesz are complemented by visual anthologies of the human figure, self-portraiture and the dead and deformed ("The Body," "The Camera I" and "Harms Way").
Fashion takes an impressive turn on the runway with "Toni Frissell: Photographs 1933-1967" (Doubleday), "William Klein: In and Out of Fashion" (Random House) and Albert Watson's "Cyclops" (Bulfinch/ Little, Brown).
And edging in the direction of multimedia is "Talking Pictures" (Chronicle), a Chaucerian diversion in which 70 people, from Joan Rivers to Mister Rogers, elaborate on the image that has meant the most to them.
Unfortunately, one has to go to the touring exhibition of the same title to hear the actual sound of their voices.


New Kmart Worries Some In Co-op City
Two weeks ago a giant Kmart opened in Bay Plaza, a retail and office mall just south of Co-op City.
It brought 450 jobs, inexpensive goods for local shoppers and the usual dividends of a retailing behemoth's arrival.
But Kmart's opening, as well as plans for further expansion in Bay Plaza, has stirred mixed feelings among Co-op City residents.
Although they acknowledge the store's benefits to many local people, they worry that the development is hurting the neighborhood's quality of life.


Nov. 27-Dec. 3: Going It Alone, Again; Norway Spurns Membership In the European Union
As though acting on the advice of Groucho Marx, whose views on club-joining are well known, Norwegians rejected membership Monday in the ever-expanding fraternity of nearby and not-so-nearby nations called the European Union.
The sentiment in a referendum with a record turnout was 52.2 percent no to 47.8 percent yes.
The following day, many of the 4.3 million people who live in Norway woke up feeling both proud and a little nervous over what they had done -- becoming the only country to turn down the 12-nation group and effectively redrawing the boundary with Europe right between themselves and Sweden, which voted to join earlier this year along with Finland and Austria.
Now, Norway finds itself outside looking in.
JOHN DARNTON


Michelle Hayes, Troy A. Williams
Michelle Diane Hayes, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Michael J. Hayes of Memphis, was married yesterday to Troy Allen Williams, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
J.
Fred Williams of Carmel, Ind.
The Rev.
Alfred Mark performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at the Church of the Nativity in Midland Park, N.J.


When an Editor Falls Off the Hipness Wave
WHEN the January issue of Details hits newsstands later this week, it will serve as a reminder that those who live by the cutting edge are sometimes kneecapped by the cutting edge.
Largely because of a perception that the magazine was falling behind the curve of smart urban culture, John Leland, the editor in chief, was removed last month by James Truman, the editorial director of Conde Nast Publications, who only 10 months earlier had handpicked Mr.
Leland to succeed him at Details.
The January issue is Mr.
Leland's last.


In America; The 'Elegant' Handgun
The advertising copy proclaimed that the items, manufactured especially for women, "manage to be elegant without sacrificing any of their practicality."
There was no reference in the copy to the bloody scenes of horror that inevitably follow the practical use of the "elegant" items.
That would have been bad form.
The folks at Smith &amp; Wesson, up in Springfield, Mass., know that you have to be careful when you're selling handguns.
You don't want to scare the customers.


Patron Dead, Town Goes on the Block
By the time R. Kyle Hayes died in January at the age of 88, he had amassed a $24 million estate and owned about a fourth of the town, where he had practiced law for 50 years.
But Mr.
Hayes's tenants -- a significant chunk of Wilkesboro's residents and merchants -- are quick to dispute any notion that the landlord of this town of 2,600 acquired his wealth through avarice.
The man affectionately known as Mr.
Kyle charged minuscule rents; for 17 years the town grocer, W. Clegg Culler, paid him $350 a month for a store on Main Street.


Where Young Japanese Go to Get Away From It All
AT a Japanese-language video and newspaper store -- the Akean Total Information Center -- there is a large bulletin board advertising housing, English lessons and photography shows of local Japanese artists.
Down the street, at Hoshi Coupe, American and Japanese customers await trimming and fluffing, looking cowed from the intense shiatsu shampoo they just received in the stark, chic environs of the salon.


Meetings Of Boards In Manhattan
DISTRICT 1 Battery Park, TriBeCa.
Next meeting Dec. 13, 5:30 P.M.; BMCC Fiterman Hall, 30 West Broadway, 14th-floor conference room; (212) 442-5050.
DISTRICT 2 SoHo, Little Italy, West Village, Greenwich Village, parts of Chinatown.
Next meeting Dec. 22, 7 P.M.; St.
Vincent's Hospital, 153 West 11th Street, 10th floor, Cronin Auditorium; (212) 979-2272.
DISTRICT 3 Lower East Side, East Village.
Next meeting Dec. 20, 6:30 P.M.; P.S. 40, Division Street; (212) 533-5300.
DISTRICT 4 Chelsea, Clinton.
Next meeting Dec. 7, 7 P.M.; St.
Clare's Hospital Auditorium, 426 West 52d Street; (212) 736-4536.
Agenda: Vote on new guidelines for street activity permits; 6:30.
DISTRICT 5 Central Park South, central business district, theater district, Gramercy Park, Little India, Rockefeller Center; second Thursday of month; next Dec. 8, 6 P.M.; Fashion Institute of Technology, 227 West 27th Street; (212) 465-0907.
Agenda: Housing proposal for the Prince George Hotel.
DISTRICT 6 Murray Hill, Turtle Bay, Stuyvesant Square, Peter Cooper Village, Beekman, Sutton; second Wednesday of month; next Dec. 14, 7 P.M.; New York University Medical Center, Room A, 550 First Avenue at 31st Street; (212) 679-0907.
DISTRICT 7 Upper West Side; first Tuesday of month; Next Dec. 6, 7 P.M.; Temple Ansche Schesed 251 W. 100th Street; (212) 362-4008.
DISTRICT 8 Upper East Side, Yorkville, Roosevelt Island; third Wednesday of month; next Dec. 21, 7 P.M.; Beth Israel Medical Center, North Auditorium, 170 East End Avenue, (212) 427-4840.
DISTRICT 9 Morningside Heights, Manhattanville, Hamilton Heights; third Thursday of month; next Dec. 15, 6:30 P.M.; Community Board Office, 565 West 125th Street, off Broadway; (212) 864-6200.
DISTRICT 10 Central Harlem; first Wednesday of month; next Dec. 7, 6:30 P.M.; Adam Clayton Powell State Office Building, 2d Floor Art Gallery, 163 West 125th Street; (212) 749-3105.
DISTRICT 11 East Harlem; third Tuesday of month; next Dec. 20, 7 P.M.; La Guardia Memorial House (basement), 307 East 116th Street, between First and Second Avenues; (212) 831-8929.
DISTRICT 12 Washington Heights, Inwood.
Next meeting Dec. 13, 7:30 P.M.; New York State Psychiatric Institute, 8th Floor Auditorium, 722 West 168th Street; (212) 568-8500.
Schedules for meetings of community boards in other boroughs will appear in subsequent issues.


From the Folks Who Brought You Hamlet
THE CAMBRIDGE ILLUSTRATED HISTORY OF BRITISH THEATRE By Simon Trussler. 404 pp.
New York: Cambridge University Press. $39.95.
WHY, you might ask, should a nonspecialist American reader shell out $40 for a book entitled "The Cambridge Illustrated History of British Theatre"?
There are many good and cogent reasons for the cherishableness of this volume in the Cambridge Illustrated History series.
British theater, for starters, is what American theater derives from, and is the only theater American tourists can and do flock to without fear of a language barrier, though such cockiness sometimes proves unwarranted.
And the fruitful two-way traffic between the British and American stages, new and old, has been continuous, despite many and varied roadblocks.


Pearl Jam Gives Voice To Sisyphus
FAME ISN'T MAKING EDDIE VEDDER HAPPY.
In "Last Exit," the first song on Pearl Jam's new album, "Vitalogy," he sings, "Lives opened and trashed/ Look might watch me crash"; in "Pry, To," he simply chants, "P-r-i-v-a-c-y." In "Not for You," he complains that people "stormed my room," then works himself into a frenzy shouting, "This is not for you!" That song's lyric sheet has some extra notes jotted on it: "Call me Sysiphus  [ sic ] , love. Yeh, I move the rock. I just don't wanna talk about moving the rock."
Indeed, Pearl Jam fends off interviewers, and it hasn't been acting like a group that's thrilled to cash in on its popularity.
In the United States alone, the band has sold six million copies each of its first two albums, "Ten" (1991) and "Vs." (1993).
But this year, Pearl Jam canceled a summer tour when, in a public dispute over service charges from Ticketmaster, it couldn't keep admission prices as low as it wanted; then band members testified against Ticketmaster before Congress.
In the spring, Pearl Jam had chosen to play theaters in many cities where it could have filled arenas.
The band did not make any video clips to promote "Vs.," becoming one of very few multimillion-selling groups to snub television.
Instead, it went back into the studio and recorded its third album, "Vitalogy" (Epic 66900; LP, cassette and CD).
Rock may be inseparable from the media circus, but Pearl Jam seems determined to concentrate on the music itself.


Loren A. Scola And T. J. Kobus 3d
Loren Audra Scola, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Stephen Scola of Fort Salonga, L.I., was married on Friday to Theodore Joseph Kobus 3d, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Kobus Jr. of Wilmington, Del.
The Rev.
Francis Vattakudiyil officiated at St.
Joseph's Roman Catholic Church in Kings Park, L.I.


Correction
A picture caption on Nov. 20 with a listing of ski resorts misstated the location of a street in Alberta, Canada.
The street, Banff Avenue, is in Banff, not Lake Louise.


One More Casualty for the N.F.L.; Frier, the Latest Car-Crash Victim, Faces Uphill Battle
It was his first "boys night out" of the season.
He had received permission from his girlfriend, promised her he would not drink and drive, and guaranteed he would change their baby's diapers the next morning.
But four hours into the wet evening, he never answered her page.


Atlanta Finishes the Magic's Winning Streak
Hawks 107, Magic 105
Jon Koncak hit a free throw with 32 seconds left and forced a key turnover 25 seconds later as the host Atlanta Hawks beat Orlando, 107-105, last night, snapping the Magic's nine-game winning streak.


For Rutgers, It's On to the Final Four
The Rutgers University soccer team has had two totally different seasons: more losses than victories in the regular campaign, and a perfect record in six post-season games.
Today, the Scarlet Knights added another victory to their sudden success, 3-1 over Brown, and this one put them in the final four of the N.C.A.A. tournament.


A Gallery First
To the Editor:
I was surprised that Joseph Giovannini, in his essay on viewing art, assumed that the Guggenheim Museum was the first designed to show that the setting of paintings need not be "on right-angled white walls in evenly lighted, shadowless space"  [ "More Than One Way to See Art," Nov. 13 ] .


Dining For Art
The Onassis award, Nov. 30.


Forget Holding
To the Sports Editor:
Regarding Dave Anderson's column, "The N.F.L. Is Asking for Tragedy," Nov. 27): One solution to the problem and for greater protection of quarterbacks is to do away with the oft-misinterpreted holding penalty. I see no reason for this game-stopping penalty -- if I am stronger than you, I should be able to contain you from harming my quarterback.  HAROLD R. ARMSTRONG Jr.  Lakewood, N.J.


GARDENING
THE WESTERN SOCIETY OF MALACOLOGISTS FIELD GUIDE TO THE SLUG.
By David George Gordon. (Sasquatch Books, paper, $5.95.) For gardeners everywhere, slugs are the enemy.
Moving by night on trails of slime, they work their mischief wherever they go, leaving hostas and other choice plants in tatters as they chomp their way through the garden, using some 27,000 tiny teeth in a tonguelike organ called the radula.
But gardeners in most parts of the country have an easy time with slugs, compared to their counterparts in the Pacific Northwest, where the native banana slug can grow up to 10 inches long and weigh as much as a quarter of a pound.
David George Gordon's "Western Society of Malacologists Field Guide to the Slug" (published, fittingly, in Seattle, where the banana slug holds sway) is brief, but gripping in its own way -- from the first paragraph (pointing out, inter alia, that the blood of slugs is green) to the last sentence ("It is never a good idea to put a slug in your mouth!").
Mr.
Gordon provides a concise introduction to slug anatomy, describes more species of slugs than any gardener really cares to hear about and gives us an almost breathtaking account of the sex lives of these hermaphroditic gastropods. (The cannibalistic great gray garden slugs common to West Coast gardens "are able to copulate in midair, suspended by stretchy strands of mucus up to 17 3/4 inches (45 cm) long.")


Peekskill Honors Pataki
There wasn't any ticker tape, but this aging industrial town on the banks of the Hudson opened its arms today to its favorite son, Governor-elect George E. Pataki, in a spectacle of fifes, drums, bagpipes, wailing sirens and flag-waving citizens who yelled "Hey, George" to the guy many still remember as the mailman's lanky boy.
In what some local history buffs said was the largest parade here since Abraham Lincoln visited in 1860, Mr.
Pataki, his wife, Libby, three of their four children and Mr.
Pataki's mother rode through town in a red 1962 Thunderbird convertible, top down, waving and giving thumbs-ups to thousands who sat in folding chairs, hung from windows and crowded onto sidewalks along the 1.7-mile route.


The World; The Serbs Dream, But Dare Not Wake
GREATER SERBIA is a bleak place.
Here in its southwestern corner, young men and old are in uniform and kids' shoes are the color of camouflage.
Freight cars that have not moved for three years rust in a railway station where the clocks have stopped.
The eyes of women are tired.
The eyes of many men are bleary with liquor by mid-morning.
Yet this small town, which was a big railway junction of the former Yugoslavia, now calls itself the capital city of Croatia's separatist Serbs, an important metropolis of the contorted land mass that would be Greater Serbia.
It is here that Serbs set the Yugoslav conflict in motion by rebelling against Croatian independence in 1991, and it is near here, still, that they intend to build the western frontier of a land ruled directly or indirectly from Belgrade.


Speaking to the World
CROSSING THE THRESHOLD OF HOPE By John Paul II.
Edited by Vittorio Messori.
Translated by Jenny McPhee and Martha McPhee. 244 pp.
New York: Alfred A. Knopf. $20.


Confessions of an Autodidact
IT was on I-90 eastbound, pulling into the service area near Angola, N.Y., that I heard Stephen Hawking's riff on Albert Einstein.
On this steamy July morning, hay and manure smells from the farms southwest of Buffalo drifted into my Toyota.
A gull, wide of Lake Erie, screamed overhead.
"In the theory of relativity," the physicist explained, via an affable reader, "there is no unique absolute time, but instead each individual has his own personal measure of time that depends on where he is and how he is moving."
Or she.
I was driving back to Boston after a week at my parents' home in Cleveland -- 660 miles in one day, a 13-hour straight shot that always seems jaunty at the beginning and end, and interminable in between.
To speed the journey, I had brought along several unabridged audio books.
Driving out, I listened to Virginia Woolf's "To the Lighthouse." Driving back, to Hawking's "Brief History of Time." In two stolen days, I hoped to experience a kind of aural grand tour, an excursion through literature and science, punctuated with detours to the great shrines of fast food.
But turning an Interstate into an art and information superhighway, I discovered, wasn't easy.


The World; Latin Leaders Speak Gringo
IT'S being billed as a meeting of the hemispheres, but when President Clinton addresses Latin America's leaders this week in Miami, it will have more than a passing resemblance to an evening at the University Club.
The Latin American leaders include alumni of Yale, Columbia and the University of Michigan.
And they see the United States not so much as the overbearing behemoth of Latin lore, but as a place where they studied, whose language they share and whose values they are increasingly embracing.
This does not mean that all of South America has gone yanqui; the new rapport with North America is growing, in large part, only among the elites.
But that is still enough of change to make this first hemispheric summit meeting since 1967 unlike any other.


Erin M. Donohue, Nicholas J. Zito 3d
Erin Marie Donohue, the daughter of Brianne and Robert Emmett Donohue of Franklin Lakes, N.J., was married yesterday to Nicholas Joseph Zito 3d, the son of Rosemarie and Nicholas J. Zito Jr. of Princeton, N.J.
The Rev.
John Gerhardt performed the ceremony at St.
Ignatius Loyola Roman Catholic Church in New York.
The bride, 28, graduated from Susquehanna University and is a junior equities trader at Paribas Capital Markets, an investment company in New York.
Her father is a partner in System Software Associates, an application software company in Rochelle Park, N.J.
Her mother is a party and events planner in Franklin Lakes.


No Headline
"People were lying everywhere. I had to brace myself to the banister because I  saw too many people at the bottom. They were on the floor with their faces blue. People were screaming 'My legs! My arms!' " WILLIE CHAMPAGNE, who was trapped in the crush that killed four young people at a New Jersey nightclub.  [ 1:2. ]


Irish Immigrants In Saugatuck
To the Editor:
It was pleasant to read about the Saugatuck section of Westport, Conn., where I reside ("An Immigrant Haven, a Sailor's Delight," Oct. 2), but no mention was made of the first wave of European immigrants.
The first tracks for the opening of the New Haven Railroad were built by Irish immigrants in 1849.
A combination of centuries of oppression and disastrous famine drove nearly a million Irish to a new life of freedom in America.
Many of these early Irish settled in and near the Saugatuck railroad station and it was soon known as "Little Dublin." The street I live on, Treadwell Avenue, was known locally as "Irish Boulevard" as late as the 1930's.
KENNETH H. POWERS  Westport, Conn.


CURRENCY
Last
Prior
Year
Week
Week
Ago
Japanese Yen
100.64
98.78
108.55
per Dollar
German Mark
1.5798
1.5599
1.7200
per Dollar
Canadian Dollar
1.3706
1.3754
1.3284
per U.S. Dollar
British Pound
1.5610
1.5627
1.4905
U.S. Dollar per British Pound
Gold
$376.50
$384.60
$376.50
Republic National Bank
Currency: Friday NY Close


SUNDAY, December 4, 1994; Name Your Poison
Your teen-ager is talking about "Goofy's" and she hasn't been to Disneyland recently.
What do you do?
You could call the Drugs and Crime Data Center and Clearinghouse, at (800) 666-3332, fax (410) 792-4358, E-mail askncjrs@ncjrs.aspensys.com, and ask them to consult their "street terms" list.
"Goofy's," according to the center, which was set up by the Justice Department, is slang for LSD.
The list, more than 1,500 terms long, is updated monthly.
Some of the newer and more evocative terms are "Belushi," for cocaine and heroin; "Utopiates," for hallucinogens; "Nickelonians" -- crack addicts; "Backbreakers" -- LSD and strychnine.
The list was devised for the police and others who needed to know what suspects were talking about.
"Now," says Karen Medrow, who sometimes answers the phone, "more and more of the calls are coming from schoolteachers, clergy and parents."


ADAM WALINSKY, PRIVATE LOBBYIST FOR PUBLIC SAFETY
As a New York City police officer (lieutenant) with a law degree and an M.A. in psychology, I support Adam Walinsky's desire for better-educated police officers ("Private Lobbyist for Public Safety," by Elizabeth Kolbert, Oct. 30).
However, his concept of requiring college graduates who receive Government grants for tuition to serve four years in a Police Corps is utterly impractical.
When I joined the New York City Police Department, in 1973, I was a college graduate who had served in the Army and in Vietnam.
I was almost 30 and I was married, with a child.
It took me about three years to feel as if I were a productive cop.
Walinsky's apparent lack of respect for experienced police officers is surprising, considering his extensive experience with police officials around the country.


Taking Advantage of Sweet Bay Scallops
BAY SCALLOPS from Nantucket are now in season.
A little smaller than a penny, they are the sweetest -- and most expensive -- scallops on the market.
A new dish that has been catching on in restaurants is seared scallops heaped on a mound of buttery mashed potatoes and sprinkled with white truffle oil.
Another interesting first course can be made with scallops stir-fried Chinese style with Oriental seasonings and served on a bed of crispy fried noodles.


Norway's 'No' Vote on Europe's Union Isn't Rejection of Europe
To the Editor:
"We are Europeans" was the phrase that drew most applause when the head of the Norwegian "No" campaign announced victory in Oslo's biggest convention hall ("Vote in Norway Blocks Joining Europe's Union, front page, Nov. 29). The "no" of the people is not isolationist, not a wish to break with our internationalistic traditions.


JAMES GALIPEAU, STREET REDEEMER
Galipeau tells it like it is: most of those in prison are not "hard core . . .  beyond salvation." The majority do want to go straight but have no idea how.
They come from violent homes and may never have seen a conflict solved nonviolently.
My son and I are two of just hundreds of trained volunteers who give "Alternatives to Violence" weekend workshops in prisons.
It is humbling to see how responsive prisoners are when given an opportunity to learn skills that lift their self-esteem.


Taking a Sharper Look at Lawn Care
IF the lawn has not had its dose of fertilizer this fall, there is no time to waste.
The task should be done promptly.
Tradition has it that lawn fertilizer should be spread by the end of November.
But the recent spate of mild weather has fooled many gardeners.
Lawn-keeping researchers believe that one late fall application is all that the lawn should need for an entire year.
They say that this sort of application economy goes a long way toward lawn health -- but also keeps excess fertilizer out of the water system since less is lost to the environment through runoff.


Rome
Christmas in Rome is a crowded, bustling affair where the main attractions are reassuringly simple -- munching on freshly roasted chestnuts bought from a curbside vendor, touring the churches to compare the Nativity scenes (presepi), or simply plunging into the throng at Piazza Navona for the brightly lighted stalls and target-shooting galleries.
Christmas itself is only one part of a longer series of events that stretches from Dec. 24, through New Year's and on to Epiphany on Jan. 6, when the Piazza Navona bursts with parents and children buying traditional coal-black candy to celebrate La Befana, a witchlike figure who brings gifts on that day just as Santa Claus does on Christmas Eve in many Western countries (although, in Italy, the Christmas gift-giving is attributed to the baby Jesus).


The Neediest Cases; Lean Times for Catholic Charities
After a sharp drop in private donations this year, Catholic Charities of the Archdiocese of New York is conducting a mail campaign for the first time in its history.
Msgr.
James Murray, executive director, said the agency is $250,000 short of its budget, mostly because individual contributions have fallen off.
Catholic Charities, which has provided social services for the poor through a network of agencies since 1917, is one of seven charities supported by the annual appeal of The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund.
The New York Times Company Foundation pays all the costs of running the appeal, so all contributions go directly to the charities.


Tragical Mirth


Q and A
Prague and Budapest
Q.
I expect to be in Vienna next summer and would like to take an escorted tour to Budapest and Prague, originating in and returning to Vienna.
The tour could be conducted in either English or German.
Could you provide information about whom to contact here or in Austria about such a trip? -- Lily Boxer, Westfield, N.J.


Heather Vrooman, Neal Zuckerman
Heather Anne Vrooman, a daughter of Lynda and Edward A. Vrooman of Garrison, N.Y., is to be married today to First Lieut.
Neal Jeffrey Zuckerman, the son of Phyllis S. Zuckerman of Scarsdale, N.Y., and Richard J. Zuckerman of Mohegan Lake, N.Y.
Donald J. McGrath, the town clerk of Philipstown, N.Y., is to officiate at the Putnam County Historical Society in Cold Spring, N.Y.
The bride, 25, graduated from St.
Lawrence University.
She was until recently the personnel coordinator at D'Arcy Masius Benton &amp; Bowles, a New York advertising agency.
Her father, a lawyer in Garrison, is also a director of the Metropolitan Transportation Authority and chairman of the Metro-North Railroad Committee.
Her mother is director of development at the Dutchess County Association for Senior Citizens in Poughkeepsie, N.Y.


U.S. Navy Boards Two Iraqi Vessels in Gulf
Cracking down on what American officials say is a surge in smuggling by Iraq, the Navy stopped and boarded two Iraqi vessels this week that were suspected of violating the United Nations trade embargo.
Iraq responded to the episode, which took place on Thursday night, with angry protests.


Live, From East End, It's LTV
EVERY morning at 7 o'clock, cable subscribers in East Hampton who turn on their sets to Channel 27 start their day with "Hello! Hello! East End," a two-hour program with Frazer Dougherty as producer and host.
Mr.
Dougherty, executive director and founder of LTV, said he welcomed residents to join him on the air and talk about themselves.
"I'll talk about anything," he said, "from what's on their minds, to how many dogs they have or how many wives they have. When there's no one's here to talk to I just talk to myself."


Cynthia Aaronson, Anthony Davis
JUST before 8 P.M. on Nov. 20, the lobby of the Joseph Papp Public Theater on Lafayette Street was filled with people unraveling their scarfs and sipping coffee as black as their leather jackets.
They were there to catch one of the evening's three main events -- "Simpatico," the new play by Sam Shephard; "Some People," Danny Hoch's one-man show, or the real-life wedding of Anthony Davis and Cynthia Aaronson, held in the Lu Esther Theater.


In a Gay Haven, a Sense of Community Builds
Jackson Heights has been a gay mecca since the 1920's when the quick subway ride to Times Square drew vaudevillians here.
And in recent years, as immigrants from Latin America have transformed the neighborhood, the area has turned into New York City's epicenter for gay Hispanic people.
It is a counterpoint to the Village or Chelsea, where the gay population of white, middle-class men share common histories.
Jackson Heights's gay white and Hispanic populations may occupy the same blocks, but they are divided by age, education, heritage and class.


TRADE AGREEMENT ENDS LONG DEBATE, BUT NOT CONFLICTS
The enormous global trade agreement approved by Congress this week does not mean an end to trade conflicts, economists and Administration officials say, much as arms control does not mean an end to strife.
If anything, the biggest trade accord in two generations will clear the way for new struggles over a different breed of trade barriers, which may prove more daunting than those it resolved.
The 22,000-page General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade, known as GATT, dealt with many of the enormously sensitive political issues facing the international trading system, including the gradual reduction of tariffs on agricultural products and the protection of intellectual property rights, like copyrights and patents.


Computer Access to Indian Lore
INDIAN lore and legends, traditionally passed on by tribal ceremony, are joining the ranks of 21st-century communications because of a fourth-grade teacher at Bedford Road Elementary School here.
Since September, Christian Borger has been creating a computer software program for America On-Line, a telecommunications network similar to Prodigy but geared to teachers and schools.
The software system features interactive information about American Indian tribes.


Cynthia Kaplan, David D. Froelich
Cynthia Anne Kaplan, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Jack B. Kaplan of Greenwich, Conn., is to be married today to David Drew Froelich, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph D. Froelich of Scarsdale, N.Y.
Rabbi Beth Singer is to officiate at Birchwood Country Club in Westport, Conn.
Ms.
Kaplan is keeping her name.
A graduate of the University of Pennsylvania, she is an actress and writer in New York.
Her father is a computer consultant in Greenwich.


TV Infomercials Draw Mixed Reactions
FOR the 600,000 customers of Cablevision on Long Island the expansion of the teleshopping industry, once dismissed as a fad, means more of the 30-minute commercial programs known as infomercials.
The programs sell skin-care products, kitchen appliances, fitness equipment, self-improvement videos, nonprofit organizations and Presidential candidates.


The Jets Need a Pass Rush to Survive the December Doldrums
When practice ended on Friday, the Jets ran off the field yelling, "Seven-and-six!" Coach Pete Carroll, aware that people are wondering about the players' collective psyche, asked a bystander, "Well, they look in a good frame of mind, don't they?"
Everyone always wonders about the frame of mind of the Jets, a 6-6 team coming off a 28-24 loss to Miami.


Kicker Wins Game In a Blur
A kick once again decided the Army-Navy game, and again in Army's favor.
A 52-yard field goal by a nearsighted Cadet, Kurt Heiss, in the fourth quarter provided the winning points today in a 22-20 victory.
Heiss, a left-footed senior, did not see the football go through the goal posts with distance to spare.
The ball was a blur.


Wall Street; Level One Insiders Fared Well Before Plunge
NOT every shareholder of Level One Communications is feeling so awful about last week's plunge.
Shares of Level One, which makes semiconductors that transmit voice and data, fell $4.50, to $12.25, on Wednesday, as investors bailed out on news of shipping delays and disappointing new orders for the Sacramento, Calif.-based company.
Level One soared to as high as $32.25 by Sept. 30.
On Friday the stock rose $1.50 to $13.50.
More fortunate than those who sold last week were several insiders who sold shares between July 27 and Sept. 19, a period in which the stock traded between $17.25 and $29.50.


Librarianship As a Career
Re: "Bringing Libraries Into the 21st Century" (New Jersey Q &amp; A, Oct. 30), an interview with Dr.
Betty Turock, president-elect of the American Library Association and head of the library studies program at Rutgers University.
I've known Dr.
Turock since my days as a student at the library school in the early 1980's.
She has never failed to be a kind and supportive mentor.


New Year's in a Palace
Taurida Palace in St.
Petersburg, Russia, is not normally open to the public.
But on New Year's Eve, some 500 revelers from around the world will welcome 1995 at the palace with Champagne, caviar and dancing.
The New Year's Eve ball, billed as Taurida's first since Czar Nicholas II, includes a four-course dinner and a concert by musicians from the Maryinsky Theater.
The celebration is part of a weeklong tour, run by Russiatours of Tampa, Fla., of St.
Petersburg, Dec. 28 to Jan. 4, with a night in Helsinki.
The package, $2,400 a person, includes accommodation at the Nevsky Palace hotel, a sleigh ride outside Pavlosk Palace and air fare from New York or Miami.
Call (800) 633-1008.


HENRY ROLLINS, PUNK MOGUL
How refreshing to read about someone who is successful but hasn't sold out.
Karen Schoemer offers a unique look at Henry Rollins, in "Punk Mogul" (Nov. 6).
It is interesting that his father was a teacher and his mom worked for the Department of Education.
And he stayed in school, although he admits doing poorly, except in English.
He says he loved the subject.
Good for him!
He should do a public-service spot telling kids to stay in school.
After all, he did, and look where it got him.
ROBERTA A. MCQUEEN Amityville, L.I.


LIAM NEESON
THE INDEPENDENT!" Liam Neeson cries, referring to the English newspaper. "They did an editorial comment on me lovemaking abilities.
My mother is reading this!
I will not discuss my love life," he says. Neeson is outraged. He wants to be known for his mind. Please.
I had just walked into Neeson's trailer on the set of his latest movie, "Nell," in North Carolina.
I hadn't even thought to ask him about his sexual prowess.
Now this sudden explosion.
Could this be a bit of manful boasting, hiding behind a scrim of outrage?


Wild Gambling And Deception Bring Big Losses
GAMBLING, gambling.
We used to think that it was the stock market where the big betting went on.
But if this year has proven anything, it is that the really big swingers were playing the interest rate game.


For the Record
To the Sports Editor:
Robin Finn proclaims Martina Navratilova to be the greatest woman ever to play tennis ("Fearless, Boundless and Ready to Depart," Nov. 13).
While I recognize the difficulty of comparing players who lived in different eras, it ought to be possible to compare her with Chris Evert because they were contemporaries for 17 years.


Taking On Ticketmaster Over Pricing
To the Editor:
Ticketmaster's per ticket service charge is often illegal.
New York State forbids a ticket resaler, which Ticketmaster is, from charging more than 10 percent of the face value of the ticket, with a maximum of $5 as a per ticket service charge.
This summer's Rolling Stones' tickets carried a hefty $7 per ticket service charge, and recently the folksinger Nanci Griffith tickets carried an additional $5.50, far greater than 10 percent of the $40 face value.
This open and notorious disregard for our laws must be dealt with.
MATTHEW MANDELL  Bronx, Nov. 7  Mr.
Mandell is a free-lance writer.


Taking On Ticketmaster Over Pricing
To the Editor:
The rock band Pearl Jam deserves credit for publicly exposing Ticketmaster, joining the chorus of consumer groups that has called attention to the company's deceptive and anticompetitive practices.
This isn't the first instance in which Ticketmaster has shown contempt for its audience.
In the Dinkins Administration, the New York City Consumer Affairs Department took legal action around two concert ticket issues that both implicated Ticketmaster.


Bookshelf
THE CHRISTMAS TREE SHIP.
Written and illustrated by Jeanette Winter.
Philomel. $14.95. (Ages 5 to 9) Herman Schuenemann brought spruce trees by schooner from Manistique, Mich., to Chicago from 1887 until he and his crew were lost in a storm in December 1912.
His wife and daughters took up the tradition the next year.
A true story, simply told and well illustrated.


Hell's Kitchen Hotter With Revivalist Fans
When it comes to the sensitive business of renaming neighborhoods, some people just won't get with the program.
In the last year, a neighborhood group, a newspaper and a bar have all revived the old label "Hell's Kitchen," saying that Clinton, a relatively newfangled creation, sounds a bit too bland for a neighborhood with such an earthy past.


'Nothing to Build On': Haiti Starting at Zero
The ambulance for the only public maternity hospital in this capital city of 2 million people sits rusting on cinder blocks in the parking lot, its tires long gone.
Fetid sewage water surrounds the hospital, clumps of garbage bobbing through the thick green algae.
The hospital grounds are littered with broken and abandoned equipment: a battered sterilizing drum, a pile of old tires, a gurney with two wheels, a rusty boiler.
Inside the hospital, just one example of the overwhelming problems facing President Jean-Bertrand Aristide's new Government despite initial signs of hope, it does not get better.
A half-dozen women, groaning and crying as they begin to go into labor, lie on a hallway floor because the beds are filled.


The More The Merrier
To the Editor:
In his article "A Simple Song That Lives Beyond Time"  [ Nov. 13 ] , Eric Weisbard refers to Nirvana's version of "In the Pines" as definitive and then writes that "there really is no need for anyone ever to sing it again."


Israel Resumes Sealing of Houses as Punishment
In a courtyard a few hundred yards from El Bireh City Hall, Omar al-Asmar's relatives have lived in tents for more than four years, barely protected from rain and cold now that an early winter slashes at the canvas sheets.
The spare four-room house they rented was sealed shut by the Israeli Army in 1990 after Mr.
Asmar was sent to prison for acts that included throwing gasoline bombs at Israeli soldiers.
Shutters were welded and doors boarded up.


The Neediest Cases; Children's Aid Society: A Social Services Pathfinder
Child care for working mothers and free school lunches are expected services in the 1990's.
But the Children's Aid Society was already running such programs in the 1800's, paving the way for the many other agencies nationwide that now offer them.
Founded in 1853 to care for New York's orphans, the society now helps more than 100,000 children a year.
As the society increases spending to expand preventive services, private donations are not keeping pace, said Philip Coltoff, the executive director.
The society has dipped into its unrestricted reserves for $5 million this year to meet a budget of $24.5 million, expanding foster care and health care services and after-school programs.


Ruffs


1830's Gem Is De-Graffitied
When the New York Landmarks Conservancy looked for a site to demonstrate how to remove graffiti without damaging facades, it picked a lesser-known historical treasure: the Old Merchant's House at 49 East Fourth Street.
Last week, after applying a dose of chemical paint stripper, a crew armed with a high-pressure water nozzle blasted away the painted scrawls from the white marble steps and red brick walls.
The cleanup on Tuesday and Wednesday erased the only visible trace of the late 20th century intruding on that address.


Furtive Dumping of Used Oil and Antifreeze Fouls Vacant Lots
They do it late at night or when no one else is around, and people in the neighborhood are left with huge puddles of purple oil and no one to blame.
For months now, the industrial part of Bedford-Stuyvesant has been the site of illegal oil dumping, most likely by local mechanics, who empty vats of old oil or antifreeze into vacant lots, then tiptoe away.


Plan to Give Venison To the Poor Hits a Snag
The idea was simple enough: deer hunters in New Jersey would donate their venison to the poor, making good use of meat that might otherwise go to waste.
While the hungry would get the food, the hunters of New Jersey would get the good publicity.
Several other states, including Maryland and New York, have similar government-sanctioned programs.


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
'VELVETEEN RABBIT'
Margery Williams's story of "The Velveteen Rabbit," a toy so beloved by the little boy who owns it that the rabbit becomes real, has been adapted for the stage by James Still and will be presented by the Young Performers Ensemble of the Northern Westchester Center for the Arts in Mount Kisco next weekend.
Music was composed for the production by Bobbe Bramson.
Richard Harrison designed the sets, Kathy Ford Snider created the costumes and Peter May did the lighting.
Victoria Gail Oltarsh is the director.


A Business, And Era, End
The changes in Woodside, along Roosevelt Avenue near the Jackson Heights border, can be measured in the fruit and vegetables Eddie Ronacher has sold for 45 years at the Woodside Open Air Market.
After World War II, the staples were turnips, beans and apples.
In recent years, the shelves have abounded with jalapeno peppers and tomatillos, daikon and napa.


C.I.A. Secrets Illuminate the Cold War
During the cold war, one of the Central Intelligence Agency's most important jobs was to estimate the Soviet Union's military strength and strategy and share the findings in top-secret reports to the President and selected policy makers.
The reports, known as National Intelligence Estimates, are milestones of the arms race, snapshots that chronicled the buildup of nuclear arms as the two superpowers sought peace through ever bigger and more destructive weapons.
But with the country they analyzed no longer in existence and the C.I.A. experimenting with a policy of more openness, 80 of those reports from the 1950's through the 1980's were declassified this weekend at Harvard University here during a conference of spies and scholars.


Business and Politics
Joseph L. Bruno, the next majority leader of the New York Senate, says he believes his dual experience as a businessman and legislator is an asset.
But it has also been a liability in his political career, bringing allegations of conflicts of interest and ethical lapses.
Article, page 52.


Sports of The Times; Jets Are Asleep Instead of Alert, Once Again
ON a billboard across Highway 1 from Foxboro Stadium, Bill Parcells is big and bulky in a blue Patriots jacket.
"You Can't Fake a Patriot Commander," the sign shouts.


Sanderson Farms Inc.(SAFM,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Offshore Pipelines Inc.(OFP,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


New York City Charter Grants Council Budget-Amending Power
To the Editor:
"The City Council's Soft Numbers" (editorial, Nov. 30) and "New York City's Budget Cuts" (editorial, Nov. 22), on the conflict between Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani and the New York City Council, misinterpret the Council's role in the budget process.


After Fire Kills 5 Children, Neighbors Recall Lively Brood
They were five children with a father and mother whose addiction to drugs, neighbors said, had made them sporadic in their duties as parents.
But the three girls and two boys, age 7 months to 5 years, remained spirited and playful because of their grandmother Lori Mason, described by neighbors as an indomitable woman who, at 70, fed, bathed and changed the diapers of her child's children.
On Saturday evening, the three generations were inside the Mason's two-story, wood-frame house when a fire erupted in the kitchen and roared upstairs, trapping and killing all five children in a bedroom.
The grandparents and parents escaped with minor injuries from what fire officials said was this community's deadliest fire in two decades.


Retail Sales
Computer and Software stores are the fastest growing retailers in the region, according to a census of retail trade recently released by the Commerce Department.
Sales at these businesses doubled, and in New Jersey's case, tripled. from 1987 to 1992.
Overall, retail sales in New York, New Jersey and Connecticut increased during the same period but not as sharply as in the nation as a whole.
Nationwide, retail sales rose 27 percent over the five-year period. sales at miscellaneous general stores more than doubled in both New Jersey and Connecticut.
This retail category includes warehouse clubs: stores that sell merchandise in bulk at cut-rate prices to customers who pay a membership fee.


Seaman Furniture Co.(SEAM,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


The Obesity Gene
The identification of a genetic flaw that seems to cause obesity in mice -- and possibly in humans as well -- caused ripples of excitement when it was announced last week.
The finding holds out the dazzling hope that scientists may, eventually, come up with a drug treatment to help overweight Americans shed unwanted, unhealthy pounds.
But don't count on the discovery changing your life any time soon.
Any treatment is said to be 5 to 10 years away.
And the field of genetic disease is littered with false hopes gone unrealized.


Lawyer Sees Travel Office Indictment
A lawyer for the former head of the White House travel office, Billy R. Dale, said today that he expected Federal prosecutors to seek an embezzlement indictment against Mr.
Dale this week, charging him with stealing $69,000 in money paid by news organizations for Presidential trips.
Steven C. Tabackman, Mr.
Dale's lawyer, said his client would plead not guilty to the charges, which are likely to revive an embarrassing issue that created a furor when it erupted in May 1993, and left a powerful impression of White House bungling on ethical matters.


Giant Relief Kicker Comes in and Wins Game
They are good friends, and so when Giants kicker Brad Daluiso was patted on the back and his teammate Dave Brown called him a hero, he tried not to gloat too much.
He doesn't want to rub it into his friend's face.
His friend is kicker David Treadwell of the Giants, and Daluiso probably just took his job.
By making a game-winning 33-yard field goal today to beat the Cleveland Browns with 19 seconds left, Daluiso saved the day and may have replaced Treadwell as the full-time kicker.


Borden Plan: A Case of Cat And Mouse
Borden Inc. and Paul B. Kazarian, who wants to invest in and alter the company, have not yet held serious negotiations about the company's future, but their game of one-upsmanship continued through the weekend.
Borden said yesterday that its board members would meet tomorrow in its New York offices to discuss Mr.
Kazarian's proposals to revamp the company with him as a minority shareholder.
But Mr.
Kazarian will not be there, he said.


Surburban Listlessness As Caught by Green Day
Twenty years after punk-rock was born, it has triumphed in ways no one expected.
It has survived not by conquering cities, where its speed and noise emerged, but by infiltrating the suburbs, where its supercharged message of seething boredom and aimless resentment find receptive ears in high schools and malls.
Punk prevails not as revolutionary music -- the hope of its British wing -- but because it's bratty.
Green Day, a three-man band from the San Francisco Bay area, has seized the punk moment; the group's first major-label album, "Dookie" (Reprise) has sold three million copies.
The band performed at the Nassau Coliseum on Friday night for an elated crowd of squealing young girls and uproarious high-school slam-dancers, all singing along on lines like "Call me pathetic, call me what you will" and "Sometimes I give myself the creeps."


The 'Why' of Youth's Fatal Beating In Philadelphia Is Elusive
Three weeks after a group of teen-agers from the suburbs beat another youth to death with baseball bats in front of his church, the incident still haunts this city for its brutality, the slow response by the police and the lack of any apparent connection among those accused of the crime.
Some barely knew one another.
This combination of issues has distinguished the killing of the youth, 16-year-old Eddie Polec, from other recent crimes in Philadelphia, including the 44 other slayings recorded by the police in November.
Six teen-agers have been arrested and charged with murder, and a seventh has been charged with supplying the bats used in the beating.
But a deeper understanding of the incident, including what brought these seven youths together, remains unclear and unlikely to unfold before a preliminary hearing in court this Friday.


Gretzky Brings Life to a Saturday Night
For more than four decades, the weekly "Hockey Night in Canada" telecast has been a cultural touchstone around which social life revolves.
"See you at the first intermission" is another way of telling time in Canada.
Everyone knows there's usually one at about 8:50 P.M., Eastern time, Saturday night, when the commentator Don Cherry delivers his weekly bombast on "Coach's Corner."
When the new Hockey Hall of Fame opened in Toronto last year, one of its most popular exhibits was of a Canadian living room, circa 1960, with mannequins as family members, sitting around a black-and-white television showing kinescopes of games from the Forum in Montreal and Maple Leaf Gardens in Toronto.


Serious Crime Is Still Declining, But Fears Remain, F.B.I. Reports
Even as public worries about crime remain high, the number of serious crimes reported to law-enforcement agencies across the nation fell 3 percent in the first half of this year, the Federal Bureau of Investigation announced today.
Reports of serious crime have fallen steadily since 1992.
The nation's homicide rate fell by 2 percent in the first half of this year, after rising 3.2 percent last year.


Guess Who Has Playoff Hopes? It's Those Streaking Giants!
The Giants lose seven straight games and the playoff picture looks like something finger-painted by a 7-year-old.
Suddenly, after three straight victories, including today's 16-13 triumph over a Cleveland Browns team that is considered a Super Bowl contender, that picture is beginning to crystallize into something that's actually palpable.
And the Giants can thank their defense, their quarterback and Vinny Testaverde.
There is a saying in the National Football League: Any time Testaverde is at quarterback, the opposing team has a chance to win.
He may have been playing well leading up this game, as the Browns cruised to a 9-3 record, but for most of this afternoon he looked like the Testaverde of old -- the Tampa Bay Testaverde who usually appears clueless.


New Managers At 3 Agencies
Top management is changing at three big agencies.
Bob Hielcher, chief operating officer at Tatham Euro RSCG in Chicago and one of four managing partners, has announced his resignation, effective Dec. 31.
There will be no successor named at this time, the agency said on Friday.


U.N. Falters in Post-Cold-War Peacekeeping, but Sees Role as Essential
The effective collapse of the United Nations peacekeeping efforts in Bosnia, weeks after the Security Council decided to end an increasingly fruitless mission in Somalia, is forcing the organization and its members to confront two stark truths.
The United Nations is faltering in its most crucial post-cold-war task: keeping the peace in a world that has lost its superpower balance.
Yet there is no other organization that can do the job.
"Five years into the post-cold-war era, I think we've all learned that the U.N. is fairly indispensable," said Sir David Hannay, Britain's representative.
"At the same time, there is no lack of disasters and problems. So that means that it's the U.N. with all its warts, or it's the law of the jungle."


No Headline


Sequence of Bowls a Help to Penn State
When a national championship is an expectation and perfection becomes the goal, it makes little difference when the disappointment arrives or what form it takes.
The end of Alabama's hopes, with the 24-23 loss to Florida in the Southeastern Conference championship game, seemed no more traumatic than the end of Colorado's, or Florida's, or Florida State's.
The end for the Crimson Tide just came later.
As a politically bizarre year reaches the pause before the finish, an outcome on the final Saturday of the regular season continued to produce a resulting set of winners and losers.
Although the regular season had already ended for Nebraska and Penn State, the last two contenders with perfect records, the elimination of the Crimson Tide and a unique bowl schedule combined to give the Cornhuskers one additional complication and the Nittany Lions one small added edge.


Patents; New Lenses Can Create the Distortions of Drunken Driving and Help Teach Teen-agers
TEEN-AGERS in Virginia may soon learn about the dangers of drunken driving while wearing patented glasses that cause the distorted vision and physical disorientation caused by alcohol or drugs.
Students in drivers' education will not sit behind the wheel with the glasses, because the effects of the glasses can make driving dangerous.
Teachers who tested them on controlled courses veered out of lanes, overshot stop signs and reacted sluggishly when steering and braking.


Giuliani Moving Ahead to Put City Services in Private Hands
The administration of Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani has, without fanfare, begun turning over to private companies an array of services in New York City now handled by municipal employees -- from replacing traffic signs to stuffing tax bills into envelopes to keeping city buildings clean.
The Department of Transportation has paid a contractor $1.8 million to repave roads in Queens for two months beginning next spring.
The Department of Homeless Services has awarded contracts to nonprofit organizations to operate three homeless shelters and a family shelter now operated by city employees.


Navy Fires Chaump After Loss to Army
GEORGE CHAUMP, whose 14-41 record as Navy's head coach included four losses to archrival Army, was dismissed yesterday.
After losing to Army by 22-20 on Saturday, the Midshipmen finished with a 3-8 record, including a 7-0 victory over Division I-AA Lafayette.
The 59-year-old Chaump, who refused to comment on the decision, went 5-6 in his first year, then suffered through two straight 1-10 seasons before going 4-7 last year. (AP)


With Power Rangers Scarce, A Frenzied Search by Parents
Welcome to December, holiday shopping, mistletoe and the nation's second annual Mighty Morphin Power Rangers shortage.
What, another case of missing Morphins?


Master on the Diamond And a Demon in Life
COBB A Biography  By Al Stump  Illustrated. 436 pages.
Algonquin Books of Chapel Hill. $24.95.
This reviewer has not yet seen "Cobb," the movie starring Tommy Lee Jones that is based on the relationship described in Al Stump's fascinating "Cobb: A Biography." But knowing that the film is set in the final year in the life of Tyrus Raymond Cobb (1886-1961), who by most accounts was both the greatest and nastiest baseball star ever to play in the major leagues, one assumes that it took a remarkable performance by Mr.
Jones to lend the smallest dimension of heroism to Cobb's character.


From Afar, Frier Still A Part of Seahawks
They flew in to see his immobile body, hoped they would not weep, and instead he offered them tickets to see Chris Warren play football.
"I told him, 'No!' " said Mike Frier's father, Ulysses, today.
"I said, "We aren't here to see a game, we're here to see you.' "


13-Year-Old Is Charged In Stabbing Of a Boy, 12
A 12-year-old boy was fatally stabbed in the chest Saturday night, reportedly after he taunted a 13-year-old in the playground of a Bronx housing project, the police said.
The older youth was charged with murder.
The suspect, Lewis Daniel Santiago Pagan, had been a subject of teasing in his Bronx neighborhood because at 13, he was an ungainly 6 feet tall and weighed more than 200 pounds, neighbors said.


Dividend Meetings


In Rwanda, Some Soldiers Are Hit Men
At first, the killing of Mattias Hakizimana sounded like a familiar story here.
Late one night, Government soldiers knocked on his door and took him away for questioning.
The next day, he was found shot to death.
It looked like an act of ethnic revenge by Tutsi soldiers against a prosperous Hutu because Hutu militias killed half a million Tutsi earlier this year.
But when the murder was unraveled last week, fear ran through both Hutu and Tutsi residents of Kigali.
At first, the two soldiers who were arrested said they had killed Mr.
Hakizimana to settle a score with a man they said was a member of a Hutu militia.
But ultimately, they said they had been hired by a business competitor of Mr.
Hakizimana and paid 2 million Rwandan Francs, or the equivalent of $10,000, to kill him.


Benching and a Lecture Help Starks Find Shot
A week ago, when asked about John Starks's early-season shooting problems, Pat Riley replied, "We just have to live with it or change it."
At halftime against the Washington Bullets Saturday night at Madison Square Garden, Riley apparently made his move to change it.


Wireless Bidders Jostle for Position
Forget Sotheby's and Christie's.
The biggest auction of all time will get under way on Monday morning in the basement of a Postal Service building a few blocks north of the Capitol.
No fast-talking auctioneer will be present, no gavel, no paintings by Picasso or diaries by Da Vinci.
Instead, the bidding will occur amid the quiet hum of computers.
And the prizes will be invisible and untouchable: 99 licenses to use the radio spectrum for "personal communication services," a new family of wireless telephone and data services.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-13  GINGRICH URGES BOSNIA ACTION
Newt Gingrich, the next Speaker of the House, urged arming Bosnia's Muslims and warning Serbs of an air attack, but Democrats said such a plan could involve thousands of American soldiers.
A1


Former Surgeon General Begins Push for Americans to Slim Down
Dr.
C.
Everett Koop, the former Surgeon General who tried to persuade Americans to give up smoking, now hopes to make them thinner and fitter.
On Tuesday, at a press conference at the White House, Dr.
Koop is to announce the creation of a prevention campaign called "Shape Up America!" that will produce advertisements and public service announcements to encourage Americans to lose weight.
Experts in the obesity field said it would be the first national effort to do something about the escalating weight of Americans, and they generally were enthusiastic about Dr.
Koop's plan.


Specialty Retailers reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 29


CHRONICLE
LOUIS AUCHINCLOSS , the author of books about the upper-crust world of the Social Register, is not too impressed that he has just published his 50th book.
"There is no great virtue in quantity," he said the other day.
"I remind myself that Emily Bronte wrote a single novel -- and then she died at 29."


Among Israelis, Second Thoughts About Accord With the P.L.O.
On the eve of new Israeli-Palestinian peace talks, Israel is rethinking the heralded "declaration of principles" that it signed with the Palestine Liberation Organization last year.
The Cabinet of Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin began today to debate possible changes in the basic agreement out of concern that present plans to expand Palestinian self-rule throughout the West Bank are incompatible with the need to protect Israeli settlers there.


Restrain Those Prior Restraints
It has been 23 years since the courts, responding to the most urgent pleas of the Federal Government, temporarily enjoined publication of the Pentagon Papers, a Vietnam War history.
That temporary prior restraint on publication was thought necessary to let the Supreme Court examine the Government's dire warnings of peril to national security -- which the Court dismissed after inspecting the documents.
That experience should have taught judges to deny out of hand virtually any request to restrain publication, even temporarily.
Yet over the years judges, almost casually and on flimsy one-sided pleadings, often issue those restraints.
Judge Peter Leisure of New York's Federal court acted in that silly tradition the other day, ordering a halt to the distribution of Penthouse magazine's January issue.


Market Place; In Orange County, Strategies Sour
The treasurer of Orange County, Calif., investing $8 billion of money from the county and local government agencies, did not buy any securities that have defaulted.
Nor are any of them likely to do so.
Virtually every security he bought will be worth, at maturity, about what he paid.
So how did the treasurer, Robert L. Citron, manage to lose $1.5 billion of that money, as the county acknowledged last week?


Student Dies In Struggle With Officer
A 20-year-old college student from Ridgewood, Queens, one of three young men who fled a shopping mall after being questioned about a credit-card purchase, was shot and killed in the mall parking lot during a struggle with a police officer, officials said today.
The victim, Eneea Moldovan, a Romanian immigrant and a junior pre-medical student at the State University of New York at Stony Brook, died of a single bullet wound in the neck, according to Suffolk County homicide detectives who were investigating the shooting.


Cowboys Catch Cunningham in a Complete Fog
Forgive Randall Cunningham.
The stress of a four-game losing streak -- the first in his professional career -- must be getting to him.
He actually said that the Eagles experienced a victory against the Cowboys this afternoon.
Never mind that the scoreboard at Veterans Stadium read Cowboys 31, Eagles 19.


The Garden's Man With 500 Moves; His Keyboard and Compact Disks Keep the Crowd Rocking
Ray Castoldi takes the elevator as far up in Madison Square Garden as possible.
Then he opens a small gray door and climbs 13 ladder-steep steps to a ledge overlooking all of the arena.
He edges behind a beam to a wire cage and unlocks the door.
The Garden's music director is in his element.
His job is to bang on an electronic keyboard and select from more than 500 compact disks, all with the avowed purpose of inspiring the crowd to blood lust -- or at least keeping them awake on slower nights.
The program favors rock classics, the volume seems roughly equivalent to an airliner taking off and, for spectators, the effect is like being trapped inside a raucous pinball machine.


A Literary Romance That Refuses to Die
Emily Bronte's "Wuthering Heights" can't stay away from the movies, a habit that began in earnest in 1939 with the rhapsodically romantic William Wyler film starring Laurence Olivier and Merle Oberon as Heathcliff and Cathy.
That was followed by a 1954 Mexican version directed by Luis Bunuel, and then a 1970 British adaptation starring Timothy Dalton and Anna Calder-Marshall.
Now, on TNT tonight, the British are giving the Bronte story another go, this time with Ralph Fiennes ("Schindler's List," "Quiz Show") and the French actress Juliette Binoche ("The Unbearable Lightness of Being") portraying the doomed lovers.
Unlike the Wyler film, made on a Hollywood back lot, this one was filmed on splendid locations in North Yorkshire.


Cost of Saving Lives
The brutal mathematics of safety, the inevitable weighing of money and lives, is rarely performed as publicly as it was in the legal settlement between the Federal Government and the General Motors Corporation announced on Friday.
Transportation Secretary Federico F. Pena said then that he would drop efforts to force G.M. to recall pickup trucks he had judged potentially deadly in exchange for $51.3 million from G.M. to support safety programs unrelated to the trucks.


A Not-So-Worthy Man, But Then There's His Music
By his deeds shall you know Alessandro Stradella, and many of them were not very nice.
Stradella's life, its 37 years stretched over the dead center of the 17th century, was short and fast.
Aside from his swindles, philanderings and ultimate murder, the facts about it are few.
The music, however, survives in plenty: vocal and instrumental pieces that crossed between the religious and the secular and left their mark on the late Baroque.
"L'Anime del Purgatorio," as presented by I Musici di San Cassiano at St.
Ignatius of Antioch Church on Friday night, was designated a "cantata morale," which in light of its composer's character, brings to mind another maxim: "Do as I say, not as I do." In Pompeo Figari's sweetly simple-minded libretto, a descending angel requires about an hour and a quarter of music to rescue the souls in purgatory from the clutches of Lucifer.


Keeping Score on the Budget
Under Democratic and Republican leaders alike, the Congressional Budget Office has used techniques for estimating deficits that were trusted by legislators and outside professionals.
Until now, the C.B.O. has not abused that trust.
But a Republican notion called "dynamic scoring" threatens that healthy bipartisan tradition and the budget office's reputation for refusing to adopt scoring techniques whose only virtue was to yield estimates that politicians wanted to see.
Under the budget laws, the practice of scoring takes on a huge importance.
Those laws prevent Congress from passing bills that add to the deficit.
Republicans propose cutting taxes and the deficit.
Ordinary accountants say they cannot do both.
Their response is to change the accounting method.


A. F. Shore, 70, a British Expert On Egypt After Cleopatra's Fall
Prof.
Arthur Frank Shore, a British scholar who was an expert on Egypt in Late Antiquity, died on Nov. 27 at Southport, 17 miles north of Liverpool, England.
He was 70.
He had been seriously ill in recent months, The Times of London reported.


A Flamenco Exercise in Watery Risk-Taking
Jose Costas's face is tense as he performs "Solo," a marvelously witty premiere that Susan Marshall has choreographed for Ballet Hispanico.
Who wouldn't look tense, in fact, when balancing a water-filled punch bowl on one's head while doing a flamenco dance on a ramp?
At the end, Mr.
Costas swings the bowl up, like a matador taking his hat off to salute a crowd.
The water flies out in all directions.
On Friday night at the Joyce Theater (175 Eighth Avenue, at 19th Street, Chelsea), Mr.
Costas's triumph was no less real than that of a bullfighter's.
The crowd went wild.


Press
PRESTIGIOUS news organizations hate to become the story.
So it was a rare exercise in contrition when The Washington Post ran a front-page article describing its own "deep embarrassment" at the way it had been dragged into the GATT debate.
The Post, as the Nov. 25 article explained in extraordinary detail, had been caught violating its own rules.
In September, the newspaper editorialized in favor of a pending bill to expand the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade without disclosing to readers that The Washington Post Company had a multimillion-dollar interest in seeing that the bill passed.


Savannah Foods &amp; Industries (SFI,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 2


High Road Leads to Success For Book on Prince Charles
Jonathan Dimbleby would like to make it clear that "The Prince of Wales," his exhaustive account of the life and times of the heir to the British throne, is not just another titillating treatise on the peccadilloes and sex lives of the royal family.
"The coverage has been frustrating," Mr.
Dimbleby said in an interview recently at his home here, speaking of the focus of the popular press on such racy details as Charles's confession that, yes, he did cheat on his wife.
"In a way, I'd have liked the book to have been judged more as a book than as an event."


Pall Corp.(PLL,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 29


Marijuana for AIDS: A Drug-War Victim
To the Editor:
For many years, patients and their doctors have been unsuccessfully petitioning the Government to allow the medical availability of marijuana.


Now Act to Ban the Products of Child Labor; Ratify the Treaty
To the Editor:
Anna Quindlen, in "Out of the Hands of Babes" (column, Nov. 23), vividly describes the horrors of child labor and the failure of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade to include adequate protections against exploiting children as cheap and servile workers.


Rykoff-Sexton Inc.(RYK,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 29


CHRONICLE
Huntley-Brinkley, MacNeil / Lehrer, and now -- Mason and Felder?
JACKIE MASON , the outspoken comedian, and RAOUL LIONEL FELDER , the New York lawyer best known for celebrity divorces, are teaming up to do a talk radio show on the BBC.
They taped their first program, a 15-minute segment dealing with the O. J. Simpson case, last week for broadcast tomorrow evening.
When the Simpson trial begins, "We will go to Los Angeles and broadcast from there," Mr.
Felder said, explaining that the show would then expand to an hour and include listener phone calls.
It will cover other issues as well.


GINGRICH IS URGING A TOUGHER POLICY ON BOSNIA'S SERBS
Stepping up Republican pressure for a more forceful Bosnia policy, Newt Gingrich, the next Speaker of the House, said today that the allies should pull United Nations forces out of Bosnia, arm and train its Muslim-led Government forces and then bluntly warn the Serbs that they face an all-out air attack if they respond with a general offensive.
Secretary of State Warren M. Christopher immediately replied that Mr.
Gingrich's remarks and a similar though less aggressive plan put forward by Senator Bob Dole, the new majority leader, were a "war strategy" that would lead to the involvement of hundreds of thousands of American ground soldiers.


Southern Co.(SO,N) reports earnings for 12mos to Oct 31


Clues Found To Rare Form Of Epilepsy
A rare form of epilepsy that fails to respond to most treatments appears to be caused by abnormal immune system activity, a report from the Duke University Medical Center says, and the researchers say the finding could lead to new therapy.
The report was delivered today at the annual meeting of the American Epilepsy Society in New Orleans.
The researchers said the rare form of epilepsy, Rasmussen's encephalitis, appeared to result when a patient's immune system attacks his own brain cells.


Bond Rally May Be Act of Faith
The performance of the bond market last week rattled conventional wisdom and led a number of credit market analysts to suggest cautiously that the 14-month rise in long-term interest rates may be about over.
"I think we are close to a peak in long-term rates," David H. Resler, chief economist at Nomura Securities International, said.
"I wouldn't want to argue with the idea that we are going back above 8 percent or, perhaps, as high as 8.25 percent. But unless something unforeseen happens on the inflation front I don't think we are going much higher than that."


Fed Rate Rises Take Longer To Have Effect on Economy
As the United States economy's growth continues unabated 10 months after the Federal Reserve began trying to slow it, more and more economists are concluding that the central bank's all-purpose tool, raising or lowering interest rates, is not as effective as it used to be.
To these economists and to a number of former Fed officials, figures like those in the Labor Department's report Friday showing a sharp drop in unemployment last month signal a quiet erosion of the Fed's influence.


Economic Calendar
Listed below are the scheduled release dates for major economic indicators this week.
Monday  New-Home Sales . . .
Oct.
New-Home Prices . . .
Oct.
Auto Sales . . .
Nov.
Tuesday  None  Wednesday  Productivity . . . 3d Qtr.
Consumer Borrowing . . .
Oct.
Thursday  Weekly Jobless Claims  Friday  None


Bullet From Overpass Hits a House on L.I.
Thomas Baldwin had just sat down in his den to watch television at 11 this morning when he heard the sound of shattering glass, and then a loud impact against the side of his house.
Mr.
Baldwin, 45, a purchasing manager at the Jamaica Water Supply Company, a water utility based in Jamaica, Queens, said he ran to see what had happened and noticed a hole in the wall on the side of his house.


Kennedy Turns Its Coach Into Prophet
Before the high school football season began, Kennedy Coach Jerry Horowitz boldly proclaimed that his team would win the Public Schools Athletic League championship.
Horowitz's preseason prediction proved to be on the mark.
Yesterday at Columbia University's Wien Stadium, the Knights defeated Canarsie, 27-20, to claim the P.S.A.L. title.


Young and Rice Get to Watch 4th Quarter From Bench
Beat them and embarrass them once.
Little shame.
Beat then and trounce them twice?
The message is loud and clear.
The San Francisco 49ers are the elite.


Unease at European Security Parley
Amid rancor over how NATO should respond to the war in Bosnia and Russian alarm at plans for some Eastern European countries eventually to join the alliance, the leaders of 53 countries will meet here on Monday to map security plans for the post-cold-war era.
President Clinton, who is scheduled to be in Budapest for about eight hours, was strongly urged to attend by Chancellor Helmut Kohl of Germany and President Boris N. Yeltsin of Russia, Secretary of State Warren Christopher said at a news conference here tonight.


Equity Issues This Week
The following equity offerings are expected this week:
Agco Corp., Atlanta, $125 million of convertible subordinated notes due in 2001, B-1/BB-/--.
CS First Boston.


Sports of The Times; Situated in the Hot Seat, Brown Keeps His Cool
THIRD-AND-15, the Giants backed up at their 21-yard line, the Browns' defense infused with a late-game dose of rabid adrenaline.
Who would've put their first-down money on the human soap opera named Dave Brown?
Throughout the second half, Brown's approach had been to avoid the kind of calamity that once threatened to ruin him.
Despite field position to die for, he consistently went for a foot -- kicker Brad Daluiso's -- as opposed to yards.
This was known as the Testaverde Tactic, formulated with the hunch that Vinny Testaverde was no more capable of leading the stumbling Browns to the end zone than Vinny from Queens.


A Youthful Celebration of Life Turns Into Grief
The three young men had gone to the nightclub to celebrate a new life.
Jose Goncalvez had just become a father, so he had invited his two friends, Julio Almodovar and Peter Perla, to drink and dance to his good fortune.
Mr.
Almodovar did not much like to party, and he was still mourning the death of his own baby, but he showed up anyway.
It was sometime after 1 A.M.
Saturday, after the three had toasted Jose Jr. and reminisced about their days together at Elizabeth High School, that they were standing at the top of the stairway to the club, El Balcon.
A fight broke out inside and as the crowd pushed to leave, the young men were propelled down the stairs, trapped at the bottom of a twisted heap of bodies, the air forced from them.





RESULTS PLUS
WOMEN'S COLLEGE BASKETBALL  Smith Scores a Rarity: a Dunk  As she had been predicting, Charlotte Smith of No. 5 North Carolina became the first woman in 10 years to dunk a basketball during a game, making a right-handed jam during a 113-58 rout of North Carolina A&amp;T yesterday in Chapel Hill, N.C.
The 6-footer intercepted a pass by Samara Dobbins and went in uncontested 17 seconds into the game.
"The pass was just there, and the whole time I was going out, I was focusing on dunking," said Smith, who hit a 3-pointer at the buzzer in April to give the Tar Heels the National Collegiate Athletic Association championship.
The last woman to dunk during a game was Georgeann Wells, who had two dunks while playing for West Virginia in 1984. (AP)


Budapest Bound


Miranda Rule Doesn't Specify Interim Silence
To the Editor:
Re "Britain's Civil Liberties Backslide" (editorial, Nov. 28): You are correct in condemning Britain's proposal to warn arrested suspects that not only what they say but their silence as well may be used against them in court.
Such a warning would in effect require the suspect to plead to criminal charges without even being formally told what the charges are or having the opportunity to consult with counsel.


Youths and Violence
The killings happened in different boroughs, but both raised questions about the violent behavior of some New York teen-agers.
In the Bronx, a 13-year-old was arrested for stabbing his 12-year-old playmate; friends said the suspect had often been teased because of his size.


CLASSICAL MUSIC
Schubert as Scriabin: Romanticism of a Certain Age  Washington Irving High School
As interpretive schools go, Romanticism is not one approach but many; in fact, given that personalization is one of the school's hallmarks, its varieties should be virtually infinite.
Elisabeth Leonskaja's brand of Romanticism is very much in the Russian style that was popular from the 1950's through the 70's.
It thrives on impetuousness and high contrast, and it prizes sonic breadth and power over fastidiousness and subtlety.


Now Act to Ban the Products of Child Labor
To the Editor:
As author of the child labor deterrence bill, which would prohibit the importation of products made by abusive child labor in manufacturing and mining, I take strong exception to "The Poor Need Child Labor" by Kaushik Basu (Op-Ed, Nov. 29).


B.A.T. in Court to Defend American Tobacco Deal
B.A.T.
Industries is expected to contend today in Federal District Court that its proposed $1 billion acquisition of the American Tobacco Company will promote competition among United States cigarette makers, rather than stifle competition and raise prices, as the Government has suggested.
The Federal Trade Commission has tried to block the planned merger of American Tobacco and Brown &amp; Williamson, which is owned by B.A.T., a company based in London.
In October, the agency sought a preliminary injunction, asserting that the purchase of American Tobacco "would remove an aggressive competitor from the United States cigarette market."


Elizabeth Glaser Dies at 47; Crusader for Pediatric AIDS
Elizabeth Glaser, who waged a tireless campaign to draw attention to pediatric AIDS after she unknowingly passed the disease on to her daughter and son, died yesterday at her home in Santa Monica, Calif.
She was 47.
The cause was complications from AIDS, said Josh Baran, a spokesman for the family.


Clement Biddle Wood Jr., 69, Novelist and Paris Review Editor
Clement Biddle Wood Jr., a novelist who served for many years as an editor of the Paris Review, died yesterday at Southampton Hospital on Long Island.
He was 69 and had lived in nearby Water Mill since 1983.
The cause was complications from colon cancer, said Clement Biddle Wood 3d, his son.


Steelers and Morris Hitting Stride
Steelers 38, Bengals 15
The Pittsburgh Steelers became a playoff team yesterday by finally playing like one.


Prospects for U.S.-Cuba Thaw Now Are Fading
Three months after an agreement between the United States and Cuba to stop a flood of refugees raised expectations of a thaw in the countries' relationship, the prospects for quick, significant change are fading.
Cuba's hopes for a weakening of political support for Washington's tough economic sanctions against the island were shattered by the sweeping Republican victories in the Congressional elections.


For Once, Art Bests Politics As the Kennedy Center Honors 5
Pete Seeger, the folk singer, doesn't wear a tuxedo too often in his line of work.
The one he owns was made in 1922 for his father.
It had to be let out a few inches so he could accept a Kennedy Center Honors award from President Clinton, who called him "an inconvenient artist who dared to sing things as he saw them."
At a White House reception this afternoon, Mr.
Seeger was praised along with the singer Aretha Franklin, the actor Kirk Douglas, the director Harold Prince and the composer Morton Gould.
Further tribute was paid tonight by a cast of hundreds -- including Broadway dancers, a gospel choir, an Army band and folk singers in overalls -- in a gala tribute at the John F. Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts.
The 17th annual Kennedy Center Honors show is to be broadcast on CBS on Dec. 28.
Audience members at the Kennedy Center paid as much as $5,000 a ticket to benefit the Kennedy Center.


Time Inc.'s New Chief Is All Ears
After two months of listening to editors, sitting in on budget meetings and trying to grasp the infinitely nuanced culture of Time Inc., Norman Pearlstine, editor in chief-designate, is still diffident about disclosing his plans before he actually takes over on Jan. 1.
But one thing is clear from conversations with many editors at Time Inc.'s nine magazines and a talk with Mr.
Pearlstine himself in his temporary office on the 34th floor of the Time-Life Building: Mr.
Pearlstine, former executive editor of The Wall Street Journal, will be a hands-on top editor.
The critical question is, of course, to what degree?


Marcel Carne at 88: In Feisty Mode On the Eve of a Cinema Anniversary
Marcel Carne patted his paunch and pointed to the culprit, an arthritic knee that he also blames for the way he now shuffles around his Left Bank apartment.
But once he had settled into his favorite armchair, the French movie veteran was again ready to direct.
"I could do as Visconti once did and work from a wheelchair," he said, moving his arms as if he were suddenly mobile.
"Nowadays you can follow everything on a little screen, and I could go over to talk to the actors on wheels. But I doubt that any French producer would accept that."


No Headline
"Because the monsters die -- that's why it's so good." -- MICHAEL COTTER, 4, rhapsodizing about his 13 Power Rangers.  [ D3:1. ]


Treasury Sets Bill Auctions
The Treasury's schedule of financings this week is confined to the bills markets, beginning with today's regular weekly auction of three- and six-month bills.
On Thursday, the Government will auction 52-week bills.
By the close of the New York cash market on Friday, traders said the rate on the outstanding three-month bill was 5.61 percent and the six-month bill was at 6.10 percent.


U.S. Senators Step to Plate
Fearing a devastating blow to Florida's economy with the possible loss of spring training, the state's two United States Senators have urged the new chairman of the Senate Judiciary Committee to make baseball's antitrust exemption a priority when Congress reconvenes next month.
"We urge you to take quick action in January to address legislation to repeal the antitrust exemption so that baseball can return to the playing field even if the dispute continues off the field," Senator Connie Mack, a Republican, and Senator Bob Graham, a Democrat, wrote in a letter to Senator Orrin Hatch, Republican of Utah Friday.


Clinton Writes to Reassure Bosnian Government of Support
Seeking to end recent uncertainty here over Washington's position on the Bosnian war, President Clinton in a letter today gave unequivocal support to Bosnia's Muslim-led Government and its territorial integrity.
"Let me be clear: the United States remains committed to the preservation of Bosnia-Herzegovina as a single state within its existing borders," Mr.
Clinton wrote to President Alija Izetbegovic.


World Economies


People
*
Christina Creager and Andy Dumaine were named to the new positions of co-creative directors at Campbell Group Advertising, Baltimore.
They previously held similar positions at Ogilvy &amp; Mather/Corpa Venezuela, Caracas.


Litton Industries(LIT,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


METRO DIGEST
PRIVATE HANDS TAKE OVER CITY WORK
In his effort to shrink municipal government and cut spending while still maintaining core services, the Giuliani administration has, without fanfare, begun turning over to private companies an array of services in New York City now handled by municipal employees -- from replacing traffic signs to stuffing tax bills into envelopes to keeping city buildings clean.
In all, the Mayor's office has awarded contracts, sought bids or drafted plans for hiring private companies to undertake two dozen separate services.
A1.


Ronald (Buster) Edwards, Great Train Robber
Ronald Edwards, a flower seller who had served a jail term for his part in the $7 million Great Train Robbery in Britain in 1963, was found dead in London on Tuesday.
He was in his early 60's and lived in London.
He was found hanging by his neck in a garage, the British newspaper The Independent reported.
An inquest was opened on Thursday and adjourned until Feb. 7.


POP MUSIC
Judy Collins Moves Songs Into the Realm of the Ethereal  Carnegie Hall
Near the beginning of Judy Collins's concert on Friday evening, the singer introduced an eloquent new folk-pop ballad, "Song For Sarajevo (I Dream of Peace)," by recalling her recent visit to the former Yugoslavia as an emissary for Unicef.
Some of the song's first-person lyrics, she explained, were drawn from a book of writings and drawings by Sarajevan children who were asked to describe their experiences during the siege of the city.


National Bank of Canada reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
As economic growth continues unabated 10 months after the Federal Reserve began trying to slow it, more economists are concluding that the Fed's all-purpose tool, raising or lowering interest rates, may not be as effective as it once was.  [ Page A1. ]


Miami Prepares to Embrace the Summit of the Americas
On the streets, they are resurfacing and planting palm trees.
In the neighborhoods, they are putting the finishing touches on protests and demonstrations, including one that is expected to draw more than 100,000 people to the Orange Bowl.
In city offices, about 800 workers have been briefed about being good hosts.
And for three days, seven photographers at the Dade County morgue will take pictures of world leaders instead of bullet wounds.


Folk and Modern Styles In Jamaican Celebration
The National Dance Theater Company of Jamaica was greeted like a conquering hero returning home when it performed on Saturday night at the Brooklyn Center for the Performing Arts at Brooklyn College.
Many in the audience were Jamaicans with a great love for their home country, to judge by the delighted murmurs and applause that greeted each old favorite sung by the company's chorus, one of the highlights of the evening.
But one did not have to be Jamaican to enjoy the program presented by the 32-year-old troupe.
Rex Nettleford, a founder of the company and its director, was represented by three pieces, two of them new to New York, that deftly mixed elements of folk and modern dance, the latter in the style of Martha Graham.
All three are at heart as much spectacle as dance.


China Names Names in Steroid Bans
The state-run Xinhua News Agency in Beijing has released the names of the 11 Chinese competitors at the Asian Games in October who tested positive for steroids.
The five women were the swimmers YANG AIHUA, LU BIN and ZHOU GUANBIN, the hurdler HAN QING and the cyclist WANG YAN.
The six men were the swimmers XIONG GUOMING, HU BIN, ZHANG BIN and FU YONG and the canoeists ZHANG LEI and QIU SUOREN.
The Olympic Council of Asia said on Saturday that the 11 had tested positive for illegal drugs. (AP)


Ayer Selected For Metrahealth
The Metrahealth Companies, McLean, Va., a large health insurer being created on Jan. 2 by the merger of the health businesses of the Metropolitan Life Insurance Company and the Travelers Insurance Company, has selected N. W. Ayer &amp; Partners in New York to handle its communications account, including advertising, direct marketing and public relations.


State's Quality of Life Has Dropped Sharply in Last 10 Years, a Study Finds
The social well-being of Connecticut declined sharply during the state's economic recession, erasing a substantial advantage Connecticut held over the rest of the nation in the 1980's, according to a report by a Fordham University research group.
The report, "The Social State of Connecticut," is the first study of a state by the Institute for Innovation in Social Policy at Fordham, which produces an annual assessment of the nation's social well-being known as the Index of Social Health.


Abroad at Home; Jefferson Still Lives
When Newt Gingrich said after the election that one of his first priorities was to put prayer back in public schools, he enlisted Thomas Jefferson as a supporter.
In the Declaration of Independence, he noted, Jefferson wrote that men's rights had come from "their creator."
"Voluntary school prayer is not ancillary," Mr.
Gingrich said.
"It is the core of being American."


Bridge
Cover the East-West hands shown in the diagram, and plan the play as South in seven hearts after the lead of the spade ten.
The opponents have done no bidding, and are aware that you have a singleton spade.
The deal occurred on Nov. 27 in the final session of the National Swiss Team Championship in Minneapolis.
A Canadian team -- Boris Baran, Mark Stein and Mark Molson of Montreal, Drew Cannell of Winnipeg, Manitoba, and Jack Coleman of Portland, Ore. -- had a big lead but stumbled in the penultimate round.
In part because of the diagramed deal, they lost the round heavily to a foursome led by Barry Rigal of Manhattan.


Rohr Inc.(RHR,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 30


Patterson DentalCo.(PDCO,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 29


Oxbridge 'Interests' Don't Equal a Life
To the Editor:
Re "A Scholar's Memoirs Raise Some Ghosts at Oxford" (front page, Nov. 28):


Quandary for Peacekeepers
The United Nations' peacekeeping function is becoming appreciated just as huge problems threaten its success in that role.
Page A12.


All Roads Lead to Mother In a Game of Spy Versus Spy
For those who find particle physics a breeze and John le Carre's spy novels kids' stuff, figuring out "Hapgood" will present no difficulties.
For most everyone else, Tom Stoppard's 1988 drama, which officially surfaced last night at the Mitzi E. Newhouse Theater in Lincoln Center, is likely to prove flummoxing.
Churchill's famous description of Russia as "a riddle wrapped in a mystery inside an enigma" applies here.
It takes a nimble mind, an alert eye and graph paper to get to the bottom of this one.


Jets Are Undone by Dirty Tricks Campaign
The Jets have gone from being angry to being stunned.
For the second week in a row, a play with an element of trickery proved pivotal in beating the Jets, who, once again, seemed on the verge of making something special happen.
Instead, their locker room resembled an emotional trauma center in the wake of their 24-13 loss to the Patriots.


JUDGES PROPOSING TO NARROW ACCESS TO FEDERAL COURT
A panel of Federal judges is proposing new limits on access to Federal courts for Social Security beneficiaries, victims of job discrimination and consumers as part of a long-range plan to cope with huge increases in the caseload.
The panel of nine judges, who have a combined total of more than 160 years on the bench, was created in 1990 by the Judicial Conference of the United States, the policy-making arm of the Federal judiciary.


Innocent Radio Days
It's Christmas Eve in 1941, and at Rainbow Corner, a cozy London nightclub, a radio audience is being warmed up for a special holiday show to be broadcast over WRAF.
A sound-effects man instructs the audience on the difference between "applause," "riotous applause" and "hoots and hollers." So begins "Christmas at Rainbow Corner," a charmingly nostalgic Christmas musical playing at the Ballroom (253 West 28th Street, Chelsea) Tuesdays through Sundays through Dec. 31.
The warm-up is preparation for the arrival of Lily Amboise (Ivy Austin), an American pop singer who changed her name from Minerva Turletsky and made a career as a singing pinup lauded for her "golden voice and gams." Backed by the five-piece Brigadier Generals Band, Lily arrives to sing morale-boosting ditties from World War II.


Exodus of Refugees Reaches Its Last Stage
The final months of the 20-year exodus of refugees from Vietnam are a jumble of departures and returns as some of the last unfinished business of the Vietnam War is completed.
Planeloads of families heading for America are crossing paths with returning Vietnamese-American entrepreneurs as well as with boat people rejected for asylum who are flying home from refugee camps.


Man, 78, Is Bound and Shot to Death in a Robbery in Brooklyn
A 78-year-old man who sold used tire rims and fixed children's bicycles on a lot in the Bushwick section of Brooklyn was shot and killed yesterday by two men when he resisted them during a robbery, the police said.
The man, Andrew West, who lived nearby with his wife on Cooper Street, was shot once in the stomach by the men and then bound with duct tape, said Deputy Inspector Martin Johnson, commanding officer of the Brooklyn North detective squad.
He was later pronounced dead at Woodhull Medical Center.


Nature and the Bills Provide Some Third-Quarter Lighting
The Miami Dolphins tonight had a chance to bury a wounded and reeling nemesis.
Instead, the Buffalo Bills, who have represented the American Football Conference in the last four Super Bowls, revived themselves.
The Bills scored a season-high 21 points in the third quarter to come from behind and defeat Miami, 42-31, before a crowd of 69,358 at rain-soaked Joe Robbie Stadium.


Reversing an Exodus -- A special report.; Former Refugees See Opportunity in Vietnam
She couldn't stop sampling the tropical fruits, the steamed snails, the candied plums.
She was enthralled by the children, with their red scarves, trooping along the dirt paths to school.
Almost every conversation seemed to end in laughter; she was home, and she was happy.
"This is where I want to raise my family," she exclaimed.
Nearly 20 years after she fled the fall of Saigon with her parents, Camellia Ngo, now a thoroughly American 28-year-old lawyer, has decided to return to Vietnam.
And she is not alone.
As one of the most dramatic refugee tides in modern times draws to a close, a new generation of Vietnamese raised in the United States is heading home in small but growing numbers to do business and sometimes, like Ms.
Ngo, to stay on.


New Delhi Journal; When the Warden Speaks Her Mind, India Listens
When Kiran Bedi was named warden of India's largest and most notorious prison, a job considered a professional graveyard, many of her critics shed crocodile tears.
And the assertive Ms.
Bedi, a 45-year-old Punjabi, has picked up her share of critics since becoming India's first policewoman 23 years ago.


Settlements By New York Set a Record
Spurred by a surge in personal-injury judgments, New York City paid a record $232.5 million to settle lawsuits and other claims for the 1993 fiscal year, according to a report released yesterday by City Comptroller Alan G. Hevesi.
The figures indicated that the value of judgments against the city in the last seven years doubled and that settlement costs rose more than $13 million from the preceding fiscal year.


In Brownsville, Family Looks For Answers After Tragedy
From the conversation in his neighborhood and around his father's kitchen table, it is impossible to construct a picture of Richard Larrier that is anything but dissonant: former marine, hard worker, loving father, armed robber, killer.
"I'm just as much in shock as anybody," his father, Kenneth Larrier said quietly yesterday in his 11th-floor apartment in the Langston Hughes Houses in Brownsville, Brooklyn.


POP MUSIC
Going Home to Philadelphia In a Rap Manner of Speaking  Tramps
When the rap band the Goats and the rock band Big Chief performed on Thursday night, the biggest difference between them was not the style of music they played but the sense of regional identity that produced it.
The Goats played politically conscious, free-floating rap with deep roots in Philadelphia, and Big Chief made apocalyptic hard rock influenced almost exclusively by bands from its home state of Michigan.
The Goats are one of hip-hop's best live acts not just because they're actually a band (with a drummer, a guitarist, a bassist and an organist) but also because they find the right balance between their instinct to party and their desire to provide inner-city commentary on Washington politics.
On Tuesday, the rappers known as Madd and Swayzack alternated between exchanging lines as if they were in a dialogue and shouting out phrases in unison.
The music followed their lead, sinking into a slow funk groove during the dialoguelike verses and swelling into a cacophony of scratching records, riffing guitars and breakbeats during the choruses.
Where the Goats are influenced by lowdown funk and early heavy metal, Big Chief are obsessed by these styles.
Its last album, "Mack Avenue Skull Game," was a fake soundtrack that sounded as if it was scored by George Clinton.
Its newest, "Platinum Jive" (Capitol), is a fake compilation that ranges from hard guitar rock written in the style of late 1960's Detroit bands like the Stooges and MC5 to rap.
As the rest of the time-warped quintet alternated riff-filled grooves with coordinated guitar strikes, Barry Henssler sang fierce, proud lyrics about the dregs of society in a scratchy, vintage-sounding voice that sounded as if it belonged on vinyl.
NEIL STRAUSS


INSIDE
A New Chill With Cuba
Hopes for an improvement in relations with Cuba have faded with its meager steps toward reform and the election of a Republican Congress in the United States.
Page A3.
Drug Accusation by Gingrich
Representative Newt Gingrich, who is likely to be the new House Speaker, said many White House aides had used illegal drugs before joining the Administration.
Page A17.
Finally, 'A 'Time to Reap'
Decades after being blacklisted, the folk singer Pete Seeger, 75, was lionized in Washington as one of five recipients of the annual Kennedy Center Honors.
Page C11.
A2 Arts


Wiley (John) &amp; Sons Inc.(WILLA,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Petrolane Inc.(PGASB,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 23


Foolish Pleasure's Death Announced
Foolish Pleasure, the winner of the 1975 Kentucky Derby, was probably better known for his participation in the match race against the filly Ruffian at Belmont Park than for his Derby victory, says his owner, RON VANDERHOEF.
The 22-year-old stallion died Nov. 17 at the Horseshoe Ranch near Dayton, where he had been living since September 1993.
Vanderhoef said Foolish Pleasure had been colicky and in discomfort that day and died about 6 P.M. in surgery for a ruptured stomach.
He said the attending veterinarian could find no definitive reason for the rupture. (AP)


Essay; And Then There Were Two
The man President Clinton called his closest friend, who was also the longtime law partner of Hillary Clinton, is apparently about to confess to being a crook.
Webster Hubbell has been widely reported to have agreed to plead guilty to mail fraud and tax evasion, and has declined ample opportunity to deny these reports.
Independent Counsel Kenneth Starr has scheduled an announcement today, presumably about the plea bargain.


Trying to Help a Family Work Through Its Grief
Five years have passed since her husband was shot and killed in a robbery, but the murder still haunts Salustiana S. The dark crescents under her eyes and her soft, flat voice suggest a sadness that will not fade.
Johnny, the oldest of her three children, turned 8 the day after his father died.
Shortly afterward, he started failing classes and getting in trouble at school.
Meanwhile, Mrs.
S., an immigrant from the Dominican Republic, was struggling to keep her husband's liquor store open and growing dangerously depressed.
Three months after the murder, 87 people died in the Happy Land Social Club fire in the Tremont section of the Bronx.
Mrs.
S. said the tragedy gave her an eerie sense of satisfaction.


Pulaski Furniture (PLFC,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 30


Fox-NBC Fight May Reach Congress
NBC's challenge to the Fox Broadcasting Company over the question of foreign ownership of the core stations that make up the Fox television network is likely to stir serious debate in the next Congress over the broad policy questions raised by the issue, several Congressional staff members said last week.
NBC petitioned the Federal Communications Commission on Wednesday to issue a formal ruling on whether it would uphold Fox's licenses to operate its television stations under its current ownership structure, in which 99 percent of the equity in the stations is owned by the Australian-based News Corporation.


DANCE
Identifying Johnny Panic In a Swirl of Smiles and Sneers  The Kitchen
What a compelling performer.
What a cryptic work.
Both judgments are needed to sum up "Johnny Panic," which Paul Selwyn Norton performed on Friday night.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Big doings in California: Agency openings, sales and the inevitable dance of accounts.
THE most interesting advertising news late last week all seemed to emanate from California: one agency opened, another was sold and two consumer marketers left their agencies.
The new agency, based in Venice, is Houston Effler Helm Stingley.
It is the second expansion in a year and a half by Houston Effler Herstek Favat, the Boston agency with more than $223 million in billings from clients like Converse shoes, the Massachusetts Department of Public Health and Shawmut Bank.


Politics and Judgeships: Learning the Realities
THEY called the event "How to Become a Judge" and that is precisely what they delivered.
No one who attended Saturday's teach-in at the New York City Bar Association would ever accuse the bar of false advertising.
Lawyers, judges and politicians spent the day in the bar association's elegant building on West 44th Street advising about 200 New Yorkers -- many of them young, female, black or Hispanic -- how to pursue a career on the bench.
Some of the advice was edifying.
Some was, well, realistic.


After 30 Years, Return to Berkeley
Thirty years to the day after they occupied the place, they were back at Sproul Hall.
Many had graying pony tails below their bald spots.
Some looked like middle-aged professors.
Many had guts, though of a different sort than what was on display in 1964, when they risked expulsion and jail for their principles.
They were the aging alumni of the Free Speech Movement, which brought the full range of First Amendment protections to the University of California at Berkeley and changed American campuses everywhere, and as they surveyed Sproul Plaza today, their legacy was striking for just how ordinary it seemed: angry placards, pamphleteers for everything from the Marxist Spartacist League to the Unification Church.


Josh Redman, Bright Lights and All
The saxophonist Josh Redman's concert at Town Hall on Friday night made a difference to his career.
Mr.
Redman is still unproved, a musician with promise and not much of a track record beyond an ability to sell records.
But he came through: in front of a full house, he made a strong case for himself as an intelligent, musically sophisticated and graceful musician.
He also proved himself to be a Sonny Rollins surrogate in that the audience was clearly on his mind, occasionally at the expense of his work as a serious musician.
Mr.
Redman's best came out in the second tune of the concert, "Rejoice," constructed out of a rhythmic pattern, a repeating bass line, some ambiguous chords and a rapidly shifting chordal passage.
Mr.
Redman's musicians -- Brad Mehldau on piano, Chris McBride on bass, Brian Blade on drums -- have been playing together regularly and are almost supernaturally empathetic, one of the better working bands in jazz.
They made the tune completely pliable, with the rhythm section moving from frozen rubato sections to jet-stream swing.
The elements of the composition popped up now and then, seemingly at the players' collective whim, and the whole performance sparkled, as if Mr.
Redman had come up with a new group sound and a new way of codifying improvisation.


Workers Said to Concede Managers' Power
Although millions of American workers want much more of a say in the decisions that govern their working lives, they now believe that management has become so powerful that workers will not get that say -- even in union shops -- unless management gives its consent voluntarily, a new study finds.
The findings are already influencing the Clinton Administration's labor policies.
The study, to be made public today in Washington, finds that workers would ideally prefer to organize into independent groups that are not necessarily unions.
Delegates from those groups would sit with managers on joint committees running work places.


The Big, Slow Guy Wins the Race for the Football
It wasn't really a fake field-goal attempt, and it wasn't a run-of-the-mill punt.
It was a low-key trick play, and the New England Patriots had practiced it every week for the past two months.
Today, they tried the play for the first time in a game, and it became the turning point in their 24-13 victory over the Jets.
Late in the third quarter, with the Jets leading, 13-10, the Patriots faced fourth down and 7 yards to go from New York's 31-yard line.
It seemed time for a 49-yard field goal attempt, but the Patriots' kicker, Matt Bahr, while making 23 of 28 this year, had not kicked one beyond 48 yards.
The Patriots sent out their field-goal team, but with Pat O'Neill, the punter and long-distance field-goal kicker, rather than Bahr.
Everyone expected a field-goal attempt -- everyone except Scott Zolak, the holder.
On the sideline, he was told to call the fake.


National Auto Credit Inc.(NACC,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Accounts
*
Dominick's Finer Foods, Northlake, Ill., to BBDO Chicago, to handle its broadcast advertising account, previously at Meyer &amp; Wallis, Milwaukee.
Billings were estimated at $5 million to $6 million. *
DeMert &amp; Dougherty, Westchester, Ill., to Impact, Chicago, to handle marketing for the manufacturer of automotive and personal care products, previously handled by Wells Rich Greene BDDP, Chicago.
Billings were estimated at $5 million.


Teacher Held After Door Severs Finger Of a Student
A science teacher at Westbury High School for the last 25 years was arrested today and charged with assault for slamming the door to his classroom on the finger of a 14-year-old Haitian student, an act that led to the severing of the boy's finger, the police said.
The teacher, David Dahle, 49, of 101 Woolsey Avenue in Glen Cove, L.I., is being charged with second-degree reckless assault, a felony with a penalty of six years in prison.


KCS Energy Inc.(KCS,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Many White House Employees Used Drugs, Gingrich Asserts
Representative Newt Gingrich, the Georgia Republican in line to be the next Speaker of the House, asserted today that many White House employees had used drugs before working for the Clinton Administration.
"My point is you've got, scattered throughout this Administration, counterculture people," Mr.
Gingrich said on the NBC news program "Meet the Press." "I had a senior law-enforcement official tell me that in his judgment, up to a quarter of the White House staff, when they first came in, had used drugs in the last four or five years."


Coleman May Be O.K., But the Nets Are Not
A sign of the Nets' trying times: The night Derrick Coleman finally conformed to the team's dress code -- he reached deep into his closet to find a smartly tailored blazer and matching tie -- was also the night the club desperately needed him to be wearing sweats and sneakers.
Coleman, watching from courtside Saturday night as the Nets lost to the Sacramento Kings by 94-89 for their fourth straight loss, still has a sprained right wrist and will not accompany the team to Chicago for a game against the Bulls Monday night.


Rise in Obesity in U.S. Is Explored by Experts
WHAT is responsible for the alarming fact that the average American adult has gained another eight pounds in the last decade?
Is it the ready availability of high-calorie fast foods and snacks?
Is it television and other contributors to the couch-potato syndrome?
According to experts writing in the current issue of Healthy Weight Journal, several factors have contributed to what is often called creeping obesity: the ever-growing tendency for Americans to be ever-growing.
It is a condition that, according to the latest national survey, applies to all ages, ethnic and racial groups and both sexes.


Serbs Step Up Bombardment of Besieged Muslim Enclave
Nationalist Serb rebels bombarded Government-controlled areas in northwestern Bosnia today with incendiary shells, setting off fires in Velika Kladusa, a United Nations spokesman said.
"We have eyewitness accounts from the Croatian side of the border that speak of incendiary shells," said Paul Risley, a spokesman for the United Nations in Zagreb, Croatia.
"This would indicate a great escalation in the fighting."


Hunt in Forests of Borneo Aims to Track Down Natural Drugs
DOWN a steep gravel path and over a wooden bridge shaded by a curtain of towering eucalyptus trees, visitors to this stretch of the Borneo rain forest run into a guarded, fenced-off area several hundred feet wide.
It is filled with thousands of leafy, ankle-high tree seedlings that, at first glance, look about as significant as a row of backyard shrubs.
The nursery is marked with two signs.
The larger, printed in red, bears a warning to intruders: Restricted Area.
The other sign identifies the species of this smooth-barked tree -- Calophyllum lanigerum -- which is tantalizing a team of scientists from the United States and Malaysia.
They are trying to determine if, when fully grown, these seedlings and other trees that flourish in the rain forests of Southeast Asia could offer a cure for AIDS.


INSIDE
Widening Net for Inquiry
The Whitewater inquiry moved near Gov.
Jim Guy Tucker of Arkansas after a land appraiser pleaded guilty to inflating estimates used to support loans to Mr.
Tucker.
Page B9.
Battle Laser Ready to Go
"Star Wars" is not dead after all.
After 15 years, an antimissile space laser has overcome many technical problems and is ready to be tested in orbit.
Science Times, page C1.


Finding Rent Help After Brain Surgery
Two brain surgeries saved Joyce B.'s life.
Nothing, it seemed, could stave off her brush with financial ruin.
With a steady job, health insurance and grown children and friends for support, Ms.
B. was in as good a position as any to confront her illness when it struck.
But even before she had fully recovered from her second operation, she was thousands of dollars in debt and facing an eviction notice.


Even Among the Scholars, It's the No. 1 Great Debate
The question posed among the 15 scholar-athletes being honored at the National Football Foundation news conference in Manhattan yesterday was the one on everyone's mind.
If Nebraska beats Miami in the Orange Bowl on Jan. 1 and Penn State defeats Oregon in the Rose Bowl the next day, giving both winners undefeated and untied seasons, which school should be designated the national champion?


The President's Day: 9,104 Miles, 370 M.P.H.
Seldom has an American President traveled so far so quickly for so ceremonial a purpose as did Bill Clinton today.
From a White House ceremony honoring American artists, Mr.
Clinton clambered aboard Air Force One early Sunday evening for an overnight flight to this Hungarian capital.
He read a brief statement, hurried to a ceremony, called on his hosts, and grinned for the cameras along with the dozens of his counterparts who are here to attend the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe.


Market Place; At Petrie Stores, estate planning drove a final swap of stock.
PETRIE STORES received some good news on Nov. 17, when the Internal Revenue Service ruled that a planned swap of stock with stock of Toys "R" Us would be tax-free.
So why didn't Petrie's shares pop?
Because while the swap lets Petrie shareholders avoid one level of taxes, another significant tax bite looms down the road.


CHRONICLE
GLORIA ESTEFAN and her husband and manager, EMILIO, produced another hit yesterday, a 6-pound, 14-ounce daughter, The Associated Press reported.
EMILY MARIE ESTEFAN was born at Mount Sinai Medical Center in Miami, and her father nearly fainted during the delivery, said Vivian Piazza, a spokeswoman for Epic Records.
"They're doing great," she said.


Harcourt General Inc.(H,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


VW Dismissing Berlin Cameron
Volkswagen of America Inc. said yesterday that it would dismiss Berlin Cameron Doyle in New York, its advertising agency for the last 16 months, and begin a review of its North American account with estimated billings of $90 million.
The unexpected decision, which takes effect when Berlin Cameron's contract expires March 31, severs Volkswagen's final ties in this country to Doyle Dane Bernbach, the agency that created the series of self-deprecating campaigns for the VW Beetle in the 1960's.


Pathmark Stores Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 29


Arizona Center Suspended Indefinitely
Arizona center JOSEPH BLAIR has been suspended indefinitely for failing to fulfill his team academic responsibilities, Coach LUTE OLSON said yesterday.
"We are not sure when he will return to action," Olson said in a statement issued in Tucson.
Blair, a 6-foot-10-inch, 265-pound junior, averaged 14.5 points and 7.8 rebounds as a starter in the eighth-ranked Wildcats' four games this season.
Last season, he averaged 10.1 points and 7.2 rebounds.


Bias Found In Choosing Of Justices
The Justice Department has concluded that the systems used to pick about a fifth of the State Supreme Court justices now sitting in Brooklyn, the Bronx and Manhattan violate the Voting Rights Act and must be replaced, Justice officials said tonight.
Federal civil rights lawyers were preparing a letter to New York authorities asserting that the state used methods for selecting 42 State Supreme Court justices that were unfair to minority voters.
The three boroughs have a total of more than 200 Supreme Court justices, who preside over most serious criminal and civil trials.


In Nepal, Communists Take Power, but Very Cautiously
When Communist rule came to this Himalayan kingdom in elections last month, the banners fluttering from the rooftops of Katmandu were mostly Buddhist prayer flags, not the red standard of proletarian revolt.
Even the leaden pronouncements that had been a Communist staple were absent.
Instead, the stalwarts of the Communist Party of Nepal (United Marxist-Leninist) settled into power so quietly that they were being called "His Majesty's loyal Communists." The party leader, Man Mohan Adhikary, set the tone for the swearing-in by King Birendra by trimming his straggly beard into a goatee and donning the traditional cap and gray jacket of the Nepali Brahmin.


From Fantasy to Fact: Space-Based Laser Nearly Ready to Fly
IT'S back.
Adored by military contractors and lambasted by civilian skeptics, fired into the political stratosphere by President Ronald Reagan and dragged back to earth by the Clinton Administration, "Star Wars" is prominent again as the newly empowered Republicans begin to push for deployment of a national system of antimissile defense and gird for ideological warfare with Democrats on the topic of placing arms in the heavens.
Surprisingly, this turn in the nation's 35-year, love-hate relationship with antimissile research finds the technology less speculative than before.
For the first time, it is mature enough that one class of advanced weapons could be put into space relatively quickly, a fact that is likely to electrify this round of the antimissile debate.


Former Baylor Coach Faces Fraud Charges
The former Baylor basketball coach, DARREL JOHNSON, pleaded not guilty to mail and wire fraud charges in the alleged illegal recruitment of five junior college players.
Johnson, 39, who was fired last month after two seasons at Baylor, appeared yesterday before United States Magistrate DENNIS GREEN in Waco, Tex.
He faces up to 35 years in prison and more than $1 million in fines if convicted, although the prosecutor, JOHN PHINIZY, has said it's doubtful he will seek more than a five-year sentence for Johnson.


Thor Industries(THO,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Gun Went Off Accidentally In Death of Student, Police Say
The police officer who killed an unarmed college student suspected of credit-card fraud has told the authorities that his gun fired accidentally as he was about to frisk the youth, the police said today.
"We've determined that the gun went off unintentionally," the Suffolk County Police Commissioner, Peter F. Cosgrove, said at a news conference today.
"Now, we have to find out whether the gun went off because of any mechanical malfunction or human error."


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball
EXECUTIVE COUNCIL -- Announced that Richard Ravitch, president of the player relations committee, will leave baseball when his contract expires on Dec. 31, 1994.
American League


CLASSICAL MUSIC
The Hilliard Ensemble Singing in the Original Latin  Cathedral of St. John the Divine
What was sin for St.
Augustine now passes for spirituality.
"When I find the singing itself more moving than the truth which it conveys," Augustine wrote of sacred song some 1,600 years ago, "I confess that this is a grievous sin."


Tension Persists in a Breakaway Republic in the Caucasus


Tuning In to Venezuelan Music and Its Rich Tradition
The music on classical concert programs is music of the Northern Hemisphere.
If you were to issue an edict forbidding major international artists to play anything composed below the Equator, or even below the Tropic of Cancer, you might hear a few pained cries from cellists who perform Villa-Lobos's "Bachiana Brasileira No. 5" and some whining from pianists who use Percy Grainger's folk-tune arrangements as encores.
The pianists could probably get an exemption on the grounds that the Australian-born Grainger spent most of his life in England and the United States.
Life would continue as before.
The American Composers Orchestra is helping to correct this imbalance by giving over a portion of its programs each year to Latin American composers.
The project, titled Sonidos de las Americas, began last year with music from Mexico.
Last week, it took one step farther south -- and one giant leap outside the familiar -- with a series of concerts devoted to the music of Venezuela, culminating in an orchestral program led by Dennis Russell Davies on Sunday afternoon at Carnegie Hall.


Correction
An article yesterday by Daniel Cantor and Juliet Schor, urging Democrats to develop a populist agenda, misstated the year the party last recaptured the Senate.
It was 1986, not 1982.


Hardball Politicking In California
The newly elected California Assembly was thrown into parliamentary confusion and noisy turmoil today when its wily veteran Democratic Speaker, Willie Brown, maneuvered a 40-to-40 tie vote of its members to stymie a move to replace him with a Republican.
Going into the balloting, the Republicans held 41 of the Assembly's 80 seats, theoretically enough to elect their candidate, Jim Brulte, a veteran legislator from the Los Angeles suburb of Rancho Cucamonga.


Head of Circle Rep Leaving After Eight Years in the Job
Tanya Berezin, the artistic director of the Circle Repertory Company for the last eight years, said yesterday that she would resign at the end of this season.
Circle Rep, which has been struggling with heavy debt, has begun a search for a new director, the third in the 25-year-old company's history.


Chip Error Continuing To Dog Officials at Intel
A math error found in all of the Intel Corporation's top-of-the-line Pentium microprocessors is proving to be a continuing public relations nightmare for the world's largest chip maker.
At a computer industry conference that began here today, two of the largest computer makers tried to play down the growing public alarm about the error the chip makes in rare cases while doing high-precision division operations.


Elway More Accurate Than His Detractors
It wasn't that long ago that Denver sports columnists and angry fans were calling for the Broncos owner, Pat Bowlen, to dismiss Coach Wade Phillips and everyone was wondering whether quarterback John Elway had lost his magic touch after he made three fourth-quarter turnovers that led to losses.
All that occurred when the Broncos were off to an 0-4 start.
Since then, the Broncos have undergone a remarkable turnaround, going 7-2.
Only Pittsburgh, 8-1, has a better record in the last nine games.


Observer; In Nerd World
Up-to-date is what I long to be, and what is more up-to-date than CD-ROM?
So it was off to Nerd World, all 5,000 acres of it.
Under one roof crouched, hummed, beeped, clicked, flashed and chattered the entire electronic miracle.
It swarmed with men. (Nerdesses are extremely rare in Nerd World.) The men wore earnest shirts and honest haircuts which made them look just the way I'd try to look if I were a spy for an enemy power trying to sneak into the C.I.A.


G.E. Wins in Diamond Price Case
In a stunning victory for the General Electric Company, a Federal judge threw out a criminal case yesterday in which the company was accused of conspiring to fix the world price of industrial diamonds.
United States District Judge George C. Smith in Columbus, Ohio, took the highly unusual step of finding G.E. not guilty of the sole charge against it based only on evidence presented by the prosecution.
He said there was not enough evidence to merit sending the case to the jury.


Erick Hawkins Is Remembered With Film, Poetry and Laughter
Erick Hawkins, the modern dance master who died on Nov. 23 at the age of 85, was celebrated yesterday afternoon in a memorial service at the Joyce Theater that resembled a huge family reunion.
Cora Cahan, a founder of the Joyce, opened the program with welcoming remarks.
There was a screening of "Erick Hawkins: Poet of Modern Dance," Phyllis Oyama's eloquent 1994 documentary film about the choreographer's life and work.
Much poetry was recited by the 17 speakers.
But for the most part, it was an afternoon of affectionate laughter at anecdotes about Mr.
Hawkins's sometimes exasperating tenacity of vision.


CBS Announces 3 Comedies
CBS will thoroughly shake up its prime-time television schedule at the beginning of the year, adding three new comedies and moving eight other shows to different times, the network announced yesterday.
The new comedies are headed by "Cybill," starring Cybill Shepherd as a former model about to become a grandmother.
The show will inherit the best comedy position on the CBS schedule, Monday at 9:30 P.M., after "Murphy Brown."


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-11  AS EUROPE MEETS, ANGER  The summit meeting of European leaders was dominated by angry words from Russia over plans for the expansion of NATO and recriminations from Bosnia over the failure to end the Balkan conflict.
A1


Cortines Plans Cash Awards For Most-Improved Schools
In an effort to improve students' test scores and attendance, Schools Chancellor Ramon C. Cortines yesterday said he was creating a program to award cash grants to the most improved schools in New York City.
"This system has the very best and the very worst in public education," Mr.
Cortines said yesterday in a statement announcing the program, which will use $500,000 in Federal funds.
"We need to make our worst schools as good as our best schools, and we need to make our best schools even better."


Error Halts Distribution By Magellan
A billion here, a billion there, and pretty soon even Fidelity Investments is talking about real money -- money that it will not distribute to investors in its giant Magellan Fund.
The Boston mutual fund company announced late yesterday that Magellan, the country's largest mutual fund, will not make a year-end distribution of taxable income to its three million shareholders because of an accounting error.


CHRONICLE
When guests assemble tonight to pay tribute to REGINA RESNIK, the retired mezzo-soprano, they will be celebrating the 50th anniversary of her debut at the Metropolitan Opera -- with an unusual degree of precision.
"It will be the 50th anniversary to the minute," Miss Resnik said yesterday, noting that the debut on Dec. 6, 1944, had occurred at exactly 8 P.M.


New York Is Faulted On Selecting Judges
The Justice Department has concluded that the systems used to pick about a fifth of the State Supreme Court justices now sitting in Brooklyn, the Bronx and Manhattan are unfair to minority voters and must be replaced, Justice officials said.
Supreme Court justices preside over most of the serious criminal and civil trials in New York.
Article, page B1


Region News Briefs; Westchester Installs Hospitals Chief
The Westchester County Board of Legislators confirmed Edward A. Stolzenberg as the county's Hospitals Commissioner today, officially installing him as head of the Westchester County Medical Center and giving him a yearly salary $51,500 higher than his predecessor's.
Mr.
Stolzenberg, 47, had been serving as Hospitals Commissioner since early April, when he was appointed by County Executive Andrew P. O'Rourke to succeed Mack L. Carter Jr.
But Mr.
Stolzenberg's confirmation by the 17-member board had been delayed, in part, by a political feud between Mr.
O'Rourke and the board chairman, Stephen P. Tenore, a fellow Republican.


A Subdued Hillary Clinton Amid Holiday Decor
The toll the past year took on Hillary Rodham Clinton was evident at today's unveiling of the White House Christmas decorations.
Last year, the Clintons' first in the White House, Mrs.
Clinton was full of optimism over her health care bill, and her spirits were high.
She bantered with reporters and photographers and commented on how difficult the transition to Washington had been for Socks, the family's cat.


Corrections
A music listing in the Arts and Leisure section on Sunday misstated the location for a concert at 8 P.M. this Saturday by the New York Madrigal Singers.
It is at the Church of Notre Dame, 405 West 114th Street, not at the Church of the Holy Cross.


Two Players Suspended by Notre Dame
The Notre Dame football players BOBBY TAYLOR and GERMAINE HOLDEN have been suspended for one game and will not play in the Fiesta Bowl against Colorado on Jan. 2.
The university said last night that the two violated school and National Collegiate Athletic Association rules by accepting compensation in a student's attempt to buy tickets to the Irish's Nov. 26 game against Southern Cal.


Westmoreland Coal Co.(WCX,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


A Circle of Art, a Ring of Remembrance


Johnson Sees News By Looking in Mirror
The Jimmy Johnson Credibility Test starts now.


The Chargers Let Raiders Stay in Hunt
The San Diego Chargers, with the American Football Conference West title in their grasp, had chances.
Plenty of chances to clinch.
They trailed the Raiders, their fierce rival since the early days of the American Football League, by 7 points tonight and took the ball at their own 44 with three minutes left.
Nothing happened.
Nothing good for the Chargers, anyway.
The Raider defense forced a punt.
The Chargers got it back with 1 minute 28 seconds left, this time at their own 8.
No can do.
The Raiders defense got more stingy and ended the game with sack, with linebacker Aaron Wallace on quarterback Stan Humphries.


OroAmerica Inc.(OROA,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 28


A Tongue-Lashing Has a Backlash
VERNON MAXWELL of the Houston Rockets has talked himself out of $5,000.
That fine was levied against him yesterday by the National Basketball Association for failure to leave the court in a timely fashion and verbally abusing officials after he was ejected in the fourth quarter of the Rockets' 113-109 victory over Golden State Thursday.
The ejection carries an additional $1,000 fine. (AP)


Many Questions, but Too Late
If anyone blew the whistle on Robert L. Citron, the Orange County treasurer who was forced to resign today, it was one of his biggest backers, Peer Swan.
Mr.
Swan, president of the Irvine Ranch Water District Board, may have been the first of the roughly 170 local agency heads who invested $7.8 billion in the fund, to ask questions before the county disclosed last week that it faced an investment loss of $1.5 billion.
In retrospect, he says, it was already too late.


Treaty to Cut A-Weapons Now in Effect
President Clinton, President Boris N. Yeltsin of Russia and the heads of three former republics of the Soviet Union exchanged documents today that allow the Strategic Arms Reduction Treaty, the first arms control agreement intended to reduce strategic nuclear weapons, to come into force.
The arms control treaty, signed by Washington and Moscow in 1991, had been delayed from going into effect because of the reluctance of Ukraine to renounce the nuclear weapons it inherited at the break up of the Soviet Union.


Beetle Strategy Outwits Toxin-Spewing Plant
DEEP in the heart of the Tehuacan Desert valley in Mexico, a researcher has discovered a plant bearing leaves that can shoot a toxic jet of chemicals a distance of two yards.
Heavily armed, the plant would appear to be safe from all insect attackers.
But a study has found that one beetle can chew its way past the plant's defenses by severing the canals that deliver the toxins to the leaves.
Until recently researchers thought insects simply had to swallow and somehow contend with poisons lacing a plant's leafy tissues.
But these bugs, they are discovering, have come up with more ingenious solutions.
Scientists say the new study, published in the current issue of the journal Ecology, provides the latest addition to a growing list of clever chewing counterploys that insects use to deactivate or avoid plants' noxious defenses.


Edison Brothers Stores Inc.(EBS,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 29


Aminda B. Wilkins, Welfare Official, 89
Aminda Badeau Wilkins, a retired welfare official and the widow of Roy Wilkins, longtime executive secretary of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People, died on Saturday at New York University Medical Center.
She was 89 and lived in Jamaica, Queens.
She suffered a brief illness, said Mildred Roxboro, director of development of the N.A.A.C.P.


Needle Exchanges Destroy Neighborhoods
To the Editor:
Re your Nov. 26 front-page article on the decrease in human immunodeficiency virus infection among addicts in New York's needle exchange programs:


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.50
8.50
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
4.75
4.75
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
5.43
5.42
2.97
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.83
5.61
3.11
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
6.33
6.10
3.27
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.81
7.79
5.67
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.92
7.91
6.16
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.78
7.75
7.17
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.96
6.99
5.59
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Retailer Buys A TV Stake
In what is billed as the first alliance of its sort between a retailer and a television shopping network, Montgomery Ward said today that it would pay $8 million, or $6.25 a share, for a 4.7 percent stake in Value Vision International Inc., the nation's third-largest home shopping network.
Under the terms of the tentative agreement, Montgomery Ward will also get 25 million Value Vision warrants that if exercised would give it more an equity stake of more than 49 percent.
Montgomery Ward can buy the warrants over a five-year period at prices ranging from $6.50 to $17 a share, for an average price of $9.16.


Rowland Names Democrat To Important Post on Budget
Governor-elect John G. Rowland, the state's first Republican governor in two decades, today named a former Republican state representative, Reginald L. Jones, as his top budget official and stunned many by naming a prominent Democratic state official, Lorraine M. Aronson, to be Mr.
Jones's deputy.
Mr.
Jones, a former managing partner at Arthur Andersen and a three-term state representative, is considered an expert on state finances and is a proponent of sharp cuts in spending.
He had been seen as a top contender for the job, with leading Democrats saying they would welcome an opportunity to work with him.


For Haagen-Dazs, Instant Gratification
The Haagen-Dazs Company said yesterday that it had selected Partners &amp; Shevack in New York to handle its account, which had been at BBDO New York for the last four years.
That agency and the company decided to part ways in September.
Billings were estimated at $4 million to $5 million, but are expected to rise significantly.


Chess
The match billed as the Fifth Harvard Cup Intel Championship Playoff was not really a proper playoff since the match that gave rise to it was a team event that lined up computer programs against humans, whereas the playoff pitted the two top scorers against each other to prove individual supremacy.
In the playoff, at the Manhattan Chess Club on Nov. 9, Joel Benjamin upheld the honor of the humans by winning from WChess, 4 to 1.
WChess, programed by David Kittinger and running on a 90MHz Intel Pentium Processor, disappointed computer buffs by losing on time in the first two games, in one of which it was clearly winning.
Computers are normally at their best in games played at rapid time limits, but WChess failed to demonstrate that against Benjamin.


Brogna Still Savors His '94 Hitting Splurge
Rico Brogna gets the question in the grocery store.
And at the gas station.
And on the sidewalk in front of the local diner.
The local hero of Watertown, Conn., no longer mulls over his strike-abbreviated rookie season with the Mets.
His neighbors still do.
"They all want to know if I'm bitter or angry," said the first baseman, who hit .351 with 7 home runs and 20 runs batted in while playing 39 games with the Mets.
"But I'm not. I'm really not."


After Young People Die, Generational Frictions
SCHOOL let out early, so Melinda Perez and three friends decided to walk to Elizabeth Avenue, two blocks away, for some pizza.
An older woman, "at least 35," Melinda recalled, stopped in front of them, looked them up and down, and offered a little advice.


Institute Overcomes A Threat To Survival
AFTER teetering on the knife-edge of extinction, an East-West institute formed in 1972 to attack common problems of the advanced nations has been given a new lease on life.
The International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis had been formed on the initiative of President Lyndon B. Johnson to ease cold war constraints on research, enabling the United States and Soviet Union to join in a study of their mutual problems.
It was begun with 17 participating nations, divided between the American and Soviet blocs.
Austria provided its headquarters at Schloss Laxenburg, a chateau near Vienna.


YELTSIN SAYS NATO IS TRYING TO SPLIT CONTINENT AGAIN
A 52-nation summit meeting to strengthen security throughout Europe was disrupted today by Russia's opposition to the expansion of NATO and Bosnia's recriminations about the world's failure to end the war in the Balkans.
In caustic tones reminiscent of the cold war, President Boris N. Yeltsin of Russia bluntly told other world leaders in this former Communist capital that NATO was trying to split Europe with its plan to admit members from the former Warsaw Pact and that the United States should not be allowed to dominate the world.


Bethlehem Journal; A City Prepares for Life After Steel
This is a city of caldrons and creches, of blast furnace fires at the steel plant and twinkling holiday lights, of grit-coated factory windows and impeccably kept 200-year-old homes.
But the fires that shaped the backbone of American cityscapes -- the mighty I-beams that went into Rockefeller Center and the Citicorp building, the Golden Gate Bridge and the George Washington Bridge, the Supreme Court building in Washington and the new stadium in Cleveland -- will soon be extinguished.


Frenchman Extends Lead in BOC Race
The French solo sailor, Christophe Auguin, stretched his lead to 131 miles in the second leg of the BOC round-the-world race yesterday.
Next in line as the 16-boat fleet headed through the Indian Ocean to Sydney, Australia, was Jean Luc Van den Heede, also of France.


No Headline
"He's no longer just the minority whip in the House of Representatives, he's not the editor of a cheap tabloid, he's not just an out-of-control radio talk show host. He's Speaker of the House of Representatives, and he's got to learn to behave as the Speaker of the House of Representatives." -- LEON E. PANETTA, White House chief of staff, on Newt Gingrich.  [ B8:1. ]


Region News Briefs; Defense Says a Witness It Called Was Real Killer
Under questioning by a judge, a lawyer for a Bronx man accused in a fatal carjacking here today asserted that the defense had produced the real killer -- a man named Deno Lloyd -- and put him on the witness stand.
The defendant, Edward L. Summers, has asserted that a notorious drug lord named Dino killed one teen-ager and wounded another in the Jan. 3 carjacking from Nanuet Mall.
Prosecutors say his claim is a fiction.


Homes Data Help Push Bonds Down
Prices of Treasury securities fell yesterday amid revived investor concern over continuing strong growth that could accelerate inflation.
Municipal bond prices outperformed government securities despite the potential $1.5 billion loss reported last week by Orange County, Calif.
The price of the benchmark 30-year Treasury bond fell about 6/32 to 95 7/32 .
Its yield, which moves in the opposite direction from its price, rose to 7.92 percent from 7.91 percent on Friday.


CHRONICLE
ROY ROGERS and DALE EVANS, on the other hand, didn't wait to celebrate their 47th wedding anniversary on the actual day, New Year's Eve.
An organization called Happy Trails: Dude Ranching for Children With Disabilities gave them a dude-ranch party with pony and hay rides, pond fishing and line dancing on Sunday in Malibu, Calif., The Associated Press reported.
The guests of honor -- children with disabilities -- sat on bales of hay and sang "Happy Trails to You" along with the King of the Cowboys and the Queen of the West.


Fund Head Resigns in California
Under mounting pressure from state and county officials, Robert L. Citron, the manager of a public investment pool in Orange County, Calif., resigned as county treasurer after disclosing that his aggressive strategy caused $1.5 billion in potential losses for local governments, county officials announced today.
The announcement was made by Ernie Schneider, the chief administrative officer of Orange County, who also said the Securities and Exchange Commission had been gathering information during the weekend on the investment pool, made up of $7.8 billion from about 170 municipal agencies.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  IMPROVED SCHOOLS TO GET CASH REWARDS
In an effort to improve students' test scores and attendance, Schools Chancellor Ramon C. Cortines said he was creating a program to award cash grants to the most improved schools in the city.
He said the program, which will use $500,000 in Federal funds, would not compare schools against each other, but rather chart each school's performance from year to year.
B3.


Jets Get the Day Off, Johnson May Get More
Pete Carroll had no bad words for his players today.
In fact, he had no words for them at all.
For the first time this season, Carroll told the Jets to stay home on a Monday.
He suggested that an extra day off would heal their minds and bodies after Sunday's crushing loss to the New England Patriots.


RESULTS PLUS
COLLEGE BASKETBALL Kansas Keeps Rolling Jerod Haase scored a career-high 22 points and Raef LaFrentz added 16 as No. 4 Kansas shot 57 percent and made 12 3-pointers to beat visiting Coppin State, 91-69, last night.
Kansas (3-0), which came into the game on a high note after knocking off then-No. 1 Massachusetts on Saturday, was 12 of 21 from 3-point range and pulled away early in the second half.
Haase, a transfer from Cal-Berkeley, scored the first 9 points for the Jayhawks on three straight 3-pointers as Kansas opened a 13-5 lead.
Coppin State is 0-3. (AP)


Quiet End to a Political Dynasty; Hamilton Fish Jr. Leaves Congress and Takes 150 Years of Family History
Late in the day, the last day of his long tenure on Capitol Hill, Hamilton Fish Jr. was still at his desk revising what was to have been his final speech in the House of Representatives, crossing out long passages and scribbling in new ones in favor of the global trade accord known as GATT.
Then he kissed his wife and hurried off to the House floor.
In the visitors' gallery, Mary Ann Fish took a seat in the first row and scanned the crowd.
When she finally saw her husband stand and move forward, she turned to her son, John Charles Knauss, and said with great feeling: "John Charles, do you know what this is? This is the last speech of 26 years."


The Red Storm: Hunter To Hunted to Winner
St.
John's learned a valuable lesson in its Big East opener tonight against the Pitt Panthers: one half does not a basketball game make.
Not even when you're ahead by 23 points.
Leading by 52-29 at halftime, the Red Storm needed a layup by Felipe Lopez and two free throws by Charles Minlend in the final 26 seconds to hold off the scrappy Panthers, 88-83, before 8,156 at the Civic Arena.


The Whitewater Gavotte
The expected plea of guilty by Webster L. Hubbell, the former No. 3 official in the Justice Department, may seem like a big breakthrough in the Federal investigation of the Whitewater affair.
But as the inquiry drags into its 11th month, it is still no more clear than ever before whether the independent counsel, Kenneth W. Starr, will uncover any evidence that Bill or Hillary Clinton broke any law, told any lie or violated any ethical standard in their financial dealings in Arkansas in the late 1970's and early 80's.
In part, that is because Mr.
Starr is pursuing Whitewater as purely a criminal matter; what if any wrongdoing by the Clintons was at worst civil rather than criminal?


BENTSEN IS POISED TO LEAVE CABINET, OFFICIALS CONFIRM
Treasury Secretary Lloyd Bentsen plans to announce his resignation this week, senior Administration officials said tonight, ending months of speculation about the tenure of the Cabinet's most prominent member.
Robert E. Rubin, the head of the National Economic Council, will be nominated to replace Mr.
Bentsen, the officials said.


Dr. David E. Rogers, 68, Leading Medical Educator, Dies
Dr.
David E. Rogers, a leading scientist and medical educator who was co-chairman of the National Commission on AIDS, died in New York City yesterday.
He was 68 and lived in Princeton, N.J.
Dr.
Rogers died from colon cancer at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, said a representative of the New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center, where he was professor of medicine.


Return To India A Mehta Triumph
With a rousing encore of Johann Strauss Sr.'s "Radetzky March" that had a stadium audience of 14,000 people chanting for more, Zubin Mehta put the finishing touch on Saturday night to a long-standing ambition: bringing the Israel Philharmonic Orchestra to India, and better still to Bombay, the hometown Mr.
Mehta left 40 years ago to begin his musical career.
The orchestra's five concerts in Bombay and New Delhi broke a political taboo that had kept it from performing in India for three decades, since Mr.
Mehta began his long association with this Tel Aviv-based symphony.
The invitation the Indian Government had long blocked came after India and Israel opened embassies in each other's capitals two years ago and embarked on a rapid increase in economic and cultural ties.


New York Mental Health System Fails Us All
To the Editor:
Charles J. Hynes, Brooklyn's District Attorney, who is investigating Kingsboro Psychiatric Hospital following the murder of David Kaplan, a patient who came to the hospital voluntarily for treatment (news article, Nov. 28), is right to be angered by the flippant attitude displayed by officials from the New York State Office of Mental Health.
These officials seem oblivious to the consequences of their failure to insure that reasonable risk management measures are in place.
The Office of Mental Health has failed to provide much-needed administrative direction and oversight to prevent mismanagement at Kingsboro and other New York State psychiatric hospitals.


Borden Bars A Proposal From Suitor
The board of Borden Inc. yesterday rejected a proposal by a would-be suitor, Paul B. Kazarian, that would have tried to restructure the troubled company.
A letter from Frank J. Tasco, the board chairman, said Mr.
Kazarian's plans "are not realistic or credible" and contended that he had engaged in "publicity-seeking rather than substantive dialogue."


COLLEGE SOCCER REPORT
Rutgers
The Scarlet Knights are in the final four of the National Collegiate Athletic Association tournament despite having the most losses among the 32 teams that received bids.


Light Trucks' Sales Lift Auto Makers' Records
The sound of breaking records has itself become something of a broken record in Motown, as, month after month, sales of light trucks have topped past performances.
November was no exception, the auto makers reported today.
All three domestic auto makers set November records for sales of pickups, mini-vans, and sport utility vehicles.
The General Motors Corporation sold 167,687 light trucks in the United States during the month -- 13 percent more than its previous record November, which was in 1978.


Man in the News; Ascendance of an Improbable Leader -- Richard Keith Armey
Here is how Newt Gingrich says someone can tell that a "revolution" is truly at hand.
When he and Senator Bob Dole of Kansas had to leave an important meeting of Republicans on Friday, they left Representative Dick Armey and Senator Trent Lott of Mississippi in charge.
Mr.
Gingrich of Georgia, the next Speaker of the House, told this anecdote to a gathering of conservatives here, and the audience cheered wildly.


Corrections
An article in some editions on Wednesday about plans by Empire Blue Cross and Blue Shield to stop offering a special type of comprehensive health coverage misstated the percentage of Empire's subscribers who now have the coverage.
It is less than 1 percent, not about 2 percent.


8 L.I. Hospitals Agree to End Plan That Controlled Rates
Eight Long Island hospitals agreed today to abandon what Federal prosecutors described as a scheme to control the rates they charged health maintenance organizations, a practice Federal authorities said violated antitrust laws.
Officials of the United States Justice Department and representatives of the H.M.O. industry -- a rapidly expanding segment of the health care market -- said the agreement filed today in Federal District Court in Brooklyn was a significant victory for those seeking to reduce hospital costs.


Corrections
An obituary in some copies yesterday about Clement Biddle Wood Jr., a novelist and former editor of The Paris Review, omitted a survivor.
Mr.
Wood, who died on Sunday, is also survived by a sister, Emily Wood, who lives in Philadelphia.
The obituary, as corrected, is reprinted on page D22 today for readers who did not receive it.


Quayle Facing Restrictions On His Travel and Activity
Former Vice President Dan Quayle, who was hospitalized here a week ago after a blood clot was discovered in his lungs, will be restricted to light activity and no air travel for at least a month, his doctors said today.
The prognosis could delay the announcement of his expected Republican Presidential bid, which had been expected around the first of next year.
But the doctors said they thought Mr.
Quayle could resume a normal routine in early January.


Mayor Accuses Schools Chief Of 'Scare Tactics' Over Cuts
One day after taking a swipe at Schools Chancellor Ramon C. Cortines by offering to "kick the living hell" out of the size of the city's Board of Education administration, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani yesterday accused the Chancellor of using "scare tactics."
It was during a speech on Sunday that the Mayor continued his long-running war of words with the Chancellor about the need for further administrative cuts at the board.


Anderson Seizes Game as Nets Seize Day
Kenny Anderson and friends seized a game tonight that had no business being one.
He broke down a defense in the third quarter the way his teammates broke down a potent offense throughout the second half.
Together, they buried an 8-year, 19-game losing streak with an implausible 99-94 victory over the Bulls in Chicago.


Vote Accord In Mexico Is Disputed
Trying to avert a violent showdown, the Government has negotiated an agreement with opposition leaders in the southern state of Chiapas to allow the newly elected Governor to take office peacefully as scheduled on Thursday, officials said today.
But Indian and peasant rebels in Chiapas, who staged an uprising last January, continued to warn that if the Governor-elect, Eduardo Robledo Rincon, tries to take office, there will be violence.


Prodigy Cuts Work Force As Part of Broad Revamping
The Prodigy Services Company, one of the country's largest on-line computer information services, dismissed an estimated 100 employees yesterday, or nearly 15 percent of its total work force.
The company, which is based in White Plains, said the staff reduction included some senior officials and was part of a broad revaming prompted by both technical and strategic changes in the on-line industry.


And Skating Onto the Ice: Optimism
Negotiators made significant progress today in their attempt to end the 66-day lockout and begin the National Hockey League season.
During a six-hour session at the Drake Hotel, the league and its Players Association neared compromises on two of three significant issues, according to persons with knowledge of the collective bargaining.


Recycling Makes Good Business Sense Too
To the Editor:
Your Nov. 27 and 28 news articles on "reinventing garbage" focus primarily on recycling household materials and office paper.
An important but less publicized facet of the industry is taking place in the South Bronx, where Big City Forest is recycling wooden pallets and packaging materials.


The New Ski Wear: Function and Fashion
In the beginning, skiers dressed to keep warm and dry.
If that meant shapeless wool pants and bulky sweaters, so be it.
Skiers still dress to keep warm and dry, but now ski wear is as fashionable as swim wear and even the most serious athletes want to look good on the slopes.
Lucky for them, advances in technology have brought fashion and function as close as the skis of a downhill racer.
So they can schuss the mountain in feel-good colors like yellow, red, orange and cornflower blue.


Knicks Give It Away, But Take It Back
The Knicks kept giving the Philadelphia 76ers opportunities.
And they almost paid for it.
After losing a 17-point lead in the first quarter, and losing a 7-point lead in the final two minutes of regulation, the Knicks finally took control tonight to squeeze out a 101-96 overtime victory at the Spectrum.


A Fight in Texas for the Homeland of a Sect
At the weed-strewn, 77 acres of Texas prairie where the Branch Davidian compound burned to the ground last year, all is not quiet.
A gunshot pierced the air one day last week during an impassioned argument among self-proclaimed leaders of the religious sect about who had authority over the property.
Three people were arrested.
Apparently, an illegal weapon was involved, and the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms has been called in to investigate.


Panel on Trimming Programs Takes Aim at Social Security
WASHINGTON, Dec. 5 --
The staff of the committee appointed by President Clinton to remedy imbalances in the Government's health and retirement programs proposed today three possible solutions that involve the politically unmentionable subject of Social Security.
One option would be to raise the normal retirement age to 70; another would accelerate previously scheduled increases in the retirement age to lift it to 67, and a third would raise the threshold for full benefits to age 68 in a way that the full effect would be felt only by people 40 years old or younger.
The third option would also reduce benefits for the more affluent.


Congress Should Save Human Rights Caucus
To the Editor:
The new Republican leadership is conducting a review of all Congressional institutions and programs.
As part of the process, on Dec. 6 Republicans will debate the abolition of Congressional caucuses, the so-called Legislative Service Organizations.
We urge Congressional leaders to preserve an effective weapon in the struggle for international human rights: the Human Rights Caucus.


A Man. A Woman. Just a Movie. Not a Polemic.
The fact that Hollywood's first high-profile film about sexual harassment involves a woman harassing a man leaves its creators and stars uneasy and a bit defensive.
"We're making a movie, not an issue," said Michael Douglas, a star of "Disclosure," the adaptation of the Michael Crichton suspense thriller about corporate intrigue and sexual politics, which will open on Friday.
"It's really about the use of harassment as a tool for power. And it's very effective in terms of allowing people to look at the issue from the other side."


Lands' End Chief Resigns Abruptly
On one of the busiest sales days of the year for catalogue retailers, Lands' End Inc. abruptly announced yesterday that William T. End, its president and chief executive, had resigned because of differences with the mail-order company's board.
The announcement was startling not only for its timing but because the company anointed an unknown executive, Michael J. Smith, to replace Mr.
End.


Ousted School Board Considers Challenge
The lawyer for a community school board in Central Brooklyn said yesterday that Schools Chancellor Ramon C. Cortines was wrong to seize control of the district last week and that he will help the board members fight their suspensions.
Several of the nine District 17 board members met yesterday with Philip Kaplan, who has been the district lawyer for several years, to discuss how they could challenge the chancellor's order.


Russian Peacekeeping in the Caucasus
After a brutal war with Azerbaijan, Armenia has won autonomy for Nagorno-Karabakh, a largely ethnic Armenian enclave in Azerbaijan.
But a cease-fire has been delayed because of a squabble between the U.S. and Russia over peacekeeping arrangements under the 53-member Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe.
The issue poses a critical test of whether the conference, now meeting in Budapest, can function as an instrument of collective security, especially in restraining deadly ethnic rivalries.
The parties agree that Russia will provide about a third of the 3,000 peacekeepers to separate the combatants in Nagorno-Karabakh.
What remains in dispute is the nature of its mandate from the C.S.C.E. and the numbers and role of other peacekeepers, mostly from Turkey, Eastern Europe and Scandinavia.


Citing Health, Rapper Misses Court Hearing
Tupac Shakur, the wounded rap performer who was convicted of felony sex-abuse charges last week, failed to show up for a hearing in a Manhattan court yesterday because doctors were concerned about his medical condition, the judge in the case said.
The judge, Justice Daniel P. Fitzgerald of State Supreme Court, rescheduled the hearing, to set a sentencing date, for Dec. 14.


Clippers Place Spencer on Injured List
The Los Angeles Clippers placed center ELMORE SPENCER on the injured list yesterday because of apparent behavioral and personal problems.
Spencer, who turns 25 today, met yesterday with the team physician, TONY DALY, who recommended a specialized treatment sequence to further identify and treat the condition that the Clippers feel has affected both his overall behavior and performance on the court.


Officials Say Flu Season Is Off to a Slow Start
ALTHOUGH flu season is well under way, running from October to April, state and national health officials say that many who may think they have had the flu have probably had a cold that mimicked flu symptoms.
As of Nov. 26, only Kentucky, Minnesota, New Mexico and New York have reported confirmed cases of influenza infection, according to Dr.
Joseph Bresee, a medical epidemiologist with the Federal Centers for Disease Control and Prevention in Atlanta.
Of the 3,876 suspected flu specimens tested nationwide, only eight yielded positive results.


El Salvador Suffers Split Among Left
Five years ago, the Salvadoran guerrilla movement carried out a military offensive with such discipline and organization that it ultimately forced the Government to accept many of its demands.
But in its new incarnation as a political party, the Farabundo Marti National Liberation Front has become so splintered by animosities and differences over fundamental goals that it seems unlikely to survive the peace, many of its most important leaders say.


Sterling Software Inc.(SSW,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Samaranch Retiring as I.O.C. Chief in 1997
The International Olympic Committee president, JUAN ANTONIO SAMARANCH, said in an interview published yesterday that he will not run for re-election to the I.O.C.'s top position in 1997.
"It is my obligation to respect the age limit for I.O.C. members. I do not plan to be re-elected in 1997 as president, and of course I will not be a candidate," he said in an interview with the Athens newspaper Ta Nea.
Samaranch, 74, has been president of the I.O.C. since 1980. (AP)


Tracing the Brain's Pathways For Linking Emotion and Reason
IMAGINE walking along a jungle path in the twilight and hearing a lion roar.
Your skin turns clammy, a knot forms in your stomach and you can taste the fear rising in your throat.
Now imagine walking along a zoo path at the same time of the eveningand hearing the same sound.
This time you do not feel afraid.


Union Official at Javits Center Is Accused of Having Mob Ties
In his first move to clean up the corruption that officials say has driven business away from the Jacob K. Javits Convention Center, a special investigator yesterday accused a carpenters' union official of being a Mafia family's "acting agent" at the center.
The investigator, Kenneth Conboy, filed administrative charges to remove the official, Anthony D. Fiorini, the union's top representative at the center, on the grounds that he aided the Genovese crime family in its activities at the center for more than three years.
While not specifying how Mr.
Fiorini is to have helped the crime group, Mr.
Conboy suggested that he had helped Mafia members and their associates find jobs at the center while discriminating against carpenters' union members.


DANCE
Poetry and Humor In Several New Works  Danspace Project
Trying to explain why he called his program "Dance Is a Fat Woman," David Zambrano wrote in a program note that for him, dance "is filled with the sensual and the sexual, with life and with poetry." The works he presented at St.
Mark's Church on Sunday night were certainly filled with life.
They were also blessed with a rough sort of poetry.


Club Owners' Labor Chief Resigns
No one knows when striking baseball players and the club owners will resolve their prolonged labor dispute, but if they ever reach a settlement, they'll do it without the man who served the past three years as management's chief labor executive.
They'll also apparently have to do it with something other than the owners' recent tax proposal.
"We don't believe it provides a framework in which we likely will get an agreement," Donald Fehr said in his first public characterization of the owners' proposed luxury tax on payrolls.


COMPANY BRIEFS
CAMERON ASHLEY INC., Dallas, a building materials distributor, acquired two building supplies distributors that will add $83 million in annual sales.
They are C.A.
Co.
Inc. of Lewiston, Idaho, and Southland Building Products Inc., a unit of Bird Corp.
The terms were not disclosed.
FISERV INC., Brookfield, Wis., which provides financial data processing services, has purchased the imaging technology banking unit of Cincinnati Bell Inc., for an undisclosed price.


America Online
Shares of America Online Inc., a fast-growing on-line service, rose sharply yesterday after it said that it expected to more than double its number of customers.
The company expects to have 3 million subscribers a year from now, up from about 1.4 million.


Devtek Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Magma Agrees to $950 Million Offer
In a reversal, the Magma Power Company ended its opposition yesterday to a merger with the California Energy Company, accepting a sweetened takeover offer of $39 a share, or $950 million.
The agreement surprised investors, who bid up shares of Magma $1.875, to $37.375, in heavy trading on the Nasdaq market.
Shares of California Energy fell 87.5 cents, to $15.625, on the New York Stock Exchange.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy  Treasury Secretary Lloyd Bentsen will announce his resignation this week, a senior Administration official said.
Mr.
Bentsen will be replaced by Robert E. Rubin.  [ Page A1. ]


Almaty Journal; It Isn't Much but, Golly, Zhirinovsky Slept Here
Nikolai Sidorov has a T-shirt given to him by American Nazis who recently made a pilgrimage here.
The T-shirt commemorates Mr.
Sidorov's apartment, where Vladimir Volfovich Zhirinovsky, as he came to call himself, grew to boyhood and developed some of the strange obsessions with women and empire that he describes in his autobiography, "Last Leap for the South."
Now Mr.
Zhirinovsky is famous, a seriocomic ultranationalist who has changed Russian politics, and the apartment where he grew up with his mother is a sort of shrine, something like Lenin's home in Ulyanovsk or Mao's in Shaoshan.


Mabel Julianelli, 85, Designer of Shoes
Mabel Julianelli, an innovator in couture shoe design, died on Friday at Southampton Hospital on Long Island.
She was 85 and lived with her daughter, Jane, in Wainscott, L.I.
The cause of death was complications from an infection, Jane Julianelli said.


Biggest F.C.C. Auction Draws Small Bids
Vice President Al Gore opened the Government's biggest auction yet of licenses to operate wireless-telephone and data services today, but the first round of bidding was strikingly restrained.
The high bids today totaled $379 million, and even licenses for the largest metropolitan areas drew very modest opening offers.
A license for serving San Francisco drew the single highest bid of the day, $50.7 million, submitted by a subsidiary of Telephone and Data Systems Inc. of Chicago, which owns cellular companies in the Midwest.
The license covering the New York metropolitan area drew a $50 million bid from the GTE Corporation.


Physicists Say New Math Tool Will Probe Secrets of Matter
IN a mathematical tour de force that has prompted a surge of excitement among mathematicians and particle physicists, two theorists have discovered a technique that may permit detailed exploration of a subtle unifying symmetry pervading material existence.
The achievement, by Dr.
Nathan Seiberg of Rutgers University and Dr.
Edward Witten of the Institute for Advanced Study at Princeton, N.J., cuts through a class of mathematical problems previously regarded as impossible to solve.
It permits mathematicians to calculate exact predictions from a theory of matter called N=2 Supersymmetry.


World News Briefs; Irish Labor Party Ends Coalition Talks
Ireland's Labor Party leader, Dick Spring, pulled out of negotiations to form a new coalition Government early today, Britain's Press Association news agency reported.
Mr.
Spring said there was no basis for continuing discussions about a Government with the Fianna Fail Party.
The Labor leader said he had received inadequate explanations for Fianna Fail ministerial actions surrounding last month's appointment of the former Attorney-General as Irish High Court president, the Press Association reported.


Clement Wood Jr., 69, Novelist and Editor, Dies
Clement Biddle Wood Jr., a novelist who for many years was an editor of The Paris Review, died on Sunday at Southampton Hospital on Long Island.
He was 69 and had lived in nearby Water Mill since 1983.
The cause was complications from colon cancer, said Clement Biddle Wood 3d, his son.


Watchwords for Windows Shopping
WHEN it comes to shopping for a computer, the most important peripheral runs at 98.6 degrees Fahrenheit and is known as a friend.
The ideal friend fully understands these strange beasts, can cut through clouds of technical buzzwords and will sympathize and help when you phone frantically at 2 A.M. because your printer will not spit out a crucial document.
The ideal friend probably does not exist.
Find someone to help anyway, particularly if you are shopping for a machine to run DOS and Windows, which can be tricky to set up. (Macintoshes are much simpler, as will be discussed next week.) Be certain any computer you buy has the power to run the software you want and run it well; you can get along with an underachieving machine, but you may soon regret it.
Upgrading a microprocessor tends to be expensive, so do not skimp here; insist on a computer that runs at an internal speed of at least 60 megahertz , like a 486 DX2/66 model, whose "66" indicates its speed.


Bankers Trust and U.S. Set Pact On Disclosure of Derivatives' Risk
In the first big Government action against a seller of the financial instruments known as derivatives, the Federal Reserve Board said yesterday that it had reached a settlement with the Bankers Trust Company that requires the bank to increase the disclosure of risks its customers face.
At the same time, two other Federal agencies, the Securities and Exchange Commission and the Commodity Futures Trading Commission, are expected to reach a joint settlement against Bankers Trust in the next few weeks.


By Design; To Be Sure It's Festive
The year-end holidays ring in a round of parties and nights on the town.
And that calls for dressing up in festive fashion.
This year, the thing to wear is a sexy disco dress that's short and bares a lot of skin.
It may be jersey, knitted or sequined.
Sequins are suddenly highly acceptable in fashion circles, and nothing beats the shimmery effect of a body dancing in a sequined dress.


In the Sudan, Islamic Leader Talks of Tolerance
This country is bankrupt and locked in a vicious civil war.
It has become an international pariah over what Western diplomats describe as its active support for armed militant movements seeking to topple governments in Egypt, Algeria, Tunisia and Saudi Arabia, and for egregious human rights abuses.
Yet Hassan al-Turabi, by all accounts the mastermind of the Sudanese Government, defies the stereotype of the Islamic revolutionary.


Appraiser on Madison Loans in Plea Accord
Federal prosecutors reached a plea agreement today with a land appraiser who admitted to conspiring with executives of the savings association at the heart of the Whitewater case to inflate the estimates used to support loans.
Investigators have been told that the appraiser, Robert W. Palmer, significantly inflated estimates used to support loans made to Gov.
Jim Guy Tucker of Arkansas, witnesses in the inquiry said.


Mr. Clinton's Future and the G.O.P.
Representative Newt Gingrich's freewheeling performance on "Meet the Press" and Senator Bob Dole's earlier foray into diplomacy affirm the Republican leadership's ability to dominate the news at the expense of a racked White House.
But the larger message is this.
The Republican challenge to President Clinton's ability to lead the Government and establish a national policy agenda has now been fully joined.
This is political combat carried to its most exalted -- or at least most extreme -- level.
The Republicans are trying to use the strength gained from their Nov. 8 election victory to settle pre-emptively the question of the President's fate and thereby determine the outcome of the 1996 Presidential contest.


The Mystery and Tragedy of Genius
On the stage of the Perry Street Theater these nights, there is much to admire: performance, poetry, prose and a pair of mesmerizing excursions into that fascinating realm where literary creativity dances its pas de doom in the arms of alcoholism.
Bringing Dylan Thomas and Truman Capote back from the dead in two admirable one-man shows is the talented Welsh-born actor Bob Kingdom.
In "Dylan Thomas: Return Journey," wearing a saddle of strawberry-blond fleece over his broad, high brow, a slightly rumpled suit and an ill-fitting shirt, he conjured up the memory of the touring poet.


Fox Petition Counters NBC On Foreign Ownership Issue
Responding to NBC's contention that the ownership of the Fox network television stations violates Federal law, Fox Inc. filed a harshly worded petition to the Federal Communications Commission yesterday asserting that NBC was lying in an effort to derail Fox as a competitor.
Fox accused its rival's parent, the General Electric Company, of engaging in criminal conduct that called into question NBC's qualifications to continue as a broadcaster.


3 Aftershocks Jangle Nerves In Los Angeles
Three small aftershocks from January's major earthquake jiggled the Los Angeles area this evening, raising the pulse rates of people here who still tend to jump at loud noises.
The three shocks, near the San Fernando Valley epicenter of the January earthquake, registered preliminary readings of 3.0, 3.5 and 4.5 on the Richter scale of magnitude.
No injuries or serious damage were reported this evening.


Why Try to Re-Create Old Penn Station?
To the Editor:
Re "On the Right Track" (Op-Ed, Nov. 28): Ada Louise Huxtable's assessment of plans for a new Pennsylvania Station in New York provides cachet for what seems like the biggest boondoggle of the decade.
The proposal is faulty on several accounts:


On the 'Datasphere' and a Generation Absorbed in It
MEDIA VIRUS!
Hidden Agendas in Popular Culture  By Douglas Rushkoff  338 pages.
Ballantine Books. $21.95.
Rushkoff makes a spirited case for technology's potential to reshape our cultural agenda.


Troops-Turned-Teachers Offer Great Potential
To the Editor:
The transition of talented people from a downsized military to the teaching profession is to be saluted (front page, Nov. 30).
Many of these former military personnel -- an estimated 21,000 in the New York City area alone -- have been teaching in the military for years.


Trying to Keep the Historical Society a la Mode
Betsy Gotbaum has her eye fixed on the future, beyond the inevitable tempest over next month's fire sale at the New-York Historical Society, beyond next May's planned gala reopening, beyond next fall's "Elvis and Marilyn" show with which she hopes to put a popular stamp on the fusty institution.
Ms.
Gotbaum, the society's new executive director, is thinking into the next millennium.
Meeting the other day with a fellow museum director about a possible joint show, Ms.
Gotbaum was undaunted to hear that the research alone could take up to four years.
"We're interested," she said, beaming as her new partner promised to "put our curator with your curator."


Patterns
A Film Message
Designers are slowly learning how to wield their political clout, but few have had an opportunity to send a message more pointedly than Tracy Reese does with a cameo appearance in "White Man's Burden," a film produced by Quentin Tarantino and Lawrence Bender and expected to be released early next year.


Cocaine Found Smuggled Inside a Dog
To get their goods into this country, drug traffickers have tried just about everything, from hiding cocaine or heroin in hollowed-out coconuts and bowling balls to swallowing condoms stuffed with the drugs.
But even hardened United States customs officials were surprised to find nearly five pounds of cocaine surgically implanted in the abdomen of a female Old English sheepdog that had been shipped from Colombia to Kennedy International Airport.


Maps, Guns And Bosnia; Redrawn Peace Plan Is Unlikely to Please
Recent changes to an American-backed peace plan for Bosnia seem likely to fall short of Serbian demands and to antagonize the Muslim-led Government.
The Serbian demands grow bolder with each successful use of force, and the Government's bitterness grows deeper each time it feels betrayed by the West.
The original plan put forward by the five-nation "contact group" that has sought for months to negotiate an end to the war has now been turned on its head.
Blandishments to the Serbs have replaced threats.
A "final" map is open to adjustment.
Bosnia's borders look less than sacrosanct.
And American diplomats are scurrying to visit a Bosnian Serb leadership that was supposed to be locked in punitive isolation.


G.E.'s Diamond Victory
In a stunning victory for the General Electric Company, a Federal judge threw out a criminal case yesterday in which the company was accused of conspiring to fix the world price of industrial diamonds.
Article, page D2.


Science Teacher Arraigned on Assault Charges


Issue of Juror's Misconduct Is Raised by Simpson Judge
The O. J. Simpson murder trial was thrown into confusion today when Judge Lance A. Ito of Los Angeles Superior Court disclosed that at least one of the 12 jurors selected in the case might be dismissed for misconduct.
Judge Ito did not disclose the nature of the misconduct, but he set a hearing on the matter for Thursday.


Corrections
An obituary on Nov. 11 about the lawyer Louis Nizer referred incorrectly to the prize he won while a student at Columbia University, and to the timing.
The award is is the George William Curtis Prize, given for excellence in the public delivery of English orations, not the Curtis Oratorical Prize.
He won it twice as an undergraduate at Columbia, not while he was a law student there.


Stock Prices Mixed as Dow Retreats 3.70
The stock market, after some afternoon thrashing-about, closed mixed but essentially unchanged yesterday as stock and bond traders grappled with what may be changing market sentiment about the strength of the economy.
The Dow Jones industrial average fell 3.70 points, to 3,741.92, while the broader Standard &amp; Poor's 500 rose 0.03 point, to 453.33.
The smaller-company Nasdaq composite index rose 0.69 point, to 745.71.


Republicans All for One, and the One Is Gingrich
Representative Newt Gingrich was unanimously chosen today to be Speaker of the House by ecstatic Republicans chanting "Newt, Newt, Newt," and he told them that the way to get rid of bad Federal programs was simply not to provide any money for them.
Nominated for the post by Republicans who called him "a revolutionary" and a "visionary," Mr.
Gingrich, a Georgian, talked for an hour about the America he would like to help fashion and the hard work ahead for the House.
He gave his fellow Representatives an eight-item reading list that included titles as diverse as the Federalist Papers and Mary E. Boone's "Leadership and the Computer."


Corrections
A picture of a laboratory study of tsunami waves in Science Times last Tuesday carried an incorrect credit.
The photographer was Michael Briggs of the Army Corps of Engineers in Pittsburgh.


Officer in Crash Suspended
A rookie police officer was arrested and suspended from duty yesterday after being accused of driving while intoxicated and driving into an unoccupied patrol car in Bay Ridge, Brooklyn, the police said.


Suspect in Crib Deaths: Reaction to Allergens
EVERYTHING from virulent viruses to passive smoking has been suggested as a cause of sudden infant death syndrome (SIDS), or crib death.
The recently issued warnings not to place infants to sleep on their stomachs or on pillows or plush mats is an effort to curb infant deaths caused by smothering in bedclothes.
But for the most part, the cause -- or more likely, causes -- of crib death are largely unknown.
But new research by a team of allergists from Johns Hopkins University, the Mayo Clinic and the Medical College of Virginia suggests that severe allergic reactions that were previously unrecognized may play a role in as many as 40 percent of sudden infant deaths.


INCOMING SPEAKER SHARPLY SCOLDED
The Clinton Administration today denounced Representative Newt Gingrich, the incoming Speaker of the House, for asserting that up to a fourth of the White House staff had used illicit drugs in recent years.
Leon E. Panetta, the White House chief of staff, said the accusation was "absolutely false" and part of an emerging Republican pattern of "smear and innuendo."
The response from the Administration was remarkably strong and reflected the polarized relations between the White House and Capitol Hill as Mr.
Gingrich was formally ratified as the Republicans' choice for Speaker today.
Hillary Rodham Clinton told reporters that the charge by Mr.
Gingrich, which he made Sunday on NBC's "Meet the Press," was "so unfair" and added, "I would hope it was a momentary lapse."


Q&amp;A
Happy Bluebirds
Q.
At the end of November, I saw a big flock of bluebirds in New Marlborough, Mass., where they've always seemed pretty rare.
Are they having a general resurgence in the Northeast?
Shouldn't they be migrating?


Dance Club Had Failed Inspections
The dance club where four young people were killed early Saturday in a panicky stampede at a stairway exit had failed previous building inspections, most recently on Sept. 8, when Elizabeth fire officials found an exit door nailed shut and a broken exit sign, Mayor J. Christian Bollwage said today.
"It's clear this place has had violations in the past," Mayor Bollwage said.
He said that when investigators inspected the El Balcon dance hall in the hours after the tragedy, the sign above one of the two exit stairways was not lighted.


Cuomo, Loser in Costly Race, Also Lagged in Fund Raising
Governor-elect George E. Pataki raised $2 million in the final two weeks of the campaign, giving him a total of $14.5 million for what is widely believed to be the most expensive gubernatorial race in New York State history, campaign spending reports filed with the state today show.
In the same period, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo raised $1.5 million for a total of $11.1 million for the entire campaign.
B.
Thomas Golisano, the millionaire Rochester businessman who ran on the Independence Fusion Party line, raised a total of $6.6 million for the campaign, almost all of it his own money, including $1 million in the final week.


David Freiman, 63, Business Consultant
David J. Freiman, a management consultant, died on Friday in Los Angeles.
A resident of Stamford, Conn., he was 63.
He died while attending a cable-television convention, his family said.
The cause of death was not given.


Cipsco Inc.(CIP,N) reports earnings for 12mos to Oct 31


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; From the optimists' ball, a consensus that happy days are indeed ahead.
AN increasingly optimistic outlook for growth in advertising spending brightened even further yesterday as two leading industry forecasters presented rosy predictions for 1995 and beyond.
At the opening session of the 22d annual Paine Webber media conference, Robert J. Coen, senior vice president and forecasting director at McCann-Erickson U.S.A. in New York, and John Perriss, chairman at Zenith Media Worldwide in London, increased their projections for total advertising spending in the United States and overseas.


Sheik in Bombing Case Has TB
A Federal judge said yesterday that Sheik Omar Abdel Rahman, the lead defendant in the terror conspiracy case that is scheduled to come to trial next month, has tested positive for tuberculosis, but he does not have a contagious form of the disease.
The judge, Michael B. Mukasey, was responding to complaints by a defense lawyer for Mr.
Abdel Rahman that he had been quarantined in his cell and even refused permission to use the telephone.
"He was completely sealed off from the outside world," the lawyer, Lynne Stewart, said.


Corrections
An article yesterday about plans by former Surgeon General C. Everett Koop for a campaign against obesity misidentified the organization that issued a report on diet and exercise.
It is the Institute of Medicine of the National Academy of Sciences, not the Office of Medicine.


Clean Needles Slow AIDS
Researchers in New York City have found the most persuasive evidence yet that providing clean needles to drug addicts can slow the spread of the AIDS virus.
The results, though preliminary, strengthen the case for needle exchange programs, not only in New York but in all cities with intravenous drug users at risk of infection with AIDS.
Such programs are banned in some states and only allowed as an experiment in New York.
The logic behind needle exchanges has always seemed plausible.
In many cities, addicts who inject drugs have been devastated by AIDS, largely because the AIDS virus can be spread from person to person through the sharing of needles and syringes.
One way to slow this spread, the reasoning goes, is to give addicts clean needles in exchange for used needles that may be contaminated.
The addicts may remain hooked on their drugs, but at least they are less likely to spread the AIDS virus.


Sports of The Times; A Player's Dream and His Fear
THE contract sits on his agent's desk, waiting for his signature, a mere formality.
Kevin Baez intends to sign with the Detroit Tigers.
He will take their minor league deal, the invitation to their major league camp, their promise of a good, long look.
He just hopes that the promise, by spring, doesn't become a guarantee.


U.S. Gave Myanmar a Choice on Relations
To the Editor:
We write to take issue with your description of American policy toward Myanmar, formerly Burma, as "deny reality, declare things are getting better, and lower the pressure," ("Don't Cave In on Myanmar," editorial, Nov. 24).
Secretary of State Warren Christopher did not suggest that the Administration would take a more conciliatory approach to Myanmar's ruling State Law and Order Restoration Council, or Slorc, in the absence of meaningful change in that country.
Quite the contrary.


Companies Rediscovering Indonesia
General Motors is back in Indonesia, selling the Opel Vectra sedan made at its new assembly plant outside Jakarta, the first G.M. plant in Southeast Asia.
G.M. is one of many American companies that have discovered or rediscovered Indonesia, lured by the prospect of its 5 to 7 percent economic growth, abundant natural resources and a population of 200 million, the world's fourth largest.


Stop &amp; Shop Cos.(SHP,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 5


DANCE
Four Women, Four Elements, Made Magical by Light  Bessie Schonberg Theater
Four women course along a route that winds through a luminous landscape in Stefa Zawerucha's "Curve Ahead," performed on Friday night.
The only props are four blankets that appear at the beginning and end of the hourlong piece.
The set is a wash of changing light, designed by David Fritz and Carol Mullins, which provides a backdrop and fills the air with soft color.
But Ms.
Zawerucha, who choreographed the acclaimed 1992 dance "Black Box," creates a sense of almost three-dimensional place in this new piece.


Latest in Knowlege Without Pain
CHILDREN 6 to 12 years old have a lot to think about: rhythms and shapes, colors and tunes, the standing of their soccer teams.
Thinkin' Things Collection 2 will not help a child bounce a soccer ball off his noggin, but it may pound a little knowledge into it.
Oranga Banga's Band, one of the five activities, helps the youngster read and write rhythm patterns and play around with rhythmic notation and makes explicit the relationship between the line of notes on the screen or page and the rhythms and sounds that come out of the speaker.


Staff Layoffs At Publisher's Children Unit
Citing a need to revamp in an effort to cut costs, Random House Inc. is laying off nearly 10 percent of 200 employees in its juvenile and merchandise group, which publishes the company's children's books.
In addition, at another Random House division, Alfred A. Knopf, two senior editors, Gordon Lish and Corona Machemer, are leaving at the end of the year.


Bill Would Let Adoptees See Birth Records
Adults who were given up for adoption when they were children could eventually have access to their birth certificates under a bill passed today by the New Jersey Assembly.
But to satisfy concerns of biological parents who do not want to be traced, the legislation gives the biological parents one year to tell the state if they want their identities permanently shielded.


Daugherty Out for Rest of Regular Season
BRAD DAUGHERTY of the Cleveland Cavaliers had two herniated disks removed from his lower back yesterday and will be sidelined for the rest of the regular season.
The Cavaliers said there is a remote chance the 29-year-old center could return for the playoffs, which begin in April.
The back pain has kept the 7-foot Daugherty off the court for nine months.


One Big Play Turns Into Graduation For Brown
The play is called "16 halfback 9 Y 7" and it is a play Dave Brown says he may never forget.
It is the kind of play that can change a player's career.
The kind that if it fails, well, so be it; he tried.
But if it works, if somehow Brown can squeeze the ball in there and Chris Calloway can make the catch, then it becomes more than just a play.
It becomes confidence.
It becomes winning.
The "16 halfback 9 Y 7" becomes a third straight victory and now, following the 16-13 decision over the Browns Sunday, the 6-7 Giants are mentioning the "P" word: Playoffs.
They are still in the race, with the weak Cincinnati Bengals coming up next at Giants Stadium on Sunday.


H.I.V. as a Defense in a Murder Trial
An impending murder trial in a small Mississippi town has captured the fearful attention of gay organizers around the nation who worry that the case may turn on whether the two homosexual victims were infected with H.I.V., the virus that causes AIDS.
The defense lawyer, J. Ronald Parrish, said he would argue that the accused murderer, Marvin McClendon, 16, shot Joseph Shoemake, 24, and Robert Walters, 34, when they tried to assault him sexually.
The bodies were found on Oct. 8.


U.S. Edges Toward Israel on Palestinian Self-Rule Security Issue
In a sign of Washington's mounting frustration with Yasir Arafat and his Palestinian Authority, Secretary of State Warren Christopher said today that Israel cannot be expected to withdraw its army from the occupied West Bank until Palestinian attacks on Israelis come to an end.
Attacks on Israeli soldiers and civilians by members of Palestinian radical groups opposed to Mr.
Arafat have outraged Israelis and fueled dissatisfaction with the Government of Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin.
That, in turn, has threatened the core of the peace agreement signed by Israel and the Palestinians on the White House lawn 14 months ago: the withdrawal of Israel's troops from Arab towns and villages.


In the Literary Field, An Upstart Alliance Based on Tradition
In the last few weeks, an advertisement in The New York Review of Books has put forward a novel proposition.
"We invite you," it reads, "to join us and the more than 400 other members in a new professional society for the study of literature, the Association of Literary Scholars and Critics."
New literary societies are not in short supply, but this one is different.
It will not be devoted to a single author, a specific period or a specialized subject.
Membership will be open to university professors, journalists, novelists, poets and publishers.
Most telling, as the advertisement has it, "it will hold to broad conceptions of literature rather than the narrow, highly politicized ones often encountered today."


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League
TEXAS RANGERS -- Named Zach Manasian home clubhouse and equipment manager and Joe Macko visiting clubhouse manager.


Major's Tax Plan for Britain Loses, Shaking His Hold on Power
Prime Minister John Major suffered a stinging defeat in Parliament tonight as rebel members of his own Conservative party sided with the opposition to kill a tax increase.
The setback raised questions about Mr.
Major's ability to advance his legislative agenda and maintain his hold on power.
The defeat, over the Government's plan to raise the tax on home heating fuel, came despite frantic arm twisting by Mr.
Major and Kenneth Clarke, the Chancellor of the Exchequer, and left Westminster with an air of political crisis.


Metropolitan Diary
DEAR DIARY:
One recent Monday afternoon, a torrential downpour whipped up unexpectedly.
I realized my young daughter was at school without an umbrella, so I grabbed one for her and one for myself and set out into the storm eager to meet her.
Along the way I noticed a very elderly man, without topcoat or hat, timidly inching his way along lower Duane Street toward the courthouses.
Our eyes met and I asked if he needed an escort.
Without a word, he lunged for my arm and held it tightly.
He was on his way to the No. 15 bus, and we slogged along -- slowly, silently -- toward the unsheltered bus stop.
Several people were waiting, and I ushered him into their midst.


Reeves Is Looking To Daluiso As Kicker
Dan Reeves will announce Wednesday who will kick field goals on Sunday against the Cincinnati Bengals.
The nominees are David Treadwell, who is in a slump, and Brad Daluiso, who replaced Treadwell in the second half last Sunday against the Browns and kicked the game-winner.
Look for these things to happen:


Times Company Plans Shift To More Electronic Media
Executives of The New York Times Company announced a strategic shift yesterday that would increase the company's involvement in electronic media.
The executives said they expected the company to invest $1 billion to $1.5 billion during the next five or six years for the acquisition of television stations and for investments in other electronic media businesses.
These would include cable television programming and providing information on CD-ROM computer disks and on-line services.


Cultures Collide on Madison Avenue


A Contemporary 'Messiah'
"Too Hot to Handel," a contemporary arrangement of Handel's "Messiah," is to be presented by the Concordia Orchestra at Alice Tully Hall, on Dec. 15 at 8 P.M.
In this arrangement, by Gary Anderson and Bob Christianson, the great choruses (like "Hallelujah" and "Glory to God") are sung in gospel style, while the arias are done in a variety of pop and jazz styles.
The soloists are to be Lillias White, soprano; Vivian Cherry, mezzo-soprano, and Thomas Young, tenor.
The orchestra, to be conducted by Marin Alsop, is to be joined by jazz and rhythm players.
Tickets are $25 and $30.
Information: (212) 721-6500.


CNA to Pay $1.1 Billion For Insurer
The CNA Financial Corporation announced yesterday that it had agreed to buy the Continental Corporation for $1.1 billion in cash.
The deal would create the nation's seventh-largest insurance company.
The agreement is another sign that despite a pattern of weak profits in recent years, the property- and liability-insurance businesses remain attractive to some investors.


At the Nation's Table
Austin, Tex.  A Supermarket With No Motor Oil
About a year ago, the H. E. Butt Grocery Company, the oldest and largest grocery chain in Texas, decided to see whether a supermarket carrying mainly food -- fresh and high-quality food -- would float.
Off the shelves came the cosmetics, dog food, videos, Tide, Coca-Cola and Fritos.
In their place went the comestibles of those who live to eat, or cook.
Now, 10 months later, despite the grumblings of a few hard-core one-stop shoppers and the head-scratching of excluded vendors, the checkout lines at the store, Central Market, are bustling.
Even in a place like Austin, which was selected for this experiment for its demographics and its food savvy, walking the serpentine layout of this 63,000-square-foot warehouse-cum-chic store can produce sensory overload.
The shopper first encounters a huge, temperature-controlled farmer's produce market.
Employees wearing nametags rush around offering samples, answering questions and giving cooking advice on the day's inventory of up to 400 items.


March Madness Stays on CBS's Calendar
Baseball, pro football and pro basketball have left CBS's once-powerhouse sports schedule, but the N.C.A.A.
Division I men's basketball tournament, the network's signature event, enrolled with the network yesterday through 2002.
CBS and the National Collegiate Athletic Association announced that they had rolled the final three years of their current seven-year, $1 billion contract into a new eight-year extension worth $1.725 billion.
It will cost CBS an average $216 million annually to show the event known as March Madness, 51 percent more than the current annual average of $143 million.
The contract is effective with the 1995 tournament.


Deere &amp; Co. (DE,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Royal Bank of Canada reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Rockets Easy for Sonics With Olajuwon Sidelined
SuperSonics 103, Rockets 90
Gary Payton scored a season-high 30 points to lead the Seattle SuperSonics past Houston, 103-90, last night in Tacoma, Wash., as the Rockets struggled without center Hakeem Olajuwon.


Sweet It Isn't: Investors Resist Russian Chocolate
Business, like love, is blind.
One of Russia's best-known and most respected companies, the Red October chocolate factory, offered $22 million in stock this week -- the first Russian company to raise equity in a way that meets Wall Street's bookkeeping standards.
Yet few investors were smitten.
Within Russia's murky transition to a market economy, Red October shines -- a beacon signaling that some publicly traded Russian companies are ready to play by Dun &amp; Bradstreet rules.
But it has also fallen victim to a callous rule of romance -- that a man does not necessarily fall for the nice woman with high standards and a good reputation.


Sports of The Times; Knicks Show They'll Win Some Games
LET'S lighten up on the Knicks.
Let's stop acting as if that loss to Orlando was some kind of civic treason.
The Knicks may be trudging as fast as they can, but they will nevertheless win a bunch of games, and some of them will be downright entertaining.
They showed some moves last night -- stutter-step drives by Charles Smith and post-up moves by Herb Williams -- in a 104-90 victory over the Celtics.
It could be a whole lot worse.
The Knicks could be the Celtics, who are reduced to Dominique Wilkins freelancing with off-balance shots.


Janet Oppenheim, 46, Historian Of British Life in 19th Century
Janet Oppenheim, a historian on aspects of 19th-century British life like psychological depression, the condition of women and sex roles and stereotypes, died on Friday at Bryn Mawr Hospital in Bryn Mawr, Pa.
She was 46 and lived in Villanova, Pa.
The cause was cancer, said her mother, Elaine Oppenheim.


As Fifth Ave. Changes, Disney May Replace La Cote Basque
In another indication that Fifth Avenue is no longer solely a preserve of luxury, the Walt Disney Company is planning to rent space there for a store selling merchandise tied to its movies and characters -- and in the process may displace the elegant restaurant La Cote Basque.
The company is poised to sign a lease for about 30,000 square feet in the Coca-Cola Building at 711 Fifth Avenue, which the soft-drink maker took over when it bought Columbia Pictures in 1982.
Under the plan, according to real estate executives, the Disney store would displace La Cote Basque as well as Goldpfeil and Bally of Switzerland, two high-end retail stores.


Food Notes
Jefferson Market to Move
After 65 years at 455 Avenue of the Americas (at 10th Street), Jefferson Market will move next month across the avenue to No. 450.


STORED PLUTONIUM IS LIABLE TO LEAK, GOVERNMENT SAYS
American nuclear weapons plants have thousands of containers of plutonium that could spill their deadly contents before the material is properly disposed of, posing significant risks to workers and some risks to the public as well, the Department of Energy said yesterday.
The plutonium, 26 metric tons in liquids, solids and powders at 13 sites around the country, was left over when production of nuclear arms materials abruptly stopped in the late 1980's.
Because few thought the shutdown would become permanent, much of the plutonium is being stored in forms that can leak.


State Officials Still Support Diversity Law
Although eight of 11 regions across Connecticut rejected plans to promote racial diversity in their schools last month, state education officials said today that a 1993 law promoting voluntary integration has not failed and that they would seek financing from the General Assembly for the three plans that were approved.
The most ambitious plan, developed by Hartford and 22 surrounding towns, calls for greatly expanding Project Concern, a 29-year-old program that now sends 730 Hartford children to suburban schools.


Schubert, Schumann and the Gaze of Others
Joseph Kalichstein presented Schubert, Schumann and their commentators on Saturday night at the 92d Street Y. To go along with the Schubert A-minor Sonata (D. 845) and Schumann's "Faschingsschwank aus Wien" were Liszt piano arrangements of songs by both composers and Mr.
Kalichstein's own version of Schumann's "Aus den Hebraischen Gesangen."
Mr.
Kalichstein's playing acknowledged the arranger's pre-eminence in "Sei mir gegrusst," "Standchen" and "Widmung." Honored, in other words, was an old Romantic pianism: broad pullings and pushings of phrase, dramatic contrasts and a melody-playing hand that often lags just behind the accompanying one.


Choice for Treasury Wins Praise As Clinton Loses Elder Statesman
President Clinton today accepted the resignation of Treasury Secretary Lloyd Bentsen, one of the few elder statesmen in the Administration, and said he would name as the successor Robert E. Rubin, a former investment banker who is an ally of Mr.
Bentsen and now mediates economic policy at the White House.
For Mr.
Clinton, the effect of Mr.
Bentsen's departure is more political than economic, since Mr.
Rubin has been at the center of the Administration's policy-making for two years as a quiet consensus-builder serving as chairman of the National Economic Council.  [ Man in the News, page B10. ]


Wine Talk
WINE enthusiasts can be overbearing, humorless and difficult to live with.
Their one redeeming feature is that it's really easy to find gifts for them.
From a $5 bottle of Beaujolais nouveau to a cellar full of rare Bordeaux, the range of possibilities is immense.


Orange County, Calif., Makes Bankruptcy Filing
Orange County, Calif., plagued by disastrous losses in its investment fund, announced today that it had filed for bankruptcy protection to keep nervous lenders and investors from draining the fund and compounding its problems.
The filing by Orange County, one of the wealthiest in the country, is by far the largest bankruptcy case involving a unit of government and the first involving a large American county.


Gian Maria Volonte Dies at 61; A Prize-Winning Italian Actor
Gian Maria Volonte, whose chiseled features and militant leftist politics left their mark on European theater, film and television, died today while on location in Greece.
He was 61 and lived in Velletri, outside Rome.
The cause was a heart attack, The Associated Press reported.


A Year Later, the Demons Remain; Fear Still Haunts L.I.R.R. Shooting Survivors
Even after the passage of time and the continuous blur of uneventful commuter trips, any train ride chills their bones.
Once in their seats, they never feel part of the same becalming, banal routine that other passengers do.
That one ride -- those three interminable minutes -- is still with them.
Lucinda Melkonian frames it in terms of sounds and sights.
If someone tosses a briefcase into the overhead rack or drops a book on the floor, she flinches.
With quick glances, she scrutinizes other commuters in her car for signs of veiled menace.
Should a passenger stir suspicion, she hastens to another car.


Why Israel Shouldn't Rush to Give Up Golan
To the Editor:
Re "It's Time for Israel to Risk Peace With Syria" (letter, Nov. 29): The major flaw in Avshalom Vilan's riposte to the bleak assessment by the Likud's Benjamin Netanyahu of the prospects for peace with Syria is that it is based on wishful thinking.


Mexico's New Leader Proposes Overhaul of the Justice System
In a first major initiative four days after taking power, President Ernesto Zedillo Ponce de Leon has proposed broad changes in Mexico's notoriously corrupt and inefficient justice system.
The measures, which were submitted to Congress on Monday and detailed for the first time today, would include an overhaul of the Supreme Court, greater oversight of judicial decisions, and laws forcing prosecutors to act on pending cases.


No to 32-Cent Stamp
To the Editor:
Instead of raising the price of a stamp yet again (news article, Dec. 1) and penalizing those who pay bills and write letters, why not reduce or eliminate the bulk-rate discounts for catalogues, solicitations and fliers that cram our mailboxes and add to environmental problems?
This would keep the price of sending letters down, and reduce the amount of junk mail.
DEBORAH KAZIS  New York, Dec. 1, 1994


Panel Criticizes Testing Method For Cigarettes
A Federal advisory panel said today that the way the tar and nicotine in cigarettes have been measured since 1967 should be changed.
The method misleads smokers into thinking they are taking in less tar than they actually are, the panel said.
A report based on the panel's recommendation is expected to be brought before the Federal Trade Commission for action.


Prostitution Laws Serve to Protect Weak From Exploitation; Hypocrisy's High Cost
To the Editor:
Anna Quindlen highlights the moral cost of prosecuting some forms of pandering while giving out Oscars for others (column, Nov. 26).
She's right; and our hypocrisy has a whopping dollars-and-cents cost too.


Julien Cornell, 83, The Defense Lawyer In Ezra Pound Case
Julien Cornell, a civil liberties lawyer who defended Ezra Pound against charges of treason after World War II, died on Friday in Arden Hill Hospital in Goshen, N.Y.
He was 84 and lived in Central Valley, N.Y.
The cause was cancer, said his son J. Martin Cornell of West Nyack, L.I.


It Might as Well Be Spring
Those young enough to use them may be longing for their sleds.
Those old enough to know the adage may be brooding about how green winters make fat churchyards.
But after last year's 17 snowstorms, streets like skating rinks and curbs off which one stepped up rather than down, 1994's extension of Indian summer is a welcome present.
True, it is strange to hear "I'm Dreaming of a White Christmas" drifting out of doorways open to curiously spring-like breezes.
It is strange as well to see naked trees a few feet from windowboxes in which petunias, geraniums and impatiens are still plugging away.
Strangest of all is to walk coatless down a New York street in December.


A Question of Balance: Judges, Law and the Voting Rights Act
At the heart of the criminal-justice system in New York City sits a group of judges who got their jobs through a kind of political sleight of hand -- a mechanism intended to create enough judges to handle the expanding caseload without having to amend the State Constitution.
That group now includes people who many lawyers and judges say are among the busiest and best-known criminal-court judges in the city, men and women who preside at high-profile trials and help keep the system from gumming up.


CHRONICLE
Would MARTHA STEWART suggest that her followers make their own water from scratch, whip up 90-grain bread or dash out to build an addition to the house when there's an overflow of guests -- and still serve dinner on time?
Those are among the dozens of suggestions in "Is Martha Stuart Living?," a spoof of Ms.
Stewart's magazine, Martha Stewart Living, that is beginning to appear in bookstores (at $9.95 a copy).


World News Briefs; Leftist Coalition Splits In El Salvador
Ending a union that lasted through 12 years of civil war, a coalition of leftist groups formally split today in El Salvador.
One of the main factions withdrew from the Farabundo Marti National Liberation Front after failing to move the other groups toward the political center.
In a written statement, the breakaway group said the front should "pass into history" because it was too far to the left to be politically viable.


Washington at Work; Man With His Own Foreign Policy
John Carbaugh, long a loyal member of the staff of Senator Jesse Helms of North Carolina, settled into his wingback chair at the Metropolitan Club, took a pull on his cognac and reflected on his old boss.
"He's one of the great tragic figures of American politics," Mr.
Carbaugh said.
"He could have been a much greater man than he is."


Nets Write a New Plot For Fine Art of Losing
This was not something Craig Ehlo had ever seen drawn up on a chalkboard before a game or something that Lenny Wilkens had designed on the arena floor with precious seconds remaining.
A game-winning layup off a jump ball tossed 75 feet away?
Welcome to the zany and wacky Nets season, which took another unpredictable turn tonight at Byrne Meadowlands Arena when Ehlo converted a 3-point play with three-tenths of a second remaining in overtime, sparking the Atlanta Hawks to a 94-91 victory.


Europe Seeks Latin Free-Trade Ties
The European Union is taking steps toward creating its first significant free-trade links with Latin America, in an effort to prevent the erosion of its markets there and to parry efforts by the United States to form a huge free-trade zone in the Americas.
During the last two months, officials from the European Union have negotiated with the four countries of Mercosur, a trading bloc made up of Brazil, Argentina, Uruguay and Paraguay, for the creation of a free-trade zone, first in industrial goods and services, and later in agricultural products.


Nabors Industries(NBR,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


UConn Takes Hard Road To Victory
Connecticut's expected easy victory over Boston College was anything but easy tonight.
Yes, the unbeaten Huskies did win, 74-70, for their fourth victory of the season.
But they were extended to the end.
The Eagles, with four new starters, tied the score at 68-68 with 2 minutes 29 seconds left.
Then UConn scored 4 points within three seconds when Doron Sheffer hit a 15-foot jumper and Brian Fair scored a layup after stealing the inbounds pass by B.C.'s Mickey Curley.


As Magicians Hone Art, Presto, Woman Appears
IT was 3 o'clock in the afternoon and as on every Saturday the back room at Reuben's restaurant on Madison Avenue and 38th Street was filling up with magicians.
There were already about 35 of them there, dexterous professionals and passionate hobbyists, doing their tricks and seeking constructive criticism.
"You should know," said Sol Stone, a 72-year-old retired Brooklyn College psychology professor, "we don't call them tricks, we call them effects."


Casey's General Stores Inc.(CASY,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Talks Are Off As N.H.L. Puts A Tax Plan Back on Table
In a development that was anticipated and dreaded, collective bargaining broke off in the National Hockey League today after the owners re-introduced their demand for a harsh tax on high payrolls.
The players' association said the surcharge was unacceptable because it acts as a salary cap to restrain wages and that this issue threatened the season, which has already been postponed for 67 days by an owner-ordered lockout.


Oil Companies Drawn to the Deep
Three of the biggest petroleum companies, buoyed by Shell Oil's initial success with the world's deepest offshore oil platform, have decided to wade even deeper into the Gulf of Mexico toward deep-water reserves thought to hold more oil than the giant Prudhoe Bay fields in Alaska.
In a deal recently forged but not yet announced, Amoco, Exxon and Shell Oil plan to use new and improved technologies to build a billion-dollar platform to tap into oil and natural gas from fields previously considered too deep to reach economically.
At stake are a band of reserves estimated to hold some 15 billion barrels of oil -- 50 percent more than the Prudhoe Bay fields, currently one of the largest sources of United States oil.


Celebrity Sweat: Home Fitness Videos
IN a culture whose popular preoccupations seem to boil down to celebrities and slimming, it should come as no surprise that celebrity exercise videos have become late-20th-century American pop-cultural icons.
They are the modern answer to the ancient fetish -- a small object (plastic, this time around) believed to have magical protective powers, trusted to a point of unreason, if not obsession.


U.S. Shutting 1,274 Farm Field Offices
The Department of Agriculture will close nearly one-third of its field offices and hopes to save $3.6 billion in a vast reorganization announced today.
In Washington it might have been a budget cutter's dream, but few down on the farm were happy about the changes.
Under the reorganization signed into law by President Clinton in October, 1,274 of the department's 3,700 offices around the country will be closed and consolidated with nearby ones.
Many of these offices are in counties where farming has given way to urban and suburban sprawl.


Mets Tie a Few Strings
The Mets, the team most active in off-season trading, cleaned up some loose ends yesterday.
They acquired a minor league second baseman, JESUS AZUAJE, from Cleveland to complete the trade last month that saw outfielder JEROMY BURNITZ go to the Indians in a five-player deal in which the Mets obtained pitchers JERRY DIPOTO, DAVE MLICKI and PAUL BIRD.
They then sent catcher JAVIER GONZALEZ to Milwaukee as one of the two players to be named in last week's trade for reliever DOUG HENRY and they shipped right-hander ANDY BECKERMAN to Houston as part of the Nov. 28 deal for the rights to the free-agent pitcher PETE HARNISCH.


Lima Journal; In the Macho World of Peru, 8 Women Muscle In
Two women are running for President and six for Vice President in elections early next year -- the first time in Peru that women have been selected as candidates for such high office.
No one expects the tickets with women on them to defeat President Alberto K. Fujimori, who the polls indicate is comfortably ahead as he seeks a second five-year term.
But some Peruvians see the women's candidacies as a sign of progress in a country of 23 million where many people still think of women as the property of their husbands.


METRO DIGEST
A PAINFUL FAREWELL TO A SLAIN OFFICER
An estimated 10,000 police officers from New York City and the rest of the state stood at attention for the funeral of Officer Raymond R. Cannon Jr., who was killed in a shootout while thwarting a robbery at a bicycle shop last week.
Officer Cannon, who was eulogized as a hero of the city by Mayor Giuliani and Police Commissioner William J. Bratton, was given the traditional inspector's funeral accorded to those who die in the line of duty.
B3.


Hopeless in Gaza: A Forlorn Family in Limbo
"Curfew" visits a Palestinian household in Gaza, an extended family uneasily confined to quarters by an open-ended military curfew.
The time is 1993, just before peace negotiations began, and the atmosphere is both torpid and tense.
Rashid Masharawi, a film maker who was himself raised in a refugee camp, understands the slowly debilitating effects of such confinement.
He describes them in a compassionate but obvious film that spans one long, claustrophobic day.
So "Curfew," which opens today at the Film Forum, depicts the ways this family accommodates itself to imprisonment.
The film is a virtual catalogue of curfew-related troubles, from the difficulty of shaving when water is shut off to the use of onions to stave off painful effects of tear gas.
A baby cries inconsolably.
Vegetables spoil.
The patriarch, Abu Raji (Salim Daw), suffers a backache but is trapped at home, unable to alleviate his pain.


Rutgers Final Four Recipe: Season Lightly and Win
The ingredients were there all the time.
It was merely a question of putting them together in the right combinations.
When Coach Bob Reasso solved that, the Rutgers soccer team began to justify its preseason ranking in the country's top 10.
It was the morning of Nov. 3, the day after the last game of the regular season, that the Scarlet Knights' reversal of fortune started.


Defendant Says He Is Able To Run His Own Defense
Acting as his own lawyer, Colin Ferguson insisted in court today that he was competent to stand trial and defend himself against charges that he murdered six people on a Long Island Rail Road train a year ago.
Mr.
Ferguson repeatedly objected to the proceedings today at a competency hearing ordered by Judge Donald E. Belfi of Nassau County Court at the request of Mr.
Ferguson's lawyers of record, William M. Kunstler and Ronald L. Kuby.


A Late Rossini Mass
Rossini's Petite Messe Solennelle, one of the composer's last major works, is to be performed by the Chamber Music Society of Lincoln Center at Alice Tully Hall, on Dec. 16 at 8 P.M. and Dec. 18 at 5 P.M.
The work is to be presented in its original version, for chamber chorus, four vocal soloists, two pianos and harmonium.
The pianist David Golub is to conduct from the keyboard.
The other soloists are Lee Luvisi, pianist; Margo Garrett, harmonium; Susan Dunn, soprano; Theodora Hanslowe, mezzo-soprano; John Aler, tenor, and Kelly Anderson, bass-baritone.
Tickets are $18 and $28.
Information: (212) 721-6500.


Raiders and Davis: Fist in a Glove
During pre-game warm-ups on Monday night at Jack Murphy Stadium, Al Davis, the Raiders' owner, strolled around the field and was popped by receiver Tony Martin of the Chargers.
Davis tumbled.
He had a bruised lip to show for it.
An accidental run-in, Martin said.
It was the Chargers' best hit of the night.


Timing Is All In Filmic Opera
The question Philip Glass was asking himself a few years ago was, how might a composer present an operatic setting of a screenplay, performed live, with the complete original film as an integral component of the production?
His solution, an operatic version of Jean Cocteau's 1945 film "La Belle et la Bete" ("Beauty and the Beast"), is to have its American premiere at the Brooklyn Academy of Music tonight.
The work, which runs through Sunday, is the second installment of a Cocteau trilogy that Mr.
Glass began composing in 1990 and will finish next year.
The first installment was "Orphee," an opera that used Cocteau's 1950 screenplay as its libretto.
"La Belle et la Bete" takes the integration a step farther, using the film itself but replacing its soundtrack with sung dialogue and new music.


Corrections
Because of a production error, the continuation of an article on the front page of Science Times yesterday about a mathematical technique relating to the symmetry of matter included scrambled passages.
Readers wishing corrected copies of the article may write to Production Quality Control, The New York Times, 229 West 43d Street, New York, N.Y. 10036, or telephone (212) 556-1992.





On Madison Ave.: Stark Reminders Of a Different Life
On the other side of affluence, Charlie Barbera makes his bed.
He spreads a blanket or newspaper on the chilly sidewalk of Madison Avenue and curls up in the golden glow of a store where women buy silks and baubles and other pretty things.
If he resents their wealth, he does not say.
Mr.
Barbera, one of the hundred or so homeless who spend the night in the alcoves of the ritzy shops on Madison Avenue, can go long hours without speaking to anyone but himself.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Saatchi moves to create a U.S. media services unit, a first by a big agency company in this country.
IN a move underscoring the growing importance of media services in the advertising industry, the British agency giant Saatchi &amp; Saatchi said yesterday that it would open a United States unit of Zenith Media Worldwide, the successful media services agency that it began operating in Europe six years ago.
Zenith Media U.S.A., as the unit will be called, will open around Feb. 1, with 250 employees at offices in Atlanta, Chicago, Houston, Los Angeles, Minneapolis, New York, San Francisco and Portland, Ore.
It will be the first time that an agency company will offer media planning and buying in this country from a single centralized source rather than from the media departments of its individual shops.


In America; Targeting Women For Guns
The circumstances that led up to the shooting are not clear.
One version of the story, according to the police in Jackson, Miss., is that late Saturday night 3-year-old Jonathan Hicks, who loved to look at the lights on the family's Christmas tree, was mistaken by his stepmother for a burglar.
The stepmother, whose identity is being withheld by authorities, reached for a .380 semiautomatic handgun, went into the living room and fired at the first sign of movement.
The boy was shot in the head and died.


Giuliani And Council Still at Odds On Budget
An effort by Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani and leaders of the City Council to break their impasse over cutting New York City's budget appeared to have collapsed yesterday, and officials for each side offered little hope for a settlement that would avoid a court fight.
After a flurry of talks over the weekend prompted by a meeting between Mr.
Giuliani and Speaker Peter F. Vallone on Friday, the two sides appeared no closer to an agreement on where to cut spending and services to close a $1.1 billion gap in the city's $31.6 billion budget.


Prostitution Laws Serve to Protect Weak From Exploitation
To the Editor:
Anna Quindlen takes issue with the decision to prosecute Heidi Fleiss, the so-called Hollywood madam who has now been convicted of pandering (news article, Dec. 3), complaining that prosecution of this offense wastes public resources (column, Nov. 26).
Ms.
Quindlen contends that prostitution is victimless because any potential harm can be prevented by the use of a condom.


INSIDE
Battle on New York Courts
An opinion from the Justice Department raises the possibility that New York's judicial system may have to be revamped to comply with the Voting Rights Act.
Page B1.
U.S. to Close Farm Offices
Hoping to save $3.6 billion in a huge reorganization of its farm services, the Agriculture Department announced it would close 3,700 offices and eliminate 11,000 jobs.
Page A16.
Gulf of Mexico Oil Drilling
Buoyed by Shell Oil's deep-drilling success in the Gulf of Mexico, Amoco, Exxon and Shell are drilling even deeper.
Reserves are thought to exceed Prudhoe Bay's.
Page D1.
A Train Where Terror Struck
A year ago, Colin Ferguson killed 6 people and wounded 19 on a Long Island Rail Road commuter train from Pennsylvania Station.
Today, survivors are still wary.
Page B1.
Quayle Leaves the Hospital
The former Vice President vowed to make a "full recovery" after an eight-day hospital stay to treat blood clots in his lungs.
Page A16.
Snapshots of Early Galaxies
The Hubble Space Telescope has taken the first clear pictures of some of the earliest galaxies.
The images offer evidence of grown-up galaxies in an infant universe.
Page A20.


Are Sports Drinks All They Promise?
AFTER a vigorous workout at the gym, many fitness buffs head to the drink counter to quench their thirst.
There they are, a slew of fitness drinks promising huge energy boosts and mounds of muscles, with bold names like Blue Thunder, Ultra Fuel and Protein Blast.
Those who fall to temptation pay a few cents extra for one, thinking it will deliver more than water.
But does it?
"It depends on what you want it to do," said Dr.
Jim Wright, the editor in chief of Muscle and Fitness magazine, who has a Ph.D. in physiology.
Dr.
Wright suggested reading the labels carefully.
"You have to know what the ingredients are and what they do," he added.
There are three types of sports drinks, as they are known in fitness circles.


New York City Faces Change Over Justices
A strongly worded opinion from the Justice Department has posed a fundamental legal challenge to the ways that State Supreme Court justices are selected in Brooklyn, the Bronx and Manhattan.
The opinion raises the possibility that New York's judicial system may have to be revamped to comply with the Voting Rights Act.
The opinion, handed down late Monday, pushes the future of the state's courts into the hands of the Federal courts in what could become a lengthy battle.
The outcome of that fight will determine whether state lawmakers and the incoming Pataki administration have to decide how the state should pick its trial judges, a question that has remained mired for years in a quagmire of racial, geographic and clubhouse politics.


School Prayer Tramples on Tolerance
To the Editor:
As a transplanted New Yorker, a Jewish child, I started second grade in the Dallas Independent School District in 1967 and did not experience a "moment of silence" as exists in many public schools today.
Rather I experienced a "Christian moment."


Senator Fires Fusillade Against G.M. Deal
In one of his last acts before leaving office, Senator Howard M. Metzenbaum convened a Senate hearing today to excoriate the General Motors Corporation and the Department of Transportation for their agreement last week that ended the Federal investigation into whether G.M. pickup trucks had a deadly defect.
"It smells like a political deal," said Senator Metzenbaum, an Ohio Democrat who did not seek re-election this year.
"It is a bizarre fix that does nothing to solve the problem."


Winter Grill: Rosemary-Infused Pork
THERE'S a simple seasonal meal made of ingredients that are readily available in supermarkets, with two possible exceptions: the fresh rosemary and the Italian frying peppers.
If fresh rosemary cannot be found, dried rosemary will do.
The frying peppers, which are elongated and pale green, have a more delicate flavor than green bell peppers, but if necessary bell peppers can be used.
Grilled Rosemary Pork Tenderloin
8 ounces pork tenderloin  1 clove garlic  Enough sprigs fresh rosemary to yield 1 tablespoon chopped or 2 teaspoons dried rosemary  1/2 cup dry red wine  Pan spray.
1. Wash and dry tenderloin, and cut into 1/4-inch-thick pieces. Place in small bowl.
2.
Crush garlic; rinse and remove leaves from rosemary stems, and chop.
Combine garlic and rosemary with wine, and pour over pork.
Turn pork to marinate well.
3.
When ready to cook pork, spray stove-top grill with pan spray, and heat.
Place pork slices on grill.
Cook for about 5 minutes total, turning once and basting once or twice with marinade.
Yield: 2 servings.
Approximate nutritional analysis per serving: 170 calories, 4 grams fat, 80 milligrams cholesterol, 80 milligrams sodium, 25 grams protein, 2 grams carbohydrate.
Potatoes, Peppers and Onions
1 pound large new potatoes  1 tablespoon olive oil  8 ounces whole onion or 7 ounces chopped ready-cut onion (1 2/3 cups)  1 pound Italian frying green peppers  1 cup chicken or beef stock or broth  1/4 teaspoon salt  Freshly ground black pepper to taste.  1.
Scrub but do not peel potatoes; slice in food processor.
2.
Heat nonstick pan large enough to hold all the ingredients until it is very hot.
Reduce heat to medium-high; add oil and add potatoes.
Stir often to brown on both sides.
3. Chop whole onion, and add to potatoes as they cook.
4.
Wash, trim and seed peppers, and slice in food processor.
When potatoes and onions have begun to brown, add peppers and cook a couple of minutes over medium heat.
5.
Add stock; reduce to simmer, cover and continue to cook until all of the ingredients are soft.
6. Season with salt and pepper.
Yield: 2 servings.
Approximate nutritional analysis per serving: 400 calories, 9 grams fat, 4 milligrams cholesterol, 335 milligrams sodium, 10 grams protein, 75 grams carbohydrate.
Game Plan Prepare potato dish through Step 3.
Prepare pork, and marinate.
Finish potato dish through Step 5.
Grill pork.
Season potatoes.


Zale Corp.(ZALE,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


A Sea of Dress Blue Bids Farewell


Italian Magistrate Who Cited Premier Quits Investigation
After almost three years as the leading figure in Italy's anticorruption drive, the crusading magistrate who came to symbolize Italy's quest for renewal resigned today, complaining that political maneuvering had made his work impossible.
Antonio Di Pietro's resignation, even more than his decision last month to investigate Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi, stunned Italians, many of whom regarded him as what one television commentator called "the symbol of justice."


U.S. Vows to Remain Vigilant on Price-Fixing
Despite the dismissal of a price-fixing case against the General Electric Company, the Justice Department will not pull back from bringing complex antitrust cases, Assistant Attorney General Anne K. Bingaman said yesterday.
"I believe the case shows our determination to prosecute the most complex and difficult international criminal cases in the most vigorous way possible," Mrs.
Bingaman, the head of the Justice Department antitrust division, said in a telephone interview.
"This case is over, but we will continue to do that."


Personal Health; Prostate cancer: the neglected killer.
DESPITE complaints that women's health issues have been relatively neglected by medical researchers, when it comes to cancer of the prostate, the opposite argument can easily be made.
Breast cancer, the woman's disease that comes closest to it in incidence, death rates and age of onset, has been the subject of many well-designed clinical trials that have resulted in improved survival chances and a reduced need for mastectomy.


'On the Mend,' Quayle Leaves the Hospital
Scanned, rested but not quite ready to reveal his Presidential intentions, former Vice President Dan Quayle left the hospital here today after eight days of treatment for blood clots in his lungs.
He vowed to make a "complete and full recovery" and promised a decision on his political future early in the new year.
"I'm on the mend, the recovery is going better than expected, and after four weeks, I'll be back," a pink-cheeked, chipper-looking Mr.
Quayle told a brief news conference at the Indiana University Medical Center, referring to his doctors' insistence that he limit his schedule and forego air travel for at least a month.


The Revival of an Ancient Tuscan Wine
The well-preserved medieval town of San Gimignano in central Tuscany is defined by the slender stone towers punctuating its skyline.
And although its wines are less well known than its towers, they are more ancient.
An island of white wine in the heart of Chianti country, San Gimignano specializes in a dry wine made from vernaccia, a local grape variety, somewhat different from the types of vernaccia grown elsewhere in Italy.
The San Gimignano vernaccia have been planted on the slopes surrounding the city for nearly 1,000 years.


Fresh-Air Dining for All
Today the City Council's Health Committee will vote on an anti-smoking bill that will give most New Yorkers a chance to breathe fresher, healthier air.
But, thanks to a large and unfortunate loophole, not all New Yorkers.
Those who patronize the several thousand restaurants that seat 35 or fewer people would not have the privilege of smoke-free dining granted those who eat at bigger, possibly fancier places.
Under the bill, customers of the big places may smoke only in the bar area -- and it must be at least six feet from the dining area or separated by a floor-to-ceiling partition.
But the smaller places have been given an exemption.
Constructing separate areas for smokers, the small-restaurant owners testified at previous Council hearings, is impractical and impossibly costly for them.
It probably is.
But there is no reason they can't ban smoking entirely.
In the 100 American cities with anti-smoking legislation that does not exempt small restaurants, the law has had little or no effect on their revenues.
According to a recent Gallup Poll of 763 adult New Yorkers, a smoking ban might, in fact, increase restaurant patronage and revenues.


U.S. Petroleum Data
In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
Dec. 2
Nov. 25
Dec. 3
1994
1994
1993
Gasoline production, daily
8.2
7.7
7.8
Distillate production, daily
3.3
3.3
3.6
Gasoline stocks
215.0
210.3
222.6
Distillate stocks
145.2
143.6
145.7
Crude imports, daily
6.5
7.2
8.0
Product imports, daily
1.4
1.7
2.0
Crude stocks
338.4
337.7
339.3
Crude production, daily
6.6
6.6
6.9
Refinery utilization (%)
94.9
95.0
93.1
Source: American Petroleum Institute


Nigerian Author Urges Boycott Against Rulers
After fleeing his homeland three weeks ago to avoid arrest, Wole Soyinka, the Nigerian playwright and Nobel Prize winner, came to Washington today to publicize human rights abuses by his nation's military Government and to urge the United States to begin an economic boycott against his country.
Mr.
Soyinka condemned Nigeria's dictator, Gen.
Sani Abacha, as "uncivilized" and "sadistic" as he criticized him for executing opponents, jailing writers and pro-democracy advocates and closing more than a dozen newspapers.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article on Sunday about the reinstatement of a University of New Hampshire professor accused of making sexually harassing remarks misstated the location of the Federal District Court that considered the case.
It is Concord, N.H., not Manchester.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.50
8.50
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
4.75
4.75
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
5.00
5.40
2.67
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.74
5.83
3.08
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
6.21
6.33
3.25
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.73
7.81
5.68
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.84
7.92
6.16
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.70
8.78
7.17
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.92
6.96
5.56
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Merry-Go-Round Plans 2 Rounds of Layoffs
Merry-Go-Round Enterprises Inc., the troubled specialty store company, said yesterday that it would lay off about 70 employees, or about 10 percent of its corporate office, in the first of at least two job cuts.
The layoffs are the first step taken by the new management team that was brought in to accelerate revamping efforts for the company, which has been in bankruptcy since January.
The plans for getting the Joppa, Md., company back on track include merging divisions, improving inventory management, closing more stores and a second round of job cuts early next year, the size of which will depend on the company's sales in the holiday season.


No Unity on Balkans at Europe Summit
Because of objections by Russia and Bosnia, efforts to pass resolutions condemning the fighting in the Balkans failed today amid widespread recriminations at the end of the 52-nation summit meeting on European security.
The inability to come to an agreement on addressing the war in the former Yugoslavia cast a pall over the closing of the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe, a meeting that the Clinton Administration had said would help to create a "new security architecture" for Europe.


Pasadenans Show Will To End the Violence
To the Editor:
Your Dec. 2 news article on the gang-related Halloween murders in Pasadena, Calif., depicts the anguish of Deborah Bush over the loss of her son in a way that underscores the reality that violence can strike anyone anywhere.
Ms.
Bush's lamentation is deeply touching as she says, "I feel the spirit of my children broken." That is incalculable loss.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
Orange County, Calif., filed for bankruptcy protection in an effort to keep nervous lenders and investors from drawing money out of its troubled investment fund.
The filing by Orange County is the largest bankruptcy case involving a local government.  [ Page A1. ]


Is 'We the People' Too Counterculture?
To the Editor:
Recent actions by our elected representatives make it obvious that the foxes are guarding the hen house.


No Headline
"I want this court to know that I take full responsibility for my actions and accept the full and complete consequences for them, which are substantial." WEBSTER L. HUBBELL, pleading guilty.  [ A1:4 ]


Persisting on Whitewater
Whitewater is back, without televised Senate hearings for the moment.
The affair has returned in humbler guise -- the patient prosecutorial efforts of Kenneth Starr, the independent counsel.
He has now reached two plea bargains -- from Robert Palmer, a land appraiser whose phony estimates appear to have enriched his associates at great cost to the American taxpayer; and from Webster Hubbell, personally installed by the President as political manager of the Justice Department.
It is important to review what these developments mean and do not mean for Mr.
Clinton and Hillary Rodham Clinton.
The downfall of even so close an associate as Mr.
Hubbell does not mean that the Clintons have done anything wrong.
Similarly, Mr.
Palmer seems more closely tied to Jim Guy Tucker, the Governor of Arkansas.
But the Palmer case establishes beyond a doubt that there were serious problems of mismanagement and political favoritism at Madison Guaranty, a savings and loan operated by James McDougal, the Clintons' business partner in the Whitewater Development Corporation.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-13  SERBS HARASS U.N.
TROOPS  The Serbs stepped up their humiliation of United Nations personnel in Bosnia, promising to release an officer who was suffering from a heart ailment but then reneging and taking two more soldiers captive.
A1  EUROPEAN SECURITY SUMMIT FAILS  A 53-nation summit meeting on European security ended by failing to pass resolutions condemning the fighting in Bosnia.
Widespread recriminations dominated the end of the conference in Budapest.
A12


Senators Must Disclose Number and Cost of Mailings, Appeals Court Rules
The New York State Senate can no longer keep secret how many mailings individual members send out each year and how much they cost the public, the Court of Appeals ruled yesterday.
Republican Senate leaders said they had already been making the information available for more than a year and that the ruling only puts into law their own voluntary system of disclosure.


A CLINTON FRIEND ADMITS MAIL FRAUD AND TAX EVASION
Webster L. Hubbell, a trusted friend of Bill Clinton and former law partner of Hillary Rodham Clinton who became one of the nation's top law-enforcement officials, admitted today that he stole at least $394,000 from his law partners and more than a dozen clients, including the Federal Government, before he arrived in Washington last year.
In a Federal district court here, Mr.
Hubbell pleaded guilty to two felony counts of mail fraud and tax evasion.
His head bowed, he confirmed that on more than 400 occasions he submitted bills to cover personal expenses from 1989 to 1992 and concealed the theft with phony expense vouchers and inflated accounts of the hours he worked for clients.


Carpenter Guilty of Manslaughter in 1988 Slayings in Larchmont
Paul Cox, a 27-year-old carpenter from a prominent Larchmont family, was convicted of manslaughter today in the brutal 1988 slayings of an Indian immigrant couple after a jury found he had been affected by "extreme emotional disturbance" in stabbing the sleeping victims.
In reaching their verdict in Mr.
Cox's second trial, the jurors took a middle path in a case in which the defendant admitted to the killings but claimed he had done so in an alcoholic blackout in which he imagined that the victims, Dr.
Lakshman Rao Chervu, 58, and his wife Dr.
Shanta Chervu, 51, were his parents.
The jury, after eight days of deliberations, rejected the defense contention that Mr.
Cox was temporarily insane, but they also rejected the prosecution's request for a verdict of murder.


Black and White and Fervent
"The world doesn't like independent women," muses the 92-year-old photographer Berenice Abbott in Martha Wheelock and Kay Weaver's handsomely filmed documentary of her life.
"Why, I don't know, but I don't care."
Abbott, a self-described loner who died in 1991, shortly after the film was completed, was a giant of American photography.
The film, which uses over 200 of her black-and-white photographs, presents her as a proud proto-feminist who near the end of her life declares matter-of-factly, "There is nothing smarter than an old woman."


Maryland G.O.P. Candidate for Governor Just Keeps on Going
After most losers around the country have long since accepted defeat in the midterm elections, Maryland's Republican candidate for governor, Ellen R. Sauerbrey, is still fighting to win.
All around a room that once served as her campaign headquarters in this suburb north of Baltimore, dozens of volunteers today continued to comb lists, checking to see whether voters actually live where their official registration forms say they live.
On a bank of computers downstairs, statewide results were being downloaded so election experts could review voting patterns over the last few years to point out anomalies.


Discoveries on the Makings of a Suntan Reveal How Cancer Lurks in the Wings
RESEARCHERS have partly solved the mystery of what causes a suntan, and it is not a pretty picture.
Tanning happens when the body tries to excise and dispose of damaged genetic material, scientists reported last week.
In the process, they said, the skin erects a protective barrier that tries to stop sunlight from further destroying cellular DNA.


Aikman Will Start Against the Browns
The Dallas Cowboys won their last two games without TROY AIKMAN.
It now appears that they will get a chance to win the next one with him.
"It's good to have our general back," wide receiver MICHAEL IRVIN said.


Case Settled By Metpath On Testing
Metpath Inc., one of the nation's largest blood laboratories, has agreed to settle a consumer fraud investigation of its billing practices, the Attorney General of New York State said yesterday.
Metpath will alter practices that led to hundreds of thousands of extra tests being added to routine blood- screening procedures and billed to New Yorkers, Attorney General G. Oliver Koppell said.


Parks (29) and Duke (103) Go on a Spree
Duke 103; George Washington 73
Cherokee Parks scored 19 of his career-high 29 points in the first half as No. 9 Duke put on a shooting clinic in beating George Washington, 103-73, last night at Durham, N.C.


National Panel Urges Earlier, Better Science Education
In far-reaching recommendations intended to improve science literacy, a national panel says students should be exposed to science at earlier ages, teachers should receive better training and curriculums should offer more real-life applications.
The recommendations, released on Thursday, acknowledge that science instruction generally fails to give students challenging, inventive assignments and that students are often asked to memorize scientific theories and facts in a vacuum.


Cameron Ashley Inc.(CMSH,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Large California Utility Accepts Rate-Cut Plan
To prepare itself for more competition, Pacific Gas and Electric, the nation's largest investor-owned utility, said yesterday that it had agreed with consumer groups and state agencies to cut its rates by about $2.1 billion during the next five years.
Rates would be reduced by 32 percent on power produced at its huge Diablo Canyon nuclear power plant.
The announcement was unusual because the utility had a 1988 contract under which it could have collected increasing rates.


War Threat In Caucasus Is Averted
Stepping back from the looming threat of military intervention by Moscow, the Russian Defense Minister met today with the leader of the secessionist Chechen republic and agreed to try to resolve the crisis there without using force.
While the decision mainly appeared to be a reprieve for the secessionist leader, Dzhokhar Dudayev, who is under siege from opposition forces backed by Moscow, it also provided the Russian President with a narrow escape.


Anacin Account Is Placed in Review
The Whitehall-Robins health care division of American Home Products has placed in review its Anacin pain-reliever account, advertising executives who spoke on condition of anonymity said on Monday.
The account, with billings estimated at $17 million, has been at McCann-Erickson New York for almost two years.
The executives confirmed a report of the review this week in Adweek, adding that McCann New York was expected to take part.
Adweek listed as contenders other American Home roster agencies: Avrett, Free &amp; Ginsberg and Partners &amp; Shevack, both of New York.


Mayor Blocks Move To Evict Dog Owners
Housing Authority officials said last night that they would withdraw a notice mailed last week to all tenants in public housing warning that those who kept dogs would be evicted.
The reversal came after housing officials were called to a late-night meeting at Gracie Mansion with senior officials from the Mayor's office, who had not been told of the notice, said Randy M. Mastro, the mayor's chief of staff.


Tryout for Lindros
The Islanders announced yesterday that they have given BRETT LINDROS permission to try out for the Canadian national team in preparation for the world junior championships Dec. 26-Jan. 4 in Red Deer, Alberta.
The 19-year-old Lindros, the Islanders' first-round selection in the 1994 entry draft, surprised many by making the National Hockey League team in his first training camp.
He signed a five-year, multimillion-dollar deal on Oct. 1, the day the N.H.L. regular season was scheduled to start.


Doubts Raised by Fidelity Accounting Error
Mutual fund experts expressed confusion -- and some investors expressed concern -- yesterday about what caused Fidelity Investments to make a huge clerical error in estimating payments that shareholders in its Magellan Fund were to have received on Friday.
And Fidelity did not help clear the air, refusing to provide details about how the mistake occurred, except to say that it was caused by a "manual mathematical error."


Fan Says Mason Hit Him
A Jackson Heights electrician and Knicks fan who counseled power forward Anthony Mason last month in a Manhattan bar to improve his 15-foot jumper charged in State Supreme Court yesterday that Mason responded by slugging him in the jaw and kicking him, causing severe physical damage.
The lawyer for Thomas Loughlin, 36, said he expected to serve papers on Mason last night at the Garden.
Mason's agent, Don Cronson, said: "We can't deny he was there, but we deny the charges."


AT WORK WITH: Karen Durbin; In the Out Crowd And Loving It
IT was just after the election, and the people who edit The Village Voice, New York's famously cantankerous weekly organ of whatever passes for counterculture these days, were gathering for their morning meeting in the office of Karen Durbin.
She is the writer-turned-editor and self-described pro-sex feminist "who isn't an imitation man" who was appointed editor in chief seven months ago.
Ms.
Durbin had, as she often says to introduce one of her famous barrages of marathon talking, two things to say.


Hubble Peers at an Infant Universe
With its cameras snapping "baby pictures" of the universe, the Hubble Space Telescope has produced the first clear views of primeval galaxies forming just one billion years after the presumed creation of space and time in the Big Bang.
The universe, it seems, enjoyed a robust infancy as the most common galaxies grew astonishingly fast into their present shapes.
Astronomers, accustomed now to the Hubble telescope's capacity for surprise and wonderment, said the new photographs should lead to a better understanding of the origin and evolution of galaxies.
They could also inspire revisions of theories of how the universe, so smooth and homogenous in the beginning, developed its complex structures of stars in round and spiral galaxies and galaxies congregating into spreading clusters.


Holding Gavel When Power Is in Question
Willie Brown did today what he has always done best under political fire.
With the newly elected California Assembly caught in parliamentary gridlock for a second day and unable to decide whether to give him an eighth term as Speaker, he turned on the charm, cranked up the threats, threw out the bluster and worked magic on the rules.


Esiason, Monk and Lott Carrying an Extra Load
This is why Esiason and Monk and Lott are Jets: It's December, and the bad memories need to be erased.
These are the players who know about crunch time.
They are the veteran performers who can lead the young ones.
It will come down to Saturday for these three, a distillation of why they are here.


Director to Resign From National Theater
The widely admired director of the National Theater, Richard Eyre, announced today that he was giving up Britain's most powerful and prestigious theater position in three years.
The 51-year-old Mr.
Eyre, who is said to be able to spot a hit play when it is only a gleam in a playwright's eye, said he was resigning to pursue his own projects as a director and writer and because he had long maintained that a decade in the job was enough.


2 Teen-Agers Who Died At Nightclub Are Mourned
Two of the four young people killed early Saturday in a frenzied stampede at a dance club were buried here today as both the priest and Baptist minister who presided at separate services across town invoked the same message: it is time for adults to take greater responsibility for their children.
"The solution to the problem is we have to face it and take our responsibility before God and society," the Rev.
Fabio R. Brenes-Chaves said at a Roman Catholic funeral mass for 18-year-old Peter Perla.
"And that means parents have to take back the role of parents."


Keeping Dignity Intact Amid Holiday Specials
On paper, it's an enviable career coup.
Natalie Cole snags two television specials this week.
Tonight's, on WNET, is "Untraditional Traditional Christmas," a holiday songbook with the New York Restoration Choir and Elmo the Muppet from "Sesame Street." Tomorrow's, on the USA Network, is a movie called "Lily in Winter," starring Ms.
Cole as a 1957 nanny in a jam.
Unfortunately, neither project will leave viewers singing, or even humming.
There is nothing terribly untraditional about the "Great Performances" music special, taped in October at the Performance Arts Center of the State University College at Purchase, N.Y.
Ms.
Cole moves sweetly, and somewhat lifelessly, through a largely standard repertory ranging from "Jingle Bells" to "Joy to the World," done in gospel style.
A couple of new songs are forgettable.


Father Testifies on Last Hours Of His Daughter in Hospital
Nearly a decade after he filed a malpractice suit against four doctors and New York Hospital in the death of his daughter, Sidney Zion finally had his day in court yesterday to tell of his last hours in the hospital with her, when doctors reassured him that she looked far sicker than she actually was.
In fact, he testified, a second-year resident suggested that his daughter, Libby, who was feverish and agitated, might calm down if he and his wife went home.
"I said, 'Elsa, if it's better for the kid, I guess we should go,' " Mr.
Zion said.
His 18-year-old daughter said to him in Yiddish, "Sleep well, Daddy."


Expose of a Success Story With the Mentally Ill
9 Highland Road
By Michael Winerip
451 pages. Pantheon Books. $25
From the opening of insane asylums a century and a half ago to the emptying of gargantuan mental institutions beginning in the 1960's, the care of people with mental disorders has been a recurring nightmare of false hopes, willful abuse and shrugging neglect.
In the booming 80's, the failure to follow up on patients who had been blithely deinstitutionalized became manifest in the ragged multitudes of homeless psychotics left in the dust by prosperity's gold chariot.
Now, in this heyday of self-actualization, the issue of the homeless mentally ill comes down to "quality of life" -- not theirs, of course, but ours.


Moderate and Morose
Representative Dave McCurdy, the defeated Oklahoman who heads the Democratic Leadership Council, the group of moderate Democrats that helped elect Bill Clinton, criticized the President as a "transitional figure" whose agenda hurt Democrats at the polls last month.
Article, page B10.


G.O.P. Decides To Halt Money To 28 Caucuses
The Republicans began making good today on their pledge to sweep Congress clean, whisking away financing for a cherished if little-known institution in the House -- the caucuses -- and suggesting they might even be able to sell off a government building in the process.
"The conference has begun a process of voting to shrink the size of Congress, to shrink the size of the legislative staff," said Representative Newt Gingrich, whom Republicans have selected to be the new Speaker of the House.


Justices Rule Against Election Panel, Declining to Judge Its Makeup
The Supreme Court ruled today that the Federal Election Commission lacked authority to represent itself in the Court, a result that kept about two dozen of the commission's enforcement actions under a legal cloud.
In a 7-to-1 decision, the Court dismissed the election commission'sappeal of a ruling, issued by a Federal appeals court here in October 1993, that the commission's structure at the time was unconstitutional.


Is 'We the People' Too Counterculture?; A Test for Gingrich
To the Editor:
The incoming House Speaker, Newt Gingrich, would quickly earn the respect of Americans across the political spectrum by using his power to reform our disgraceful campaign financing practices.


REBEL SERBS TRICK U.N. ON CAPTIVES
The Bosnian Serbs stepped up their humiliation of United Nations personnel today, promising to release an officer who was suffering from a heart ailment, only to renege and take two more soldiers captive.
Four days after the Bosnian Serb leader, Radovan Karadzic, promised to release all detained United Nations personnel, 349 are still being held.
These do not include the 1,200-member Bangladeshi battalion trapped inside the besieged Bihac pocket in northwest Bosnia.


Public &amp; Private; Lead Us Not
As a kid I prayed in school.
Fast.
I can say three "Our Fathers" in the amount of time it takes to eat a Twinkie.
The way you do it is, you run "onearthasitisinheaven" and "leadusnotintotemptation" all together.
It's as rich in meaning as the multiplication tables.
I'm not making light of prayer here, but of so-called school prayer, which bears as much resemblance to real spiritual experience as that freeze-dried astronaut food bears to a nice standing rib roast.
From what I remember of praying in school, it was almost an insult to God, a rote exercise in moving your mouth while daydreaming or checking out the cutest boy in the seventh grade that was a far, far cry from soul-searching.


Why Israel Shouldn't Rush to Give Up Golan; Israeli Public Opposed
To the Editor:
Re "It's Time for Israel to Risk Peace With Syria" (letter, Nov. 29): There is nothing unusual or surprising for the Peace Now movement to urge Israelis to give up the Golan Heights and "risk peace with Syria," as Avshalom Vilan recommends.
However, Mr.
Vilan should be required to get his facts straight.


Bosnian Rapes Go Untried by the U.N.
In a well-guarded modern building here, stacks of folders stand as silent testimony to a rampage against women, telling of the large-scale and organized rape that soldiers inflicted during the Serbian "ethnic cleansing" of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Evidence of the magnitude of the abuse was so shocking that it persuaded the United Nations to identify systematic rape as a weapon of war and to include it among the crimes to be tried by the international community.


Lowe Direct Gets Mercedes-Benz Job
Mercedes-Benz of North America in Montvale, N.J., said yesterday that it had selected Lowe Direct in New York to handle its direct marketing account, which had been at the Stenrich Group in Glen Allen, Va., for the last two years.
Though billings were not disclosed, Advertising Age and Adweek estimated them at $5 million to $10 million.


Market Place; Commuter airlines like Comair expect growth despite problems.
COMMUTER airlines have not had a good few months.
Many travelers have grown more fearful of flying on propeller planes because of the American Eagle crash in Indiana in October and a recent report from Federal regulators saying that rules governing the small planes are not tough enough.


Investor Offers Higher Borden Stake
Paul B. Kazarian invited Borden Inc.'s board to a meeting yesterday, and none of them came.
That did not deter Mr.
Kazarian, the Rhode Island investor and a Borden suitor, from presenting further details of his proposal to turn around the troubled consumer products giant.
In an hour-and-a-half presentation, replete with charts, graphs and macaroni-box exhibits in a Manhattan hotel, which started an hour after the New York Stock Exchange closed, Mr.
Kazarian offered to inject an additional $230 million into Borden.


Team in Place, Gingrich Comes Out Slugging
Sometimes ebullient, sometimes combative and sometimes both, Representative Newt Gingrich held a news conference today to introduce the new members of the House Republican leadership, defend his ideas on orphanages and welfare, and take a hard poke at the press.
Mr.
Gingrich, who will be Speaker in the new House, called the news conference, at a House office building next to the Capitol, largely to hail decisions by the new Republican majority to prune the House bureaucracy.


Mr. Clinton Will Miss Mr. Bentsen
Treasury Secretary Lloyd Bentsen's resignation is bad news to a battered White House.
Mr.
Bentsen knows best what the Administration desperately needs to learn: how to deal with a Republican-led Congress.
His consistent voice for policy moderation will be missed among a chorus of advisers who remain befuddled about what the voters meant when they rejected the Democrats.
Mr.
Bentsen's clout on Capitol Hill was important to Mr.
Clinton's major legislative victories.
He fought hard within the Administration, and then in Congress, for a budget that would cut the deficit and raise spending on training and education -- beating back advice from White House pollsters who pushed Mr.
Clinton to promise a tax cut he knew the Government could not afford.


Omnicom Unit Acquires Agency
The diversified agency services division of the Omnicom Group has acquired Dorritie Lyons &amp; Nickel, a New York agency specializing in health care clients, advertising executives who spoke on the condition of anonymity said this week.
They added that Dorritie Lyons would be merged with an existing Omnicom agency specializing in health care, Lavey/Wolff/Swift in New York.


As Bonds Rise Again, A Rally Is Played Down
Prices of Treasury securities rose sharply yesterday, but many traders described the rise as strictly technical trading, saying the market may have simply oversold itself during the last few months.
Municipal bond prices gained for the fifth consecutive session on renewed interest from mutual funds that offset any concern about bonds tied to Orange County, Calif., which last week disclosed its investment fund had lost $1.5 billion.


Rowland Says a Casino Will Revive Bridgeport
Governor-elect John G. Rowland strongly endorsed a casino for Bridgeport tonight, saying other efforts to revive the city could not succeed until a casino and the crowds it would attract overcome the city's image as crime-ridden and unsafe.
In his election campaign, Mr.
Rowland said he would support a casino in Bridgeport if the city's residents voted for one in a referendum.
And today, in several stops across Fairfield County, he said he believed that the General Assembly would approve legislation authorizing a casino in 1995.


COMPANY BRIEFS
BUSH INDUSTRIES Jamestown, N.Y., a maker of ready-to-assemble furniture, said its board had declared a 5-for-4 common stock split, payable in the form of a 25 percent stock dividend on Jan. 20 to shareholders of record on Jan. 6.
QUAKER OATS CO., Chicago, said it had completed its $1.7 billion tender offer for the shares of the Snapple Beverage Corp., East Meadow, L.I., for $14 each.


At the Nation's Table: a column begins today. C4


Two Charged With Rolling Back Gas and Electric Meters
Two Brooklyn men were charged yesterday with defrauding utilities in the metropolitan region of millions of dollars over the last several years by rolling back the electric and gas meters of dozens of companies in exchange for monthly fees.
The two men, Vincent Liquori and Joseph Vasilevsky, reached agreements with dozens of businesses in New York City and elsewhere to falsify meter readings, according to a criminal complaint filed in Federal District Court in Manhattan.
The complaint said their fees ranged from $100 to perhaps $1,000 a month.


Usery Warns Owners on Salary-Cap Move
When Bill Usery Jr., a mediator with a passion for snazzy sweaters, met with the baseball players' executive board today, he quickly noticed Cecil Fielder's flashy multicolored sweater and jokingly asked him for it.
"The owners are asking for the shirts off our back and Usery wants his sweater," someone remarked.


French Role in Sending Jews to Death
Official French complicity in the deportation of scores of thousands of Jews from France during World War II has not gone unexposed.
The most powerful account remains Marcel Ophuls's painstaking and painful film "The Sorrow and the Pity." Although the title of tonight's hourlong documentary on the Discovery Channel, "France's Forgotten Shame," leans toward hyperbole, the program does add another sorry chapter to a soiled record.
The focus is on an unfinished housing project in the town of Drancy, near Paris, which served as a concentration camp from 1941 to 1943.
From there, with the collaboration of the French authorities in both occupied and unoccupied parts of the country, many Jews were shipped east to Auschwitz and other death camps.


Saying a Painful Farewell To a 'Hero for Our Times'
Shortly before 11 A.M. today, Officer Edward J. Keil struggled to attention on his crutches, hobbled by a thigh-high cast.
He should have stayed in his chair, but about to pass before him was the body of Officer Raymond R. Cannon Jr., the man he was rushing to help last Friday night in Brooklyn when he was struck in the leg by a car.
After a grimace, Officer Keil finally stood, and he remained in his painful stance for nearly half an hour.
He was joined at attention by police officers from New York City and the rest of the state -- 10,000 by a police estimate -- who gathered for the funeral of Officer Cannon, who was killed in a shootout while thwarting a robbery at a bicycle shop last week.


Clinton Accused of Forsaking the Center
The leader of the Democratic organization that helped propel President Clinton to the White House today criticized him as being a "transitional figure" who had forsaken his moderate roots.
"While Bill Clinton has the mind of a New Democrat, he retains the heart of an old Democrat," said Representative Dave McCurdy of Oklahoma, the chairman of the Democratic Leadership Council.
"The result is an Administration that has pursued elements of a moderate and liberal agenda at the same time, to the great confusion of the American people."


Cunningham Gets Call
A day after he hinted that he might bench RANDALL CUNNINGHAM, Coach RICH KOTITE yesterday affirmed Cunningham as the Philadelphia Eagles' starting quarterback in Sunday's game with the Pittsburgh Steelers.
"On the basis of yesterday's press conference, when there were mixed interpretations as to my remarks regarding our quarterback situation, I am making a statement that should be understood by everyone: Randall Cunningham is the starting quarterback this Sunday in Pittsburgh," Kotite said in a statement.


Man in the News; A Quiet Team Builder: Robert Edward Rubin
The Administration's invisible man is coming out of the shadows.
For two years, Robert E. Rubin has been the glue holding together the Clinton economic team, working behind the scenes to build consensus, much as he did while amassing a fortune as co-chairman of Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company, the New York investment bank.


CHRONICLE
On the sick list: Sir ANDREW LLOYD WEBBER, who has been in a London hospital since Friday suffering from an intestinal illness.
The 46-year-old composer, who returned to London from New York, where his musical "Sunset Boulevard" opened last month, issued a statement saying that his condition was caused by medication he took to treat an earlier intestinal infection.
He is being fed intravenously.


COLLEGE FOOTBALL: A Fighter Who Plays Football; Born With No Left Hand, DaWuan Miller Is Boise State Rallying Cry
His mother moved the family five times during grammar school, and the first day of class was always a stare down.
They never looked him in the face, they looked him in the arm.
Ask him once why he had no left hand, and he would say, "Born that way." But ask him 14 times, and he would spout, "I bit it off. Why?"
At times, DaWuan Miller would make the stub disappear, anchor it in his front pocket or behind his back.
But the new classmates were relentless.
They presumed he was vulnerable, meek, a punching bag, and 10 days into every fresh semester, he would inevitably tell them to put up their dukes.


Bradlees Inc.(BLE,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 5


Stocks, Ignoring Influential Factors, End the Day Mixed
The stock market closed mixed but essentially unchanged yesterday, despite a variety of powerful crosscurrents.
Those factors included continuing speculation about the $1.5 billion in portfolio losses of Orange County, Calif., and whether calculation problems at the nation's largest mutual fund, Fidelity Magellan, would slow the flow of money into stocks, an essential support for stock prices.


Acklands reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS  Vengeance for Sampras  Vengeance was swift yesterday as Pete Sampras, ranked No. 1 in the world, beat Jaime Yzaga by 6-2, 6-4 to open the $6 million Compaq Grand Slam Cup in Munich, Germany.
The match lasted 58 minutes and it was the fastest in the history of the tournament, which is in its fifth year.
Sampras was beaten by Yzaga in five sets in the round of 16 at the United States Open three months ago.
"It was an experience I'll never forget, I hope it never repeats itself," said Sampras, who will play another American, Michael Chang, in the quarterfinals. (AP) TRACK AND FIELD  3 Americans Upset  Dennis Mitchell, Greg Foster and Quincy Watts of the United States were upset by Australians at an indoor meet in the Brisbane Entertainment Center yesterday.
Damien Marsh edged Mitchell by 0.01 seconds in 6.75 seconds in the 60-meter dash.
Kyle Vander-Kuyp exploded from the blocks to beat Foster, the world champion in the 60-meter hurdles.
Vander-Kuyp was timed in 7.91 seconds.
Paul Greene beat Watts, the Olympic champion, in the 400 meters. (AP) YACHT RACING  Another Mast Is Lost  A second sailboat in the BOC round-the-world race lost its mast yesterday.
Neal Petersen, skipper of the 40-foot yacht Protect Our Sealife, sent a message to shore officials in Cape Town, South Africa, that high winds of about 45 knots had knocked his yacht nearly upside down in the Indian Ocean.
He was about 300 miles south of Port Elizabeth, South Africa, at the time.
When the boat came back up, the mast had broken.
The 27-year-old Petersen said that he planned to make repairs once the wind subsided.
WOMEN'S BASKETBALL  Tennessee Goes to 5-0  Latina Davis scored 19 points, and top-ranked Tennessee used a late first-half surge to break away from 15th-ranked Purdue, 81-63, last night in Knoxville, Tenn.
Tennessee (5-0) led by just 21-17 midway through the first half, but then Davis scored 8 points and Michelle Marciniak 7 to spark a 23-5 spurt for a 44-22 halftime lead.
The Boilermakers fell to 3-3. (AP) La.
Tech 89, N.E.
Louisiana 47: In Ruston, La., Amy Brown scored 17 of her 19 points in the first half as the third-ranked Lady Techsters moved to 5-1 and Northeast Louisiana fell to 0-4. (AP) Alabama 93, Arkansas 79: Yolanda Watkins managed only a layup in the first half, but roared back with 23 points in the second half to finish with 25 in sixth-ranked Alabama's Southeastern Conference victory at Tuscaloosa, Ala. (AP)


William Hiscock, Civil Servant, 71; Was Health Expert
William McConway Hiscock, a retired public-health specialist who helped to draft the legislation that created Medicaid and other Federal health programs in the 1960's, died on Nov. 29 at Johns Hopkins Hospital in Baltimore.
A resident of Towson, Md., he was 71.
The cause was pancreatic cancer, his family said.


Unaccustomed Spotlight for Smith and Williams
The Knicks may be building momentum -- or they may simply be taking advantage of a softer stretch in their schedule.
Whatever the case, a winning streak was exactly what the Knicks needed after last week's debacle in Orlando.
And after whipping the Boston Celtics, 104-90, last night at Madison Square Garden, New York (10-5) has won three consecutive games for the first time since winning three straight games to start the season.


Practices of Japanese Business Find a Home in a Brooklyn High School
In Valerie Costa's English class at George Westinghouse Vocational and Technical High School in Brooklyn, the 29 seniors sometimes grade each other, and Ms.
Costa, too.
In another classroom, students get $4.50 an hour to repair broken fax circuit boards for the Ricoh Corporation -- and in the process, they learn how to hold down a job.


A Strategy's Creator Also Drafted the Law
No one took advantage of a section in California state law allowing extra borrowing by counties as much as Robert L. Citron, the Orange County treasurer whose risky investment strategy drove the county into bankruptcy court on Tuesday.
And who wrote the law?
Mr.
Citron.
In 1979, Mr.
Citron, who was then the head of the state association of county treasurers, drafted a change in state law on counties' investments.
The change allowed county treasurers, with permission from their boards of supervisors, to borrow money through so-called reverse repurchase agreements, or repos.
Those instruments allow the purchase of securities with borrowed money, using the securities themselves as collateral.


CLASSICAL MUSIC
A Concert Idea Whose Time Has Come  Walter Reade Theater
Sunday morning concerts are popular in Europe, but have rarely been tried in New York City.
This season Lincoln Center began offering just such a series at its intimate Walter Reade Theater, and judging from the nearly full house on hand for the concert by the Eroica Trio on Sunday, it seems to be a timely idea.


CHRONICLE
Today marks the 100th birthday of James Thurber, but in Columbus, Ohio, his admirers have been celebrating all year.
What's more, said DONN VICKERS, the executive director of the Thurber House in Columbus, where the humorist lived as a young man and which he used as the locale for many of his stories, "we will carry on into the new year, because he will be 100 for a full year." A sculpture garden with five Thurber dogs -- and a dog fountain -- is being built there.
On Friday, also in Columbus, PETER SCHICKELE, who created the fictional P.D.Q.
Bach, conducted the Promusica Chamber Orchestra in a premiere of his specially commissioned suite, "Thurber's Dogs."


France Seeking Plan for Ending Bosnia Mission
In a warning to the factions in Bosnia that the time for a settlement is running out, France announced today that it had asked the United Nations and NATO to draw up detailed plans for the withdrawal of peacekeepers from the war-ravaged country.
"I say today that the obstinacy of some and the demagogy of others risk setting the Balkans ablaze tomorrow," the French Foreign Minister, Alain Juppe, told the National Assembly in Paris.
"I am still ready to do everything I can to prevent such a development, but my duty, alas, is to say that it is no longer improbable." France is the largest contributor to the 23,000-member United Nations peacekeeping force stationed in Bosnia and Croatia.


Bridge
Two recent books would be appropriate holiday gifts for a bridge-playing friend or relative.
Both focus on a fictional character active in the tournament arena and are full of interesting deals.
"Jennie Mae the Bridge Pro," by Martin Hoffman and Matthew Granovetter is the story of a young female expert in New York City trying to make a living by hiring herself out as a bridge partner.
It is told in the style of Damon Runyon, and sheds interesting light on the professional-and-client relationships now common on the American bridge scene.
It is $11.95, including mailing, from Granovetter Books, 3194 Oak Road, Cleveland Heights, Ohio 44118.


Corrections
Picture captions yesterday about the anniversary of the killings on the Long Island Rail Road reversed the identities of the two men shown in some copies, and misspelled the surname of the one at the left.
At the left, in glasses, was Carl Petersen (not Peterson); Kevin Zaleskie was at the right.


The End as Deep Consolation
Can it be coincidence that "Death on Request" is being shown the day Oregon's new law permitting doctors to hasten death for the terminally ill was to have taken effect?
"Prime Time Live" is presenting this shortened version of a look at a mercy killing that was televised in the Netherlands in October.
The Oregon law, which stipulates that two doctors must agree that a patient has less than six months to live and that the patient must ask three times for a lethal injection, is similar to a Dutch euthanasia law enacted about a year ago.
This somber account of the last months and minutes of the life of Cornelis (Kees) van Wendel de Joode, shows how the Dutch law works and what it means for those who resort to it.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-17  FRANCE ACCUSES U.S.
ON BOSNIA  Accusing the U.S. of contributing to what it called a "total dead end in Bosnia," France announced that it had asked the U.N. and NATO to draw up detailed plans for the withdrawal of peacekeepers.
A1


MicroAge Inc.(MICA,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 30


An acquisitive British entrepreneur takes an active interest, a financial one, in his new agency.
RICHARD BRANSON, the brash chairman of the Virgin Group and Virgin Atlantic Airways, is borrowing a page from the playbook of Victor Kiam, the bombastic Remington shaver titan: Mr.
Branson likes his new agency so much he's buying part of it.
The agency in which Mr.
Branson is taking a minority stake is CMG Communications, a New York shop that three longtime advertising, marketing and media executives founded in July with billings estimated at $15 million.
The terms of the agreement are not being disclosed, but Virgin is acquiring what is expected to be a 15 percent stake in the agency, which for the last four months has handled the direct-response and design portions of Virgin Atlantic's United States account with billings estimated at $2 million.


Corrections
An article on Monday about the White House travel office referred incorrectly to the business interests of Harry Thomason, a Hollywood producer and friend of the Clintons.
According to a 1993 report by the White House about its travel office, Mr.
Thomason owned one-third of an aviation consulting business that represented air charter companies and was interested in determining how such companies could bid on White House travel business.
He was not owner of an air charter company seeking to do business directly with the White House.


Clippers Win in Overtime To Avoid Futility Streak
They check their daily horoscope, watch film twice a day and tune out the wisecracks.
"Did you hear the one about the Los Angeles Clippers?" they often say, then tell a joke.
But tonight, they finally did win one -- and avoided living in infamy.
A single loss away tying Miami's league record from 1988 for most defeats to start a season, the Clippers defeated the Milwaukee Bucks, 96-94 in overtime, on Pooh Richardson's 18-foot heave at the buzzer.
Just a second before, Richardson had had the ball swiped away, but Milwaukee's Eric Murdock kneed it back inadvertently to Richardson, whose shot just beat the game clock.


G.O.P.'s Voice on Aliens Roars Challenge to Party
Senator Alan K. Simpson, the Republican Party's most influential voice on immigration matters, is charting a defiantly independent course that puts him at odds with plans of the House Republicans.
In an early sign of the divisions that are certain to emerge within Republican ranks in the new Congress, Senator Simpson said in an interview on Tuesday that he opposed a cornerstone of the House Republicans' plans for immigration: a cutoff of many Federal benefits to immigrants living legally in the United States.


Esterline Technologies Corp.(ESL,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


A Mute Girl's Theatrical Journey
THE MYTH MAN  By Elizabeth Swados  326 pages. Viking. $21.95.
"A theater artist is an alchemist of human behavior. We take what is horrible and make it into something deep and beautiful. Sometimes, however, we must take golden moments and change them into something savage."


Esiason Says He Is Not Tipping His Passes
That was no levity in Boomer Esiason's voice today.
Three interceptions in two games will do that.
Esiason, the voluble and popular quarterback whose usual response to hard times is that happiness is just around the corner, was downright defensive when asked about his and the Jets' problems.
Of course, Esiason did not lose his temper.
And he insisted, "I can't wait until the next game," as he contemplated Saturday's do-or-die meeting with the Detroit Lions at Giants Stadium.


Gingrich's Orphanages Don't Come Cheap
To the Editor:
Representative Newt Gingrich's proposal to use orphanages to reduce the welfare rolls has been aptly criticized because of its Dickensian connotations.
But there is an even more basic flaw inherent in the proposal.


Council Unit Passes Bill That Widens Smoking Ban
After eight months of debate, a City Council committee yesterday approved a sweeping anti-smoking bill that would ban smoking in the dining areas of all restaurants that seat 35 or more people, and add new restrictions in the workplace.
The approval was expected, but that did not prevent lobbying by both sides in nearly two hours of testimony that preceded yesterday's vote in a Council chamber packed with cheering and jeering onlookers.


In the Arena with Lena Golovko and Aerial Love


Would Resettlement Solve Bosnia's Dilemma?; Allies' Fig Leaf
To the Editor:
The tragic war in Bosnia has brought into currency a number of half-truths, among which are that Britain and France are reluctant to take military action against their ally of World Wars I and II, Serbia.


Recovering From Divorce and Alcohol
In the evening, after her children fell asleep, she would start pouring the wine.
Alone in her kitchen, Miriam O. would drink well past midnight, trying to forget about an unhappy marriage and uncertain future.
After the wine took effect, a few tablets of Valium would lull her to sleep.
Mrs.
O.'s life had been difficult even before her marriage.
Her parents were Holocaust survivors, and they were never able to express their love for Mrs.
O. or her three siblings.
"They couldn't say the words, 'I love you,' because everything they'd loved before, they'd lost in the Holocaust," she said.
"They saw their families die in concentration camps, and it made them totally numb."


The Search for Municipal 'Cowboys'
Are there other Orange Counties out there?
The answer, experts say, is a qualified yes.
While the bankruptcy of Orange County in California has gotten the attention, there are clear signs that similar problems exist elsewhere in the country.
Dozens of local governments have already posted multi-million-dollar losses from ill-fated interest rate bets.


Accounts
*
Avon Products Inc., New York, to Creative Media, New York, to handle the media portion of its $15 million to $20 million account for 1995, previously handled by FCB/Leber Katz Partners, New York.
Delia deLisser, advertising director at Avon, confirmed a report of the appointment this week in Advertising Age; a decision on the creative portion of the account, also previously handled by FCB/Leber Katz, is expected by the end of January. *
Professional Contacts On Call, Chicago, to Jack Levy Associates, Chicago, as the first agency to handle advertising for its First Optics prescription eyeglass division.
Billings were estimated at $3 million.


Reported Death Threat to Mayor Led to Weeks of Tighter Security
Police protection for Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani was heavily increased in October and early last month after an informer believed to be reliable reported that he had information about a serious death threat against the Mayor, law-enforcement officials said yesterday.
Police Department officials, who spoke on the condition of anonymity, said the heightened security ended several weeks ago, after an investigation found that the threat could not be substantiated.


Would Resettlement Solve Bosnia's Dilemma?
To the Editor:
In "What Will Satisfy Serbia's Nationalists?" (Op-Ed, Dec. 4), Stanley Hoffmann echoes the general revulsion over the tragic events in Bosnia but draws questionable parallels with Europe's past.


The L-Word Lives On
Reports of the death of American liberalism are greatly exaggerated.
True, on Nov. 8 the electorate and new majority party moved sharply to the right.
True, politicians in both parties shrink from any use of the L-word except to denounce it, and pundits of every ideological stripe now note (or celebrate) its demise.
If liberalism is defined as its detractors would define it -- as a simple-minded political philosophy that instinctively endorses reckless government spending, shameless personal conduct, toothless responses to crime and a spineless foreign policy -- then that philosophy has a barely perceptible pulse in American political life.


For Some Owners, Talk Turns Tougher
With negotiations having broken down again in the National Hockey League labor dispute, the mode switched back to harsh public words and private conference calls yesterday as the lockout passed its 68th day.
For the first time, league owners are hinting that they may try to break the stalemate by imposing terms of a new contract without union approval, possibly next season.


Boitzenburg Journal; 20 Castles for Sale (With 65¦ Handyman Specials)
Like scores of central European villages, this one is dominated by an imposing castle from which the surrounding region was once ruled.
The Boitzenburg castle is an imposing mass of towers, gables, steeples and cornices that has been owned by a series of noble families from the time it was first occupied in 1271.
Set on a 24-acre plot in a forested landscape that has changed little over the centuries, it is surrounded by streams and ponds and has more than 150 rooms.
It is also one of 20 castles in eastern Germany that have been put up for sale.


Management Shifts At Dentsu Unit
Dentsu of America in New York said yesterday that there would be a shake-up in top management, effective Jan. 1, as the agency reorganizes under a new name.
Keiji Matsushima, president and chief executive for the last three and a half years, will be transferred back to the Tokyo headquarters of the parent, Dentsu Inc., where he previously served as account services director.
Mr.
Matsushima, 56, who joined Dentsu in 1961, said he would continue to work for Dentsu but was "waiting for a new assignment."


Modest Public Designs Win Architects' Praise
THE New York chapter of the American Institute of Architects showed a strong new interest in publicly financed projects as it gave out its 1994 design awards on Tuesday night.
Twelve of the 22 awards went to modest, small-scale projects done in New York City.
Only 2 went to huge corporate structures, both of them abroad.
Nine projects were commissioned or sponsored by governments or public agencies.
They included the new Stuyvesant High School in TriBeCa (Cooper, Robertson &amp; Partners with Gruzen Samton Steinglass), the Transit Authority's dispatching and crew center at the Ditmars Boulevard station in Queens (Urbahn Associates), and the Parks Department's Hamilton Fish Recreation Center at Pitt and Houston streets in Manhattan (John Ciardullo).


Dealer Who Defrauded G.M. to Testify
For days, jurors and spectators in a Federal courtroom here have been transfixed by testimony about a scheme to defraud the nation's largest auto maker out of hundreds of millions of dollars, a swindle so vast and complex that even the prosecutors do not know precisely how much money was involved.
They have heard about a Long Island car dealership transformed into a veritable processing plant for fraudulent car loans, a place where, at the height of the fraud, bookkeepers churned out false documents for as many as 300 nonexistent General Motors vans a day.


The Police Rally Against Giuliani


RESULTS PLUS
N.B.A.
O'Neal Leads Magic Over Cavaliers  Shaquille O'Neal sparked a 10-0 run midway through the fourth quarter and finished with 33 points and 10 rebounds to lead the Magic to a 90-75 victory over the Cleveland Cavaliers last night in Orlando, Fla.
O'Neal had only 6 points in the last 12 minutes, but all were vital as Orlando pulled away. (AP) 76ers 111, Heat 102: Jeff Malone scored 13 of his season-high 34 points in the key third period as Philadelphia defeated host Miami.
Malone hit 13 of 17 shots from the field and 7 of 8 from the line. (AP)


Carjacking Defense Accuses Deno of Killing
Lawyers for Edward L. Summers tried to show today that a Bronx barber and ex-convict named Deno Lloyd was the same drug dealer named Dino whom Mr.
Summers accuses of commandeering a Jeep at the Nanuet Mall in January and shooting its two teen-aged occupants, one fatally.
The move was another startling turn in a case that seems to take unexpected twists almost daily.
Only a week ago, defense lawyers had called Mr.
Lloyd to show that there were many Dinos in the Bronx whom the prosecution had never bothered to track down.
At that time, they did not accuse Mr.
Lloyd of the crime.


Who Is That 'Lady in a Car?'; A Mystery Involving Citizens' Rights and Fear of Strangers
Winter is hard by, the air grows colder and still Lydia Dover comes to the Williamsburg Estates here to write.
Since late summer, she has haunted that sprawling, countrylike subdivision, parking her car along its wide streets and curling up in her seat behind the steering wheel, pen and notebook in hand.
Ms.
Dover, a Bulgarian immigrant and self-described unpublished writer, says that in lingering here she is seeking inspiration and exercising her rights as a citizen of a free nation.
But the homeowners and residents say she is intruding and invading their privacy.
They fear for their children.
The dispute seems to come down to the question of who owns the streets, and to that question township officials say the answer is clear: the public.


Brainy Books With Good Looks
BULKY, costly and impossible to disguise with gift-wrap, the coffeetable book is the publishing industry's answer to fruitcake.
That's the impression, particularly between October and Christmas, when the splashiest design and architecture titles make their debuts.
This season, however, there is a promising trend: big books with brains.
"People aren't going to plunk down $60 or $100 on a book that's just pretty pictures," said Daisy Maryles, the executive editor of Publishers Weekly magazine.
"A book about seashells should tell you everything you want to know about marine life and collecting shells."


Kindergarten Shopping: Bravery Counts
AS I sat hyperventilating on the subway, I knew I had become what I swore I would never be: the competitive New York City parent obsessing about kindergarten.
Choice is a daunting thing.
In New York, the process by which one 35-pound child claims one miniature chair in front of a box of crayons and some homemade Play-Doh is so complicated, so time consuming, so anxious making that flight to the suburbs seems like the answer.


Joseph Konzal; Sculptor, 80
Joseph Konzal, a sculptor, died on Nov. 29 at his home in New York City. He was 80.
The cause was Alzheimer's disease, said his wife, Teresa.


The Franchise Player Backed Up His Backup
During the off season, Patrick Ewing approached the Knicks' front office and asked that the team re-sign Herb Williams.
Ewing knew that quality backup centers are hard to find.
He also knew that Williams was good for team chemistry, a likable veteran willing to accept his role.


Corrections
A front-page summary entry yesterday about closings of Agriculture Department field offices misstated the number of offices affected.
It is 1,274 offices; 3,700 is the total number operating.


Greenspan's Comments Send Bond Prices Lower
Prices of longer-term Treasury securities fell sharply yesterday after Alan Greenspan, the chairman of the Federal Reserve, indicated to Congress that the central bank would be raising interest rates again.
Prices were also pulled lower by worries about the bankruptcy filing of Orange County, Calif., which faces big losses in its investment fund.
In testimony before the Joint Economic Committee, Mr.
Greenspan said the economy was continuing to grow briskly despite six interest-rate increases by the Fed already this year.
And he said that he expected inflation, which is running at about 3 percent, to begin rising soon.


Court Weighs Ramifications Of Digital Age
A lively Supreme Court argument in a case of false arrest brought the Justices face to face today with the computer age and the challenges it poses to the existing boundaries between law enforcement and civil liberties.
The question was whether prosecutors can use evidence seized by police officers on the basis of a police computer's erroneous indication that a valid search or arrest warrant was outstanding.


Board of Education Still Supports Cortines
The Board of Education yesterday defended Schools Chancellor Ramon C. Cortines against recent criticism by Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani and reiterated its support for extending Mr.
Cortines's contract.
Board members stressed that the power to rehire Mr.
Cortines rested with them, and not with the Mayor.


Gunman Said to Mistake Man for Clinton
The Colorado man who opened fire at the White House six weeks ago believed he was shooting at President Clinton after having spotted a gray-haired man walking inside the compound, Federal law-enforcement officials said today.
The gray-haired man, Dennis Basso, a 40-year-old furrier and designer from New York who somewhat resembles Mr.
Clinton, had just emerged from the West Wing of the White House as part of a private tour, said people familiar with the investigation.


Correction
An editorial on Sunday incorrectly identified the committee that Senator Alfonse D'Amato will head.
It is the Banking Committee.


TIPPING A STOCKING CAP TO DICKENS
"In the middle of hardship, people were able to love and laugh," Ms.
Abram said.
At the Morris-Jumel Mansion, now a museum, in Washington Heights, the gifts presented range from lushly patterned paper plates and napkins to gilded candlesticks.
The emphasis is on scale and effect.
In the mansion, said Paul Glassman, the director of the museum, "people can get a rare glimpse of what life was like before the Revolution." Its small and "significant sweep of occupants," Mr.
Glassman added, ranged from a British loyalist, Roger Morris, to Eliza Jumel, a wealthy widow who married Aaron Burr in her front parlor.
Today, that colorful past is still alive, even after Santa's designing elves have had their fun.
SUZANNE SLESIN Visiting the Museums
THE Lower East Side Tenement Museum and the Morris-Jumel Mansion are open to the public.
The museum, 97 Orchard Street (at Delancey Street), offers guided tours Tuesday through Friday, at 1, 2 and 3 P.M., and on Sunday, every 45 minutes from 11 A.M. to 5 P.M.
Tickets are sold at 90 Orchard Street; $7 for adults and $6 for students and those over 65.
Information: (212) 431-0233.
The mansion, at 65 Jumel Terrace, between 160th and 162d streets, one block east of St.
Nicholas Avenue, is open Wednesday through Sunday from 10 A.M. to 4 P.M.
Admission is $3 for adults, $2 for students and those over 65.
Information: (212) 923-8008.
Where to Find the Gifts
ABC Carpet and Home: 888 Broadway, at 19th Street, (212) 473-3000.
Ad Hoc Softwares: 410 West Broadway, at Spring Street, (212) 925-2652.
Adrien Linford: 927 Madison Avenue, at 74th Street, (212) 628-4500.
Amalgamated Home: 9 Christopher Street, at Avenue of the Americas, (212) 255-4160.
Barneys New York: 660 Madison Avenue, at 61st Street, (212) 826-8900.
Barton-Sharpe Ltd.: 119 Spring Street, at Greene Street, (212) 925-9562.
Bellport General Store: 125 Main Street, Bellport, L.I. 11713, (516) 286-3015.
Bergdorf Goodman: 754 Fifth Avenue, at 58th Street, (212) 753-7300.
British Khaki: 62 Greene Street, at Spring Street, (212) 343-2299.
Chambers: P.O.
Box 7841, San Francisco 94120, (800) 334-9790.
Charlotte Moss: 1027 Lexington Avenue, at 74th Street, (212) 772-3320.
Dean &amp; DeLuca: 560 Broadway, at Prince Street, (212) 431-1691.
Felissimo: 10 West 56th Street, (212) 956-4438.
Gracious Home: 1220 Third Avenue, at 70th Street, (212) 517-6300.
Gregory's Chateau Hip: 110 Greene Street, at Prince Street, (212) 941-8080.
Hammacher Schlemmer: 147 East 57th Street, (212) 421-9000.
Harris Levy: 278 Grand Street, at Forsythe Street, (212) 226-3102.
Henro: 525 Broome Street, at Thompson Street, (212) 343-0221.
Hold Everything: 1047 Seventh Avenue, at 16th Street, (212) 633-1674.
Hope &amp; Wilder Home: 454 Broome Street, at Mercer Street, (212) 966-9010.
Interieurs: 114 Wooster Street, at Prince Street, (212) 343-0800.
Laura Fisher Antiques: 1050 Second Avenue, at 55th Street, (212) 838-2596.
Lexington Gardens: 1011 Lexington Avenue, at 73d Street, (212) 861-4390.
Linda Horn: 1015 Madison Avenue, at 78th Street, (212) 772-1122.
Macy's: 151 West 34th Street, (212) 695-4400.
The Museum Company: 673 Fifth Avenue, at 53d Street, (212) 758-0976.
The Museum of Modern Art Design Store: 44 West 53d Street, (212) 708-9880 or (800) 447-6662.
Mxyplyzyk: 125 Greenwich Avenue, at 13th Street, (212) 989-4300.
P.G.H.
Antiques: 457 Broome Street, at Greene Street, (212) 226-2761.
Phoof: 805 Washington Street, at Horatio Street, (212) 807-1332.
Pottery Barn: All stores and mail order, P.O.
Box 7044, San Francisco 94120, (800) 922-5507.
Putumayo: 341 Columbus Avenue, at 76th Street, (212) 595-3441.
Rubenstein &amp; Fox: 65 Prince Street, at Lafayette Street, (212) 966-8954.
Saks Fifth Avenue: 611 Fifth Avenue, at 49th Street, (212) 753-4000.
Salt Water Pool: 123A Greenwich Avenue, at 13th Street, (212) 647-0777.
Sammy's: 484 Broome Street, at West Broadway, (212) 343-2357.
Takashimaya: 693 Fifth Avenue, at 55th Street, (212) 350-0100.
Tenzing &amp; Pema: 956 Madison Avenue, at 75th Street, (212) 288-8780.
Third Avenue Bazaar: 1362 Third Avenue, at 77th Street, (212) 861-5999.
Whispering Pines: 39 Edward Street, P.O.
Box 382, Sparkill, N.Y. 10976, (800) 836-4662.
The Whitney Museum Store Next Door: 943 Madison Avenue, at 75th Street, (212) 606-0200.
William Wayne &amp; Company: 846-850 Lexington Avenue, at 64th Street, (212) 288-9243.
Wolfman Gold &amp; Good Company: 116 Greene Street, at Prince Street, (212) 431-1888.


Patton Becomes M.G.A.'s New President
The Metropolitan Golf Association installed JAMES PATTON of Arcola Country Club in Paramus, N.J., as its 52d president last night.
The 60-year-old Patton succeeded JOHN BALDWIN of Long Island's Meadow Brook Club and will serve for two years.
At the M.G.A.'s 97th annual meeting yesterday, JEFF THOMAS of Plainfield West, the reigning New Jersey amateur champion, was honored for the second straight year as M.G.A. player of the year.


Confiscations By Leftists Still Embroil Nicaragua
When it decided that one of the best sources of money from abroad was vacationers, Nicaragua's Government enlarged the Ministry of Tourism.
The headquarters was expanded, and now displays an artistic facade of brick and stained wood.
Inside, around an open courtyard, walls are decorated with bamboo and stones.
The only hitch in the expansion is that it swallowed up land and a house confiscated from a United States citizen, according to American officials.


Currents; Wrap Artists Give Gifts Their Due
ON the first Christmas, an angel sent shepherds off to Bethlehem to look for a baby "wrapped in His swaddling clothes, in a manger." One interpretation has it that the tradition of gift-wrap also began that night.
Whatever the hermeneutics, modern holiday wrap has evolved into high art, in contrast to the humble strips of cloth and wooden box that cradled the infant.
These days, many young designers say they are spending less on the gift, but lavishing more creative energy on the wrap.
Such cheerful asceticism doesn't come easy.
Inventive wrapping can also add another layer of holiday stress -- as if there weren't enough to fret about.


Gingrich's Orphanages Don't Come Cheap; Spinning and Smearing
To the Editor:
Newt Gingrich, who speaks so highly of traditional values, might consider actually using some.
Where I live, refusing to smear others with gossip and "fighting fair" are still regarded as positive things.


North Says He Will Skip a Political Race in '96
A month after he lost in the Virginia Senate race to Charles S. Robb, the Democratic incumbent, Oliver L. North said tonight that he did not intend to run for any office in 1996.
In his first public comments since his narrow defeat in a campaign memorable for its nastiness, negative advertising and the staggering sum of $20 million that Mr.
North raised, Mr.
North ruled out challenging Virginia's senior Senator, John W. Warner, a Republican, or making a long-shot run for the Presidency.


Germany Silent on NATO Request for Planes
Chancellor Helmut Kohl's Government said today that it would not respond to a request from NATO military officials for German warplanes to bolster the alliance's air patrols over Bosnia.
The move underlines Germany's reluctance to be drawn into an active role in NATO's military effort to deter combat flights over Bosnia and to provide air cover for United Nations peacekeepers, who have been increasingly threatened by the nationalist Serbs.


Rosemary Clooney Concert
Rosemary Clooney has rescheduled her concert appearances at Avery Fisher Hall on Dec. 16 and 18 because of a bronchial infection.
The concert, "Winter Holiday Party," is to take place at 8 P.M. on Feb. 20 at Avery Fisher Hall.
Ticket holders may exchange their tickets in person at the Avery Fisher Hall box office, or receive a refund.
Information: (212) 875-5030.


National Trustco reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  *
Bank of New York Co. is selling $300 million of subordinated notes due in 2004 through UBS Securities.
The notes, which are noncallable, carry an interest rate of 8.5 percent and are priced at 99.41 to yield 8.589 percent.
The notes are rated A- by Duff &amp; Phelps. *
Federal Home Loan Bank is selling $150.5 million of notes due in 1997 through the Discount Corporation of New York.
The notes, which are noncallable, carry an interest rate of 7.87 percent and are priced at par.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an obituary on Nov. 19 about Amelia Dietrich Lewis, a former lawyer, misstated her role in a 1967 Supreme Court case that established that juveniles have essentially the same Constitutional safeguards in criminal proceedings as adults.
Mrs.
Lewis was co-counsel; Prof.
Norman Dorsen of New York University Law School presented oral arguments on behalf of the American Civil Liberties Union.


Stefan Munsing, 79, Arts Official, Dies
Stefan Munsing, a former cultural officer in the State Department who helped take American art to postwar Europe, died on Saturday at his home in Washington.
He was 79.
The cause was cancer, said his son, Peter.


Corrections
A picture caption yesterday about the funeral of a slain New York City police officer, Raymond R. Cannon Jr., misattributed a quotation in some editions.
It was Police Commissioner William J. Bratton, not Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani, who called Officer Cannon a "hero of the city."


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.50
8.50
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
4.75
4.75
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
5.50
5.07
2.87
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.62
5.74
3.06
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
6.08
6.21
3.22
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.79
7.73
5.66
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.89
7.84
6.16
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.73
8.70
7.17
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
7.06
6.92
5.53
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


White House Memo; A Wounded President Strives Not to Become a Lame Duck
As President Clinton approaches the midpoint of his term at a new low point, he is struggling in private deliberations and public speeches to reposition himself on political ground that perpetually reopens beneath him.
But he has no easy choices, faces attacks from resurgent Republicans and despondent Democrats alike and has been put to some pains simply to preserve his authority.
A national poll conducted over the weekend by the Times Mirror Center for the People and the Press found Mr.
Clinton trailing a generic Republican opponent for 1996.
More ominously, fully two-thirds of Democrats surveyed wanted to see other candidates challenge him for the Democratic nomination.


CHRONICLE
JOSEPH B. VERRENGIA, a science writer at The Rocky Mountain News, in Denver, has been named the winner of the first John B. Oakes Award for Distinguished Environmental Journalism, to be given by the National Resources Defense Council.
THOMAS WINSHIP, a former editor of The Boston Globe, is to present the $3,000 prize to Mr.
Verrengia today at a board meeting of the council at the Harvard Club.
He is being honored for an eight- part series titled "Vanishing Colorado" that was published in the newspaper in August.


REPUBLICANS SEEK SWEEPING CHANGES IN HOUSE'S RULES
Republicans in the House of Representatives today ripped up the rule book by which Democrats controlled the chamber for 42 years and offered a radical new one that, they promised, would make the unwieldy House smaller, more open and far more parsimonious.
Among many other changes, the new rules would dismantle three House committees and 25 subcommittees, eliminate 660 employees from the committees' payrolls, end closed-door hearings and unrecorded committee votes and require any tax increase to gain the votes of three-fifths of lawmakers rather than half.


Winslow Carlton, Official of Agencies And Fund Chief, 86
Winslow Carlton, an investment fund executive who was long active with the Henry Street Settlement and who helped build the Northeast's first nonprofit medical-surgical insurance organization, died on Tuesday at his home in Woods Hole, Mass.
A former resident of the East Side of Manhattan, he was 86.
The cause was cancer, his family said.


Petersen Will Restart Sassy With Push for Older Readers
The Petersen Publishing Company, which announced that it had completed its acquisition of Sassy from Lang Communications this week, will restart the irreverent magazine for teen-agers with a February-March issue and aim it at a slightly older reader.
Sassy, begun six years ago, ceased publication with its November issue.
It will now be published by Petersen in Woodland Hills, Calif., and guarantee advertisers a circulation of 700,000.
Petersen also owns Teen, a more traditional and middle-of-the-road publication for teen-age girls, which has a circulation of 1.2 million.


HOLIDAY GIFT ISSUE
Tipping a Stocking Cap . . . to Dickens, The Home Seciton offers holiday gifts that celebrate the humble and the grand, in settings to match.
Homey objects are shown in the atmospheric rooms of the lower East Side Tenement Museum, in a building where more than 1,000 families from 20 nations lived and struggled from 1863 to 1935.
The 1765 Morris-Jumel Mansion, New York's oldest surviving residence, is a splendid backdrop for gifts noble in spirit, if not always in price.
SUZANNE SLESIN


Murder Suspect Seeks to Delay Court Hearing
Colin Ferguson called in sick today for a court hearing, and his lawyer said Mr.
Ferguson was fearful of leaving his jail cell on the first anniversary of the Long Island Rail Road shootings.
In a note that was faxed to the court, Mr.
Ferguson asked for postponement of a hearing on his competence to stand trial for killing six commuters on a rush-hour train.
Judge Donald E. Belfi of Nassau County Court denied his request.


Judges, Patronage and Status Quo
NEW YORK is in legal trouble again, and basically for the same reason it has been before -- because politicians in a position to change things for the better didn't.
The state's elected officials could have long ago changed New York's politics-ridden method of selecting most judges.
Instead, they lived with the system, found a few clever ways around it where they could, and now the Justice Department and the courts may be stepping in to tell New York how to run itself.


U.S. Won't Charge F.B.I.'s Sniper in Siege
Rejecting the findings of a highly critical internal review, the Justice Department has decided not to bring criminal charges against a Government sharpshooter who killed an unarmed woman in a bloody standoff on an Idaho mountain in 1992.
The review of the incident, which involved the elite Hostage Rescue Team of the Federal Bureau of Investigation, has hung over the agency for a year and a half, threatening members of its paramilitary crisis response team and top officials with criminal prosecution and career-ending disciplinary action.


Kentucky Slips By Indiana In Stretch
Kentucky 73, Indiana 70
Walter McCarty hit a 3-pointer with 1 minute 37 seconds left last night to spark No. 7 Kentucky to a 73-70 victory over visiting Indiana, which never recovered from a delay-of-game technical foul with 4:02 to play.
Neil Reed's layup gave Indiana (2-4) a 64-62 lead, but he was called for the technical when he swatted the ball out of bounds.


If There's a Way to Lose, Nets Will Find It
Nineteen games into his first season as a head coach in the National Basketball Association, Butch Beard is frustrated.
Welcome to the Nets.


Analyst Steps Into New Press Storm
For the past 10 years, Jeffrey M. Masson has waged what he, at least, thinks of as a one-man crusade for ethics in journalism.
Now he is about to evangelize at the University of California, and some students and professors there are none too happy.
Last month, only a few weeks after a jury in Federal District Court in San Francisco threw out Mr.
Masson's long-running libel suit against Janet Malcolm of the New Yorker magazine, officials at the university's Graduate School of Journalism disclosed that Mr.
Masson, a former psychoanalyst and Freudian scholar, would lecture this winter in a course there titled Ethical Issues in Journalism.


Shock and Confusion In Offices and Streets
It was easy money.
As the California economy crashed all around them, local governments here in Orange County enjoyed what sometimes seemed a guilty pleasure: building, expanding and improving with the profits of a risky, high-wire investment fund.
While other cities around the state were making painful cutbacks, Huntington Beach built a children's addition to its library.


In Shift, Pataki Backs Legalized Casino Gambling to Aid Tourism
Governor-elect George E. Pataki said today that he would support legalizing casino gambling in the state to boost a tourism industry that he said had been battered by the spread of casinos in nearby states and on an Indian reservation near Syracuse.
Mr.
Pataki has in the past opposed legalizing gambling, as has Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo, who leaves office Dec. 31.
But Mr.
Pataki said that the booming casino business on Indian reservations in Connecticut and in the central New York town of Verona had caused him to rethink his opposition.


Music Lovers Are Voting for Vinyl
Vinyl is back.
For the first time in 13 years, sales of old-fashioned vinyl LP recordings are on the rise.
Sales have increased by a staggering 80 percent for the first half of this year compared with the same period last year, according to the Recording Industry Association of America.
Stores like Tower Records are stocking vinyl again, record companies like Mobile Fidelity Sound Lab and Blue Note are making it again, and musicians are championing it as a better-looking and -sounding medium.
Recent albums by Nirvana, Neil Young, Johnny Cash and Sonic Youth were all released on vinyl at least a week before the CD version was available.
In hip-hop, the group Arrested Development has started its own advocacy organization called Power to the Vinyl.


Garden Q.&amp; A.
Jade Plants Indoors
Q.
My jade plant thrives outside all summer, but when I bring it in for the winter it barely makes it to the following year.
I heard that you should stop watering it then.
Is this true? -- Valery McClay, Mount Laurel, N.J.


U.S. Revokes Cotton Patents After Outcry From Industry
For the third time in less than a year, the United States Patent Office has invoked a rarely used power to revoke a broad patent after a strenuous industry protest.
The agency notified Agracetus, a W. R. Grace &amp; Company subsidiary in Wisconsin, last week that it had canceled two patents entitling the company to royalties on virtually any type of genetically engineered cotton produced in this country.


The Best You Can Be Is to Be Yourself
Afternoon drama specials for young audiences have a problem.
What with prime-time sitcoms skimming lightly over everything from child abuse to unprotected sex, the occasional daytime dramas are hard pressed to come up with what the networks deem a serious subject.
But it still can be done, even with a sense of humor, as is demonstrated nicely in today's "Magical Makeover," an "ABC Afterschool Special."
This cleverly composed bit of fluff has the temerity, at the height of the holiday buying season yet, to question the increasingly hot industry of image-making, without which capitalism would apparently collapse.
Buy that skin cream, get that nip, squeeze into those jeans: there's no other way, evidently, to realize marketplace-induced dreams.
"Magical Makeover" has some doubts.


Chiat/Day Chosen By Eveready Canada
Eveready Canada in Mississauga, Ontario, said yesterday that it had named Chiat/Day in Toronto to handle its Canadian advertising account, previously at Bates Canada in Toronto.
Billings were estimated at $3 million to $4 million.


Can Jets Force Sanders To Let Go of the Ball?
The Lions' great runner, Barry Sanders, could give the Jets a devil of a time on Saturday.
In 666 straight carries or catches, he has not fumbled.
The last time he did was in 1992.
But don't ask him how he manages to do it, or what skills he brings to amass 1,596 yards in 279 carries this season.
Sanders is 5 feet 8 inches tall, and weighs 203 pounds.
Perhaps his compact torso makes it more difficult for 6-5 defensive tackles to get a handle on him.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Orange County's Bankruptcy  The municipal bond market was roiled after Orange County, Calif., sought bankruptcy.
The wealthy county's filing threatens to raise borrowing costs for other local governments.
And some Wall Street firms may face losses and lawsuits.  [ Page D1. ] Other local governments face problems with risky interest-rate investments.
But Orange County's troubles may be on a different scale: its $20 billion investment pool is bigger than most and its investments were far more aggressive.  [ D1. ]


A Top Executive Resigns at Lowe
In an unexpected announcement, John Hayes, president of Lowe &amp; Partners/SMS in New York for almost three years, said yesterday that he had resigned, effective immediately.
At the same time, the agency announced a restructuring of its top management.
"It was my decision to resign," said Mr.
Hayes, who declined to elaborate or to comment on reports in trade publications of friction between him and other top executives like Lee Garfinkel, vice chairman and chief creative officer, and Frank Lowe, chairman of Lowe and its parent, the Lowe Group, in London.


Terfel Cancels
Bryn Terfel, the acclaimed Welsh bass-baritone who made his Metropolitan Opera debut in October and has been a drawing card for the company this season, has canceled his remaining scheduled performances in "Don Giovanni," on Dec. 16, 20 and 24.
Mr.
Terfel, who was to sing Leporello in the Mozart opera, is recovering from surgery on a herniated disk.
Mr.
Terfel, who is 29, sang in six Met performances of Mozart's "Nozze di Figaro" and made his New York recital debut at Alice Tully Hall on Oct. 24.
He began having back problems during the dress rehearsal for "Don Giovanni," on Nov. 15, and dropped out of the cast before it opened two days later.
His surgery was during the last week in November, and the Met said then that it hoped Mr.
Terfel would rejoin the cast early this month.


Hall Where 4 Died Lacked Permits, Police Say
The second-floor club where four young people were killed early Saturday in a stairway stampede was operating illegally as a dance hall at the time of the deaths, the police said today.
Investigators have determined that the club, El Balcon, did not possess a dance hall license and a teen-age dance hall license as required by city law, said Lieut.
Mark Kurdyla, a spokesman for the Elizabeth Police Department.


In Remembrance of Those Who Died


Journal; Will the N.E.A. Be D.O.A.?
At the Kennedy Center Honors in Washington last weekend, the playwright Wendy Wasserstein was struck by the sight of Alan Simpson, the conservative Republican Senator from Wyoming, joining the enthusiastic standing ovation for Pete Seeger, the old-left folk singer who was one of the night's honorees.
It just goes to show that culture can transcend politics.
And that Washington's ideological spectrum has shifted so far right since Nov. 8 that Mr.
Simpson, who was deposed from his own party's leadership last week for the pure Gingrichite Trent Lott, may now count as a moderate.
Could Mr.
Simpson possibly be recruited as a leader in the coming battle to save the National Endowment for the Arts?


New Guidelines to Aid in Treatment of Manic-Depressive Illness
New guidelines for the best treatment of manic-depressive illness were issued today, emphasizing that the illness can be successfully treated with the right combination of drugs and psychotherapy, but that it is often misdiagnosed and mistreated.
Susan Dime-Meehan, executive director of the National Depressive and Manic Depressive Association, based in Chicago, said at a news conference held today by the American Psychiatric Association that the new guidelines "will lead to earlier diagnosis and better treatment."


Orange County Crisis Jolts Bond Market
The sudden plunge of Orange County, Calif., into bankruptcy shook the market for public borrowing across the country yesterday, threatening to make it more expensive for many localities to borrow.
It also left some Wall Street firms facing the potential of big losses.
And it served as a warning of how rapidly new and popular financial strategies can sour, leaving an apparently prosperous county unable to pay its bills.


Directing the Camera To Be a Dance Partner
The work of Hollywood choreographers and the avant-gardist Merce Cunningham has been examined in Capturing Choreography: Masters of Dance and Film, a series presented by the Film Society of Lincoln Center and sponsored by Dance Ink magazine.
Tonight, the series will explore new territory in a tribute to Carlos Saura and Antonio Gades at the Walter Reade Theater.
The tribute is also part of the Spanish Cinema Now III festival, put on by the society and the Cervantes Institute.
Mr.
Saura, who is to be present, achieved international fame with films that subtly challenged the Franco regime in his native Spain.
Mr.
Gades came to personify Gypsy flamenco in performances throughout the world in the 1960's and 70's.
They joined, with almost seamless contributions, to tell stories through movement in the films "Blood Wedding" (1980), "Carmen," (1983) and "Love, the Magician" ("El Amor Brujo," 1986).


Sports of The Times; Golf's Norman Invasion
FOR all of Greg Norman's appeal, he has never been known as a truly great golfer.
His two British Open titles aren't nearly enough for him to be remembered with Jack Nicklaus and Arnold Palmer, or even with Tom Watson and Lee Trevino.
But of all of today's golfers, the lean and long Australian, the Great White Shark, is the most telegenic.
As the telegenic 21st century approaches, maybe that's enough.


INSIDE
G.O.P. Split on Immigration
Senator Alan Simpson, the most influential Republican on immigration issues, is charting a course at odds with the House Republicans' "Contract With America." Page B20.
Expanding Trade Accord
Countries at a summit meeting in Miami plan to expand the North American Free Trade Agreement to include virtually the entire hemisphere, officials said.
Page A14.
Bullets Meant for Clinton
The man who opened fire at the White House six weeks ago thought he was shooting at the President, Federal officials said.
Page A18.
Kmart Comes to Manhattan
In its first foray into Manhattan, the Kmart discount chain has signed a lease for what would be its largest store this side of Alaska.
Page B1.


Jaspers Keep Rolling With 18-Point Victory Over Marist
The Manhattan Jaspers, who have been trouncing opponents by an average of 25 points a game this season, were just about average against Marist last night, routing the Red Foxes by 18 points, 70-52.
Are you listening, St. John's?


Calendar: Sales And Tours
Armory Antiques  Seventh Regiment Armory, 643 Park Avenue (66th Street); (212) 472-1180.
More than 100 antique dealers are expected to participate in a sale today from 4 to 9 P.M.; tomorrow and Saturday, noon to 9 P.M., and Sunday, noon to 6 P.M.
Admission is $10.


'Yankees' Plans 7th-Inning Stretch
In a novel attempt to bypass the winter slump in theater ticket sales, the producer of "Damn Yankees" is hoping to make his show hibernate for two months and emerge at the end of February with Jerry Lewis in a starring role.
Under the plan, "Damn Yankees" would close at the Marquis Theater on Dec. 31, after the usually busy Christmas week.
The cast, musicians and crew -- but not the box office -- would be laid off.
The theater would stay dark, except for rehearsals, until it reopened on Feb. 28 with Mr.
Lewis playing the Devil, a role now filled by Victor Garber, whose contract is up this month.


Players' Union Develops Framework for New Labor Proposal
The baseball players' executive board, after what David Cone called "three painful days," approved the outline of a counterproposal today.
Now the board will await the owners' approval of it as the means to the end of the nearly four-month-old strike.
Not that the players expect the owners' negotiators to leap at the new plan when they meet in Rye Brook, N.Y., this weekend.
But they hope they at least will view it as a framework through which an agreement can be reached.
The players will present the proposal against a backdrop of rapid rejections their previous proposals have suffered.


Orange County Crisis Shakes Bond Market
The sudden plunge of Orange County, Calif., into bankruptcy shook the municipal bond market, threatening to make it more expensive for many local governments to borrow.
It left Wall Street firms facing the potential of big losses.
And it served as a warning of how new financial strategies can sour, leaving an affluent government to pay its bills.
Business Day, page D1.


The Bette Davis Who Came to Dinner
In the spring of 1985, Bette Davis had dinner at the home of the writer Elizabeth Fuller in Westport, Conn.
New York City was in the grip of a hotel strike, so when Davis phoned the following day to thank her hostess and also to ask if she could spend "a night or two," Ms.
Fuller's antennae might have gone up.
They didn't.
Davis moved in -- bag, baggage and steamer trunk -- and didn't move out for a month.


Elizabeth Kramer, 86, Crusader Who Raised Millions for Israel
Elizabeth (Biddie) Kramer, a philanthropist who spent most of her life raising millions of dollars for the nation of Israel, died on Monday at her home in Palm Beach, Fla.
She was 86.
The cause was congestive heart failure, her family said.


Stock Prices Slip a Bit On Bankruptcy Filing
Stock prices fell yesterday after the unprecedented bankruptcy filing by Orange County, Calif., but what was puzzling was stock traders' apparently mild reaction, which analysts said was misleading.
"You've got a market that's eroding bit by bit, one day here, then one day there," said Alan R. Shaw, manager of technical research at Smith Barney, referring to a 35-point drop in the Dow Jones industrial average since last Thursday, and nearly 200 points in the last six weeks.
"It's like a battle where soldiers are retreating one by one, until the generals find themselves all alone at the front."


Kmart Signs Store Lease Near Macy's
In a city where some of the most prominent landmarks bear names like Tiffany's, Saks and Bergdorf Goodman, another is on the way: Kmart.
For years a staple of suburban retailing, the discount chain signed a lease yesterday for what would be the company's largest store this side of Alaska, on West 34th Street a half-block from one of New York City's most famous department stores, Macy's.


For Bengals' Blake, the Time to Shine Is Now
Cincinnati quarterback Jeff Blake did not back down today when asked if he thought the Jets had given him a fair shot.
"I did the first two years but I don't think they really gave me a fair shot this past preseason," he said.
"I think it was already predetermined basically on who they were going to go with. Like I said before I left there, there is nothing I can do about it. It's out of my control."


Russian Winter in Wisconsin


Oil Under Windsor Castle? The Queen Says Have a Look
In the category of "them that has, gets," Queen Elizabeth II has given permission to a Canadian-operated company to start exploratory drilling to see if there is, as suspected, a pool of oil under Windsor Castle.
"It was a long and delicate negotiation," said Desmond Oswald, managing director of Canuk Exploration.
"You've heard of the Start treaty -- it was something like that. All I needed was the landowner's permission."


U.S. A-Bomb Stamp Causes Deep Hurt
To the Editor:
The concept and printing of a United States postage stamp commemorating the dropping of the atomic bomb on Japan is insulting, offensive and morally in bad taste ("Japan Protests U.S. Stamp on A-Bombs," news article, Dec. 4).


COMPANY BRIEFS
KENNECOTT CORP., Salt Lake City, a unit of RTZ Corp., said it had completed the purchase of most of W. R. Grace &amp; Co.'s interest in Colowyo Coal in a deal worth $218.3 million.


With Profits Down, Wall St. Braces for Pay Cuts
Wall Street is preparing for its first pay cut since 1990.
Salaries, including bonuses, could plunge as much as 40 percent, after three record years of profits and revenues.
The sharp reduction reflects a stark bottom-line reality: This year profits are expected to drop 80 percent, to $1.8 billion, from the record $8.6 billion earned in 1993, according to the Securities Industry Association.


Seles Is Sued by an Apparel Firm
The Italian sports apparel firm Fila has sued MONICA SELES, saying the tennis star reneged on a contract to promote a line of clothing after she was knifed in the back by a fan last year.
In a suit filed in United States District Court in Miami, Fila said that while Seles remained out of tennis, it has lost more than $6 million from the deal signed when she was ranked No. 1.


Market Place; Orange County's debacle could prove a boon for bond insurers.
MUNICIPAL bond insurance companies are unsure about what claims, if any, they may face from Tuesday's bankruptcy filing by Orange County, Calif.
But if history is any guide, the county's imbroglio will prove to be good for the bond insurers' business.
Just as New York City's 1975 fiscal crisis and the Washington Public Power Supply Systems bond default in 1983 led more investors to demand insured bonds, analysts expect a similar rise in demand for insurance as a result of Orange County's problems.
Even though less than 1 percent of local government bonds default, demand for insurance is great enough that about 40 percent of new local government issues are insured, up from 16 percent in 1983.


Tory Divide: Bitter, Deep
John Major's authority has been so devastated by Tuesday night's stunning defeat in Parliament that people both inside and outside the Conservative Party wondered today if the Prime Minister could survive two and a half more years.
The defeat, which came on the Government's plan to slap a hefty tax increase on home heating fuel and electricity, was being compared to the poll tax, the issue that brought down Margaret Thatcher, Mr.
Major's predecessor.


Longview Fibre Co.(LFB,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


10,000 Light Bulbs and Three Big Smiles


Lu Bin, Chinese Star, Gets 2-Year Ban
LU BIN yesterday become the latest and the biggest name among China's record-setting female swimmers to be suspended for drug use.
Lu, who won three gold medals at the world championships in Rome and four golds and set a world record at the Asian Games in Hiroshima, Japan, was banned for two years for using performance-enhancing substances, thus keeping her out of the Atlanta Olympics.


BUSINESS DIGEST
COUNCIL SUES MAYOR IN BUDGET TEST For the first time since its inception in 1938, the City Council sued the Mayor, seeking to establish the extent of its power as a separate branch of government to make changes in New York City's budget.
A1.
NEW YORK CITY  NEW PLAN OFFERED FOR REBUILDING F.D.R.
New York State transportation officials have proposed a new blueprint for rebuilding a stretch of the Franklin Delano Roosevelt Drive that would cut construction time by 18 months but would close the northbound lanes and divert traffic to a street beneath the elevated highway.
B3.


Intermetco Ltd. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Ever-Durable Hampton Feeling Toll of Injuries
As strong as he is, as good as he is Rodney Hampton is beginning to think of his mortality.
"Of course, I never thought I was superhuman," Hampton said today after sitting out practice with a knee injury.
"But I have never really thought about injuries until recently because I've been hurt so much. I think for the first time in my career injuries have me thinking about how long I can stay in the game."


Swiss Dance Festival Presenting Premieres
The sixth Swiss Dance Festival, which closed on Sunday afternoon with the last two of the five choreographers it has presented this year, sounds grander than it is.
Nonetheless, this modest showcase at the TriBeCa Performing Arts Center offered a welcome opportunity to catch up on a modern-dance scene that has shown increasing creativity.
Noemi Lapzeson and Fabienne Berger, who live in French-speaking areas of Switzerland, presented local premieres that succeeded those shown earlier in the week from German-speaking regions.
Both Miss Lapzeson and Miss Berger have a strong theatrical presence: projection rather than choreographic invention colored their pieces.


U.S. Envisions An Expansion Of Free Trade In Hemisphere
At a meeting in Miami this weekend, the United States and 34 countries in Latin America will announce plans to expand the North American Free Trade Agreement to include virtually all countries in the hemisphere in the next decade, officials from several countries said today.
The agreement, reached after long negotiations over the last several days, calls for the creation of a "Free Trade Area of the Americas" by 2005.


Biding Time in California Speaker Dispute
With no break in sight in the deadlock over who should become Speaker of the California Assembly, Republican and Democratic legislators tried another tactic today -- waiting.
The Republican candidate for the job, Assemblyman Jim Brulte, sent his troops home, telling them that negotiations with the Democratic candidate, Assemblyman Willie Brown, were at an impasse.


March Madness for Women On ESPN Basketball Scene
ESPN will televise 23 games of the women's Division I basketball tournament starting in 1996 as part of a new seven-year, $19 million deal to show nearly a score of National Collegiate Athletic Association championships.
"We can take the women's tournament to an entirely new level," John Wildhack, ESPN's senior vice president of programming, said after the contract was announced yesterday.


Economic Scene; Poverty rates have actually fallen, a new book argues.
HAVE you had your fill of charge and countercharge swirling around the authors of the "The Bell Curve," who assert that I.Q. is destiny?
Are you ready for something equally subversive from the frontiers (or the fringes -- take your pick) of social science?
Consider the work of Dale Jorgenson and Daniel Slesnick, economists with impeccable academic credentials (Harvard and the University of Texas, respectively) and no apparent ideological bone to pick.
They argue that properly measured, poverty rates have actually fallen sharply in the two last decades.


Nationalism Slows Foreign Adoptions in Russia
Seven-month-old Lena, a lifetime resident of the Vladimir children's home, made it through the confusion that rules foreign adoptions in Russia these days.
In the next crib, Alyona, 10 months old and weighing just over 4 pounds, may not be so lucky.
Her adoption by American parents, which seemed imminent the day before Thanksgiving, was suddenly suspended last week by local authorities in Vladimir, 150 miles east of Moscow.


Rex Stores Corp.(RSC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Halting the Spread of Nuclear Arms
With the recent securing of dozens of bombs' worth of uranium from Kazakhstan, Monday's signing by Ukraine of the Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty and the belated entry into force of the 1991 Strategic Arms Reduction Treaty, President Clinton has recorded three successes in stopping the spread of nuclear arms.
But he will need cooperation from the Republican-controlled Congress if he is to deal with the dangers that remain: the vast nuclear stockpiles in the former Soviet Union and the nuclear ambitions of smaller countries around the world.
There is a clear link between America's interest in curbing nuclear arms and its willingness to wind down its own nuclear programs.
Failure to acknowledge that link could jeopardize chances for an unlimited extension of the Nonproliferation Treaty when it comes up for review in mid-April.
Unless the U.S. and other nuclear states do more to disarm, Mexico and others may withhold support.
Further disarming would not only satisfy the holdouts but also dampen the ambitions of states that covet nuclear arms.


Harry Horner, 84; Designer of Films, Plays and Operas
Harry Horner, an Academy Award-winning film designer who also worked in theater and opera, died on Monday at his home in Pacific Palisades, Calif.
He was 84.
The cause was pneumonia, said his wife, Joan.


F.C.C. Starts Fox Ownership Inquiry
The Federal Communications Commission, examining the ownership structure of television stations owned by the Fox Broadcasting Company, began an investigation yesterday that included a degree of secrecy described as extremely uncommon by lawyers familiar with the commission.
Saying it needed additional information, the F.C.C. issued an "interim procedural order" in which it said it would begin "another phase" in its review of a challenge, filed by the N.A.A.C.P., to the license held by Fox for WNYW-TV (Channel 5), its television station in New York City.


CLASSICAL MUSIC
Brahms and Several Friends and Colleagues  The Frick Collection
Dirk Joeres, a 47-year-old German pianist and conductor who has made several recordings in Europe, made a belated New York debut on Sunday evening, and gambled that an unusual program would make a more lasting impression than a collection of warhorses.
He explored a constricted repertory.
But by scattering interesting rarities among well-known works, drawing associations between composers and playing with an illuminating originality, Mr.
Joeres made up in depth what his program lacked in breadth.


Essay; Warwick Time?
The latest Gallup Poll shows President Clinton losing in a two-way race; even losing a three-way race with Ross Perot taking away Republican votes; and certainly losing a four-way race with Jesse Jackson cutting into Democratic support.
That linear polling reflects the winter of voter discontent.
It presupposes the same old lineup representing the forces of resentment.


Guide for Last-Minute Shoppers and Shippers
IN the United States, there are Santa's helpers who deliver presents on Christmas Day.
They don't sit in department stores or slide down chimneys, but they will come dressed in red suits.
They are Postal Service carriers.
The Postal Service is the only mail service that will deliver a package on Christmas Day -- but only if it is sent by Dec. 23 by Express Mail.


'Up or Out' Age Bias
To the Editor:
"Women in Their Fifties Follow Many Paths Into Workplace" (front page, Nov. 28) says these women are not driven by ambitions "to have the careers and promotions that many men and younger college-educated women struggle for." This ignores that this work style sets the stage for a subtle age discrimination.


Morris F. Steinberg; Physician, 85
Dr.
Morris F. Steinberg, who was an associate professor at the New York University School of Medicine and who practiced internal medicine and cardiology in Manhattan for more than five decades, died on Thursday at New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center.
He was 85.
The cause was pulmonary complications, said Roland J. Kalb, a friend.


New York's Plan for Sex-Shop Zoning Fails Constitutional Test
To the Editor:
Re "High Court Backs Cities' Zoning of Sex Shops" (letter, Nov. 30): Prof.
M.
Stuart Madden says it would be futile to challenge New York City's proposed regulation of adult-entertainment businesses.
But both the United States Supreme Court and the New York Court of Appeals have recognized that sexually explicit material remains constitutionally protected so long as it does not fall into a narrow category of expression labeled "obscenity."


Executive Changes
BANK OF AMERICA, San Francisco, promoted David G. Mackenzie, senior vice president, to executive vice president.
CALVIN KLEIN INC., New York, named Denise Seegal, former president of the DKNY division of Donna Karan Inc., president of CK Calvin Klein.


Italian Inquiry Into Graft In Turmoil
Investigators declared today that Italy's corruption inquiries would not slacken despite the resignation of a top crusading magistrate.
But there are signs that the nation's old political tactics for shielding the powerful are being revived.
Only a day after the resignation of the Milan magistrate, Antonio Di Pietro, who said that political pressure had made it impossible for him to do his job, a Senate committee recommended that an inquiry against former Prime Minister Ciriaco De Mita be dropped.
The 23-member committee on parliamentary immunity was acting under a law requiring that cases involving ministers and former ministers be reviewed at a high level before magistrates can proceed.


Harsh Documentary on Croatia Unlikely to Have Impact There
One of Croatia's best-known film directors has produced an epic documentary that is a devastating portrait of Croatian nationalism and its role in stirring Balkan hatreds, but there is no prospect that it will be shown in Croatia anytime soon.
"I think the film can only help Croatia," said the director, Lordan Zafranovic, after it was shown at the Berlin film festival this year.
"But the political climate is not right."


New York's Nonsmokers Lose Out Again
To the Editor:
The New York City Council is selling us out again, by proposing weakened restrictions on smoking in restaurants and offices (news article, Nov. 30).
By exempting restaurants with 35 or fewer seats from new antismoking legislation, the Council will make it harder for nonsmoking customers to eat in those small restaurants.


Borden Plan Is Altered, Settling Suits
Borden Inc. and Kohlberg, Kravis, Roberts &amp; Company said yesterday that they had agreed to settle eight lawsuits filed by Borden shareholders by altering the provisions of Kohlberg, Kravis's proposed $2 billion acquisition of Borden.
The suits in Ohio, New York, New Jersey and Delaware had been informally consolidated, and the plaintiffs' lawyers will get a cash settlement "in the low seven figures," a Borden spokesman said.


THEATER
Sex and 3 Generations Of Jewish Women  Dixon Place
"Jumping Off the Fridge," Ellen Hulkower's one-woman show, bridges the gulf between the Borscht Belt and the Bowery.
A broad-stroke portrait of sexual attitudes among three generations of Jewish women, it combines staples of Catskills schtick (feisty one-liners, ethnic earthiness) with body- and soul-baring elements common to downtown confessional theater, which, come to think of it, often include feisty one-liners and ethnic earthiness.
If "Jumping" demonstrates nothing else, it's that the line between stand-up comedy and performance art can be pretty hazy.


Samoans Honor Adopted Son, the Teller of Tales
At dawn on Sunday, on a site called the Entrance of the Loving Heart about two and a half miles from Apia, the capital of Western Samoa, some 250 people from around the world gathered for a memorial service for the man known to Samoans as Tusitala, the Teller of Tales.
When the service was finished, the participants trekked 1,500 feet to the summit of Mount Vaea, where Tusitala is buried.
To most of the world, he is known as Robert Louis Stevenson.


Irving Kenneth Zola Dies at 59; Sociologist Aided the Disabled
Irving Kenneth Zola, a sociologist at Brandeis University who studied and championed the disabled, died on Dec. 1.
He was 59 and lived in Newton, Mass.
The cause was a heart attack, said his brother, Michael.
He died as he was being taken by ambulance from his home to a hospital after suffering chest pains.


Body Found in Plastic Bag
The body of a woman was found this morning in a plastic garbage bag under a railroad overpass in Medford, the Suffolk County police said.
The body, discovered by a county employee on the side of Long Island Avenue near Horse Block Road, was missing two arms and a leg.
The police said that the woman has not been identified and that the cause of death has not been determined.


Daniel Frankel, 91, An Importer of Films
Daniel Frankel, an importer and distributor of films who helped introduce the work of a number of prominent directors to American audiences, died on Saturday at the Applewood Health Care Center in Winchester, N.H.
He was 91 and lived in Keene, N.H.
As the president of Zenith International Films, Mr.
Frankel was instrumental in introducing many important films to American moviegoers, among them Francois Truffaut's "400 Blows," Louis Malle's "Lovers" and Alain Resnais's "Hiroshima, Mon Amour." Earlier, he was a vice president and director of Four Continent Films and served as general manager for United Artists in Belgium and Luxembourg.





No Headline
"I say today that the obstinacy of some and the demagogy of others risk setting the Balkans ablaze tomorrow. I am still ready to do  everything I can to prevent such a development, but my duty, alas, is to say that it is no longer improbable." -- ALAIN JUPPE, the French Foreign Minister.  [ A1:1. ]


Giuliani Is Sued By City Council In a Budget Test
For the first time since it was created in 1938, the City Council sued the Mayor yesterday, seeking to establish the extent of its power as a separate branch of government to make changes in New York City's budget.
By taking its budget dispute with Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani to court, the Council asked a judge to force the Mayor to accept its version of spending cuts to close a $1.1 billion budget gap.


Hide Next on Bowe's Docket
Never mind that Riddick Bowe blew his own title in a close rematch with Evander Holyfield and that neither of the reigning kingpins, George Foreman or Oliver McCall, will let Bowe anywhere near them.
If all goes well for Bowe, come next March he will be heavyweight champion again.
All he has to do is beat the World Boxing Organization champion, Herbie Hide, in a Home Box Office bout set for Las Vegas, Nev., on March 11, and Bowe will be the undisputed recognized champion of the W.B.O.


Offense in the N.F.L.: It's Up and It's Good!
Joe Marciano's heart leaps to his throat every time he sees a team line up for a kickoff or punt return.
The fear in Marciano, the New Orleans Saints' special teams coach, is created by the new rules that have injected more offense and scoring into the National Football League.


New Jersey Lawyers Who Sin in Haste Repent in Public
One after another, a dozen lawyers from around New Jersey came before a tribunal of their peers on a November morning to plead for their professional lives.
They had already been found guilty of misconduct by local ethics committees.
Now it was largely up to the state's Disciplinary Review Board, seven lawyers and lay people who sat solemnly on the dais in the cavernous courtroom of the New Jersey Supreme Court, to determine their fate.
The choices ranged from dismissing the case to disbarment.


Andre Previn Stands In For Roger Norrington
Roger Norrington, who was scheduled to conduct the New York Philharmonic in three subscription concerts on Dec. 15-17 as well as a Casual Saturdays program on Dec. 17 at 2 P.M., has withdrawn because of illness and will be replaced by Andre Previn.


Necessities and Niceties For Hitting the Slopes
Every sport has its gear hounds.
But skiers tend to be the most avid among them, possibly because their needs are so bottomless.
Besides skis or snowboards to choose from, what about the boots, poles, goggles, clothes and the gear to carry it all?
Especially in skiing, the holiday season is a popular time to cache in on new equipment, either from presents received or personal buying sprees.
Here are a few suggestions that run the gamut of price and style.
Skis
The S Ski comes with an unconventional hourglass figure -- slim at the waist, but broad in the tips and tails.
Created by a a new company in Aspen, the skis are made to turn easily and quickly.
They are targeted for a wide midrange of skier levels and most snow conditions.
The boards have a signature look -- jet black, with a silver S Ski graphic at the tip.
Elan and Kneissel make a similar ski shape.
Available in two models, the S ski costs $475.
To order from S Ski, you can telephone (303) 925-9600 or fax (303) 920-7713.
In New York, you can call Scandinavian Ski Shop at (212) 757-8524.
Boots
Rather than buying new boots, there is a way now to revitalize the old ones.
Raichle Molitar, the Swiss ski equipment manufacturer, has developed moldable liners that fit into most any plastic boot shell.
A customized fit is achieved by heating the liners, called Thermoplastic innerboots, as part of the molding process.
The liner cools in the shape of the skier's foot, from toe to heel and to the top of the boot.
The company has set up convection ovens at ski shops for heating the liners.
Available this season in five models, including an innerboot for hard-shell snowboarding boots, the Thermoplastic liners range from $129 to $169.
For a dealer location, the number is (800) ANY-FOOT.
Goggles
Short of growing a two-day beard, any skier these days can take on the Alberto Tomba look.
The Italian ski racer's goggle is now available to consumers through Briko Racing, of Port Washington, L.I.
Aptly named the Racing Detector VIP, the Briko goggle comes with a V.I.P. price of $300.
Briko also has introduced a less racy model called the Racing Detector, at $100.
Both goggles are designed with a 180-degree visual sweep and include Briko's Thrama lens, designed to cut through the flat light that so often turns ski slopes into moonscapes.
Both models of goggle are edged in thick foam to absorb shock if a skier falls.
The VIP version is made with an outer frame of aluminum, while the regular goggle comes with a hard plastic frame.
For a dealer location, the number is (800) GO-BRIKO.
Map Holders
Anyone who has tried to use a map to locate trails on an unfamiliar mountain knows the hassle.
There are ski poles to put aside, gloves to take on and off, pockets to dig into, jackets to adjust, and chairlifts to hang onto.
All the while, the map is flapping in the breeze like a kite on a string.
The Launch Corporation of Denver has come to the rescue this year with the Skiersleeve, a plastic see-through vinyl pouch to hold trail maps.
The sleeve, made with a black foam backing, wraps around a skier's forearm with Velcro.
Once tucked inside, the trail guide is protected from sleet and snow and is easily seen.
It is available for $15 at some ski shops nationwide or by ordering directly through Skiersleeve at (800) 322-2930.
Ski Racks
Getting to the slopes brings up another need: roof racks.
This year, Masco Tech Inc., the automobile equipment manufacturer from Taylor, Mich., has got in on the act.
The company, which has traditionally installed the luggage racks that come standard with most vans and sport utility vehicles, is selling roof rack adaptors directly to consumers.
Its Append Sport Rack line includes the new Top Wing Ski and Snowboard Carrier, which sells for about $95 at ski shops.
The adaptor is made to carry skis on cars or vans that already have a factory-installed roof rack.
The carrier comes with brackets that snap onto the standardized rails and cross bars.
For a dealer, or to order directly, the number is (800) 4-APPEND.


People
Ralph Sorrentino, executive vice president and chief financial and administrative officer at Bohbot Communications Inc., New York, was promoted to president and chief operating officer, succeeding Allen Bohbot, who was named to the new position of chairman and chief executive.
Nicholas H. Niles, president at the Sporting News Publishing Co., New York, was named to the additional positions of president, chief executive and publisher of Golf Magazine Properties, New York, which like The Sporting News is owned by Times Mirror Magazines.
He succeeds the late Peter Bonanni.
Also, James L. Kopper, executive vice president at Times Mirror, was named to the additional new position of chairman at Golf Magazine.


CHRONICLE
The appearance of the DUCHESS OF YORK at a National Press Club luncheon yesterday sent usually blase Washington journalists into a tizzy.
The luncheon was sold out two weeks in advance and an overflow crowd jammed two balconies to hear the former Sarah Ferguson talk about helping impoverished children around the world through a charity called Children in Crisis.
Because of her philanthropic efforts, she said, she is often seen as "yet another earnest figure in a tireless attempt to improve one's public image."
Pursuing a career as a writer of children's books has also presented conflicts, she said, as she has tried to reconcile the demands of work with family life.
"The facts are that I am a separated mother of two children, and as an independent woman, I am largely responsible for my family," she said.


Parking Rules
Because of the Feast of the Immaculate Conception, alternate-side street cleaning regulations will be suspended today.
Other regulations remain in effect..


GREENSPAN HINTS AT FURTHER RISES IN INTEREST RATES
In an unusually clear signal that the Federal Reserve will continue raising interest rates, its chairman, Alan Greenspan, said today that inflation might rise soon and that the economy was continuing to grow briskly.
The Federal Reserve has sought with six rate increases since February to brake economic growth in an effort to forestall inflationary shortages of goods and skilled workers.
Mr.
Greenspan told members of the Congressional Joint Economic Committee that "there is very little evidence throughout this economy of any degree of slowdown,"


The Wrong Budget Battle
The struggle between the New York City Council and Mayor Rudolph Giuliani over budget cuts has now ended in court.
That could have the salutary effect of resolving some ambiguous wording in the City Charter.
But this is a silly and distracting fight to be waging at this time.
The dollar differences are not great; they could be resolved in a minute.
Indeed, the city would be better served if they were, so all concerned could turn to the truly enormous budget problems they face in the new year, not a month away.
The current fight is over the Mayor's proposed cuts in the $31.6 billion budget adopted in June for the fiscal year that began July 1.
City revenue has fallen short of what was then expected, so the Mayor -- as required by law -- has proposed spending cuts to match the loss of revenue.
The Council disagrees with a small portion of his cuts and has proposed alternative cuts, provoking a legal fight over who has the final say.


CLASSICAL MUSIC
Works by an Outsider Of the Italian Renaissance  Merkin Concert Hall
Salamone Rossi has two reputations.
One is for writing skillful vocal and instrumental music of the late Renaissance and early Baroque.
The second is for being a Jewish composer in a Christian milieu.


Transactions
Baseball  National League
NEW YORK METS -- Signed Jarvis Brown and Chris Jones, outfielders.
ST.
LOUIS CARDINALS -- Traded Luis Alicea, second baseman, to the Boston Red Sox for Nate Minchey, pitcher, and Jeff McNeely, outfielder.
American Association
BUFFALO BISONS -- Named Jack Mull assistant coach. California League
HIGH DESERT MAVERICKS -- Announced the resignation of Leanne Pagliai Harvey, general manager.
Basketball  National Basketball Association
SAN ANTONIO SPURS -- Suspended Dennis Rodman, forward, indefinitely without pay for failing to return from a 3 1/2-week paid leave of absence.
Continental Basketball Association
CHICAGO ROCKERS -- Placed Fred Roberts, forward, on the injured reserve list.
Activated Alston Turner, forward, from the injured reserve list.
MEXICO AZTECAS -- Placed Daron Jenkins, forward, on the injured reserve list.
ROCKFORD LIGHTING -- Traded Kermit Holmes, forward, to the Mexico Aztecas for a 1995 first-round draft pick.
Hockey  American Hockey League
CORNWALL ACES -- Assigned Brent Brekke, defenseman, to Dayton of the East Coast Hockey League.
International Hockey League
KALAMAZOO WINGS -- Recalled Scott Loucke, center, from Dayton of the East Coast Hockey League.
HOUSTON AEROS -- Signed Mario Chitaroni, center, and Carl Valimont, defenseman.
Released Chris Foy, defenseman, Central Hockey League
C.H.L. -- Suspended Link Gaetz, San Antonio Iguanas defenseman, for a stick-swinging incident Dec. 2 against Dallas.
DALLAS FREEZE -- Named Alan May assistant coach for the duration of the NHL lockout.
Placed Frank LaScala, left wing, on the injured reserve list.
East Coast Hockey League
NASHVILLE KNIGHTS -- Acquired Matt DelGuidice, goaltender, from the Charlotte Checkers.
Released Paul Spagnoletti, goaltender.
Soccer  United States Soccer Federation
U.S.S.F. -- Named Tom King general manager. Genreal
AMATEUR ATHLETIC UNION -- Named Tony Mason associate sports director. College
BARD -- Named Corey Robinson men's assistant basketball coach and Glenn Warnock men's volleyball coach.
CLEMSON -- Announced the resignation of I.M.
Ibrahim, soccer coach.
Named Ibrahim special consultant to the senior associate athletic director.
MIDDLE TENNESSEE STATE -- Suspended Fred Niemeyer and Marshall Brown, varsity tennis players, from the team for a minimum of one month during the spring season for team violations.
RHODE ISLAND -- Named Mike Ballweg assistant athletic director.
SOUTHERN CAL -- Announced the resignation of Cheryl Woods, women's tennis coach.
Named Ed Burt women's interim tennis coach.
YESHIVA -- Named Steve Post men's assistant basketball coach.


Texfi Industries(TXF,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 28


Mr. Gingrich's Leaner House
The Speaker-designate, Newt Gingrich, must be given his due.
Much of the House crystal that he has broken in his bullish passage to the leadership needed breaking.
His basic reforms make sense.
He has reduced the number of committees.
He is on the right track, provided he really backs off from his self-serving plan to abolish the Ethics Committee.
Similarly, the plans to limit chairmen to three terms and to end joint committee jurisdiction over important bills make sense.


Strawberry Faces Indictment
A lawyer for Darryl Strawberry said in a published report that the baseball slugger will be indicted today on Federal tax charges.
Marty Gelfand, Strawberry's Los Angeles-based lawyer, said in today's editions of The Daily News that the arraignment "will be very brief because he's not guilty. Darryl is innocent, and he will plead not guilty. This is the end of a long investigation, but in our opinion it is a case that has no merit."


Corrections
A picture caption on Sunday about the controversy surrounding a shelter for homeless men in Chester, N.Y., misidentified the man shown walking from the Chester Mall to Camp La Guardia.
He was William Houston, not Lamar Evans.


German High Court Bans Energy Subsidy on Utility Bills
It is called the coal penny, or Kohlepfennig, and for two decades this surcharge on German electricity bills has subsidized the country's unprofitable coal industry, becoming a symbol of German insistence on maintaining costly energy production and mining jobs at consumers' expense.
But today, Germany's high court ruled that the surcharge was unconstitutional.
In a decision that will force Chancellor Helmut Kohl's Government to increase taxes and possibly slash employment in the coal industry, the court ruled that the coal penny was a hidden tax and that the Government had to budget it as tax by moving it off consumers' bills and onto Government ledgers.


C.I.A. to Pay $410,000 to Spy Who Says She Was Smeared
The Central Intelligence Agency will pay $410,000 to a woman whose career as a top-ranked spy was ruined by fellow C.I.A. officers who tarred her as a drunken sexual temptress, Government officials said today.
Justice Department lawyers representing the C.I.A. had no choice but to settle a discrimination suit filed by the agency's former chief of station in Jamaica, Janine M. Brookner, after deciding that their case was fraught with legal problems and deeply dubious accusations against Ms.
Brookner, several of the officials said.


Sports of The Times: Baseball; Brissie Never Thought of Failure


F.D.R. Repair Plan Would Close Lanes
New York State transportation officials have proposed a new blueprint for rebuilding a stretch of the Franklin D. Roosevelt Drive that would cut construction time by 18 months but would close the northbound lanes and divert traffic to a street beneath the elevated highway.
State officials are optimistic and say the use of the service road will relieve congestion.
But the local community board and tenant groups have raised worries that rerouting traffic to the service road would hinder emergency vehicles trying to reach the United Nations School and the Waterside Plaza apartment complex along the East River.


Mexican's Offer to Rebels: Turn In Guns and He'll Quit
On the eve of his inauguration, the Governor-elect of Chiapas State tried today to avoid a violent confrontation with Indian rebels who have refused to accept his election victory by offering to resign if they turn in their guns.
The gesture by the Governor-elect, Eduardo Robledo Rincon, on national television late Tuesday night followed renewed threats from the rebel Zapatista National Liberation Army and its leader, Subcommander Marcos.
They said that if Mr.
Robledo takes office as scheduled on Thursday, the uneasy truce between the rebels and the Mexican Army that has held in Chiapas since Jan. 12 will be considered broken.


Arafat Tells Christopher He'll Act Against Terrorism
Yasir Arafat said the words he was supposed to say today.
In conciliatory language praised by Secretary of State Warren Christopher, the chairman of the Palestine Liberation Organization pledged to do whatever he could to end attacks against Israeli troops and civilians, which have increased over the last two months.


Florida Rock Industries(FRK,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


IN THE ARENA WITH: Lena Golovko; An Inner Light, A Leap of Faith
O.K., you can listen to the rumors about the daring young woman on the flying trapeze who, in every performance, must place her life in the hands of both her former husband and her current lover.
Literally.
Or you can read the real story. It's up to you.


New Suicide-Assistance Ban Gains in Michigan
The State Senate voted today to outlaw suicide assistance in Michigan once again and this time to make the ban permanent.
The bill, aimed squarely at stopping Dr.
Jack Kevorkian, the retired pathologist who since 1990 has helped 21 gravely ill people kill themselves, now goes to the Michigan House, which is expected to pass it.
Gov.
John Engler, an outspoken opponent of suicide assistance, says he will sign the measure, which would take effect on April 1.


Jan Bell Marketing Inc.(JBM,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 30


U.S. Seeking To Lift Cloud Over Rapport With Moscow
Stung by Moscow's opposition to their proposal to expand NATO, Clinton Administration officials acknowledged today that relations with Russia had sunk to their lowest level in years.
Eager to ease the tension, Administration officials said that high-level contacts had opened this week and that Vice President Al Gore would seek to mend fences next week in Moscow.


Mets Sign Two Minor Leaguers
The Mets signed the minor league outfielders JARVIS BROWN and CHRIS JONES yesterday and invited them to spring training.


Maple Is Honored by Jockeys' Guild
EDDIE MAPLE, who has ridden in New York for more than 20 years, has been selected as the winner of the 1995 George Woolf Award in voting by members of the Jockeys' Guild.


Now a Caller From the G. W. Bridge: Stern to the Rescue
Even for talk radio, in which people of all stripes eagerly display private grief for public scrutiny, it was bizarre.
Standing at midspan on the north sidewalk of the George Washington Bridge yesterday morning, a young Bronx man apparently intent on suicide stopped first to call Howard Stern on his cellular phone.
When Mr.
Stern, the voluble talk show host, put the caller on the air, the morning suddenly turned into rush-hour guerrilla theater.


Korea Nuclear Pact Doesn't Rely on Trust
To the Editor:
Re your Nov. 27 news article on Republican opposition to the Clinton Administration's deal to halt North Korea's nuclear program: I am concerned by such partisan criticism of the deal.
The senators seem troubled that the Administration gave away too much in return for more promises from the North.


Winning a Title Is the Rule For Foursome at Virginia
Four soccer players from the University of Virginia are two victories from claiming a distinction no Division I football, baseball, basketball or hockey player has ever earned: winning four national titles in four years.
Nate Friends, Clint Peay, Tain Nix and A. J. Wood were freshmen on the Virginia team that captured the first of three consecutive titles in 1991.
Friends and Nix played six games each as freshmen, while Peay and Wood have been regular starters every year.


Sports of The Times; The Owners Committed Long Ago
YOU walk around your neighborhood and you see boards across one of your favorite stores.
The sign in the doorway says: Closed for Renovations -- Will Reopen Soon.
"Sure," you say.
"Right." And you immediately start looking around for another store.
That's why I'm wondering about the National Hockey League owners.
They canceled the January All-Star Game yesterday just to get everybody's attention; they may shut down the entire season next week.
Are they all nuts?


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Perennial Holiday Messages Work
As Americans clamber about the attic, root around the basement and rummage through hall closets for favorite family ornaments, lights and wreaths, marketers are busily hauling out the Madison Avenue equivalent: perennial holiday ads.
Advertising decked out with Christmas themes, like Santa Claus riding a Norelco shaver, is making its annual reappearance.
These evergreens have become, in their own way, as much a part of Christmastime in this country as telecasts of "It's a Wonderful Life" and Nat (King) Cole warbling about "chestnuts roasting on an open fire."


A Bad Republican Idea
The House Republicans have won praise on this page for the proposed structural reforms of the committee and caucus systems.
But the proposal to require a three-fifths vote to raise income tax rates is a bad idea, both from the standpoint of parliamentary procedure and budget policy.
The Senate has institutionalized super-majority voting in its filibuster rule, and that alone should persuade Newt Gingrich and the other Republican leaders not to empower a minority in their chamber to block the will of the majority.
Indeed, the House minority could thwart the Senate, too, because the three-fifths rule would apply to tax bills negotiated in House-Senate conference committees.
The proposed rule would deliver an unprincipled blow to majority rule.


Four Counts Added in Shooting at White House
A Federal grand jury today added four counts of an additional charge to the indictment of the man accused of shooting at the White House in October.
The United States Attorney's office brought the new charge, carrying and using a firearm during a violent crime, against the accused gunman, Francisco Duran, after reviewing Federal firearms laws.


Obesity Gene 'Flaw' Once Served Us Well; Compensate With Diet
To the Editor:
Re "Researchers Link Obesity in Humans to Flaw in a Gene" (front page, Dec. 1): It would be most unfortunate if your report weakened your readers' resolve to follow a prudent diet.


2 School Officers Are Charged With Taking Bribes for Jobs
Two officers with the Division of School Safety were arrested yesterday and charged with receiving bribes of at least $800 each to place people in jobs, Robert M. Morgenthau, the Manhattan District Attorney, announced yesterday.
Also arrested was one of the 96 recruits who graduated last week and joined the 3,200-officer force, which patrols the city's 1,100 schools.
She was accused of paying a bribe and then accepting bribes from applicants who turned out to be undercover investigators.


Court Strikes Language Law
Saying the measure violated the United States Constitution, a Federal appeals court has struck down an amendment to the Arizona Constitution requiring state employees to speak only English on the job.
In 1988 voters in Arizona narrowly passed an initiative that amended the state Constitution to bar the use of any language other than English by all state employees while performing their official duties.


Fund Chief Will Retire In a Year
The investment world is losing one of its most iconoclastic, irreverent and irascible voices, a manager who has made a lot of money for mutual fund owners over the last 30 years.
John B. Neff, who has run Vanguard Windsor Fund since 1964, announced yesterday that he would retire at the end of next year.
Vanguard will turn over management of the $11 billion fund to Charles T. Freeman, the man Mr.
Neff calls his alter ego.
Mr.
Freeman has worked for Mr.
Neff for 25 years.


CHRONICLE
'Twas on the isle of Capri that DAVID LACHAPELLE, a fashion photographer, went to jail on Monday in a comedy of errors that began with an inflatable doll.
Mr.
Lachapelle was on that romantic island off Naples to shoot the main fashion spread for the March issue of French Vogue.
He decided to give it a plot involving a sailor who dreams of a doll who turns into a real woman.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article yesterday about the Western Hemisphere summit meeting referred incorrectly in some editions to the home state of Representative Richard A. Gephardt, who sent a letter urging President Clinton to safeguard American jobs.
He is from Missouri, not Indiana.


Low Southwest Profits Rattle Airline Investors
The stocks of several large airlines fell yesterday as investors reacted to an announcement by the industry's most consistently profitable carrier, the Southwest Airlines Company, that it would earn less than expected in the fourth quarter.
Gary Kelly, chief financial officer of Southwest, said profits would fall below the 26 cents reported for the corresponding quarter last year.
"We definitely have some rough spots in the fourth quarter," Mr.
Kelly said.


S.E.C. Cites 2 Officers Of Gannett
The Securities and Exchange Commission charged two officers of the Gannett Company yesterday with illegal insider trading in the stock of a bank for which one of them served as a director.
One of the executives settled the charges and agreed to testify about his activities, but the other is fighting them.
The S.E.C., in a civil suit filed in Federal District Court in Alexandria, Va., charged that Thomas J. Farrell, the chairman of USA Today Sky Radio and the president of the Gannett New Media Group, tipped a number of friends about a pending takeover in Rochester of the Community Savings Bank, on whose board he served, and then tipped them again when the deal was falling apart.
He even arranged to provide financing for some of the purchases by tapping his stepmother's savings accounts, the S.E.C. said, adding that the trading produced illegal profits of $410,000.


Western Europeans Cast A Cautious Line Eastward
Smarting from their setbacks in Bosnia and Russia's criticism of overtures to the east, leaders of the 12 nations in the European Union will offer Eastern European countries a tentative road map to membership at a two-day summit meeting that begins here on Friday, diplomats say.
With their meeting overshadowed by recent discord with the United States over the failed United Nations peacekeeping mission in Bosnia, the European leaders are expected to try to avoid open disputes.


Christie Examines Ankle and Options
Doug Christie took another step toward being reactivated today when he practiced for the first time with the Knicks.
Christie, 24, who was acquired in October in a trade with the Los Angeles Lakers, has been on the injured list all season after undergoing surgery on his left ankle in August.
No timetable has been set for the 6-foot-6-inch guard-forward, but barring a setback, he could be placed on the roster later this month.


Diner's Journal
A Passion for Asian Accents
In a world of copycat restaurants, Aja stands out.
The look alone is enough to make you dizzy.
Every decorating style from the last 150 years seems to have been deconstructed to create this funky Victorian-Shaker-Deco room.
The vast open space features a lounge with antique overstuffed setees and sofas, stained glass, carved wood, futuristic lights and a flotilla of potted plants.
It is eerily dislocating.
What do you serve in a space like this?
A daring, Asian-accented menu.
Reading through this remarkable document, which offers steamed lobster with curry, roasted eggplant and grilled pineapple or five spice-grilled squab with caramelized mango, kaffir lime and Thai chilies, can be daunting.
Is there actually somebody in the kitchen who can pull this off?


A Default By Orange County
The fiscal hemorrhaging of Orange County worsened today as it defaulted on a $110 million bond issue.
In addition, the county said it would sue several brokerage firms in an effort to keep its loss-plagued investment fund from collapsing.
Adding to alarm and confusion surrounding Tuesday's bankruptcy filing, the county, which pledged to meet all school and local government payrolls, acknowledged that it could not pay all its outside suppliers.
"Some vendors are probably not going to get paid," the County Administrator, Ernie Schneider, told a meeting of the Orange County City Managers Association at City Hall in Irvine, Calif.


ResultsPlus
COLLEGE BASKETBALL  B.C.
Slips Past Fordham  Last Saturday, Fordham was blown out by 40 points at Manhattan's Draddy Gymnasium.
On Tuesday, Boston College took Connecticut -- perhaps the best team in the Big East -- down to the wire at home before losing by 4 points.
So, one might have deduced that B.C. had a decisive edge last night when the Eagles traveled to the Bronx to take on Fordham.
Not so fast.
The Rams led by as many as 7 points in front of 3,175 fans at Rose Hill Gymnasium with just over 13 minutes left.
And Fordham was clinging to a 3-point lead with five and a half minutes to go.
But in the end, Boston College rallied behind the sophomore Danya Abrams and the freshman Duane Woodward for a 64-60 victory that was nowhere near as easy as it should have been.


Orthodox Churches Move Toward Unity
The leaders of 11 Orthodox Christian churches with six million members in North America are establishing an administratively united church with one voice on social, religious and political issues.
Article, page A22.


Art in Review
'From the Studio'
Artists in Residence, 1993-1994
'Hale Woodruff Memorial Exhibition'
Curator's Choice
Studio Museum in Harlem
144 West 125th Street
Through Dec. 31


U.S. May Let A Baby Bell Widen Reach
The Justice Department is close to recommending that a regional Bell telephone company be allowed to enter the long-distance industry for the first time since the Government forced the breakup of the Bell System more than a decade ago.
People familiar with the proposal, which would require the approval of a Federal judge, say it would allow the Ameritech Corporation to offer long-distance service to customers in metropolitan Chicago.
In return, the company would be required to open its local-telephone business in the area to full competition by other telecommunications companies.


Corrections
An article in Business Day on Monday about the Federal Government's auction of licenses for wireless telephone and data services misstated the number of companies and alliances that made deposits to qualify for the bidding.
It was 30, not 23.





CUBAN REFUGEES RIOT IN PANAMA
As many as 1,000 Cuban refugees stormed out of a detention camp in Panama today, injuring 236 American soldiers in a daylong melee before order was restored, military officials said tonight.
Most of the Americans suffered minor bruises and scrapes from rocks, bottles and bricks thrown by angry refugees.
But 18 soldiers needed hospital treatment, including one with a serious head injury and another with a dislocated shoulder, said William Ormsbee, a spokesman for the United States Southern Command in Panama.
About a dozen Cubans were hospitalized, Mr.
Ormsbee said.


On Stage, and Off
Less Blue Than Usual
Could Blue Man Group ever have expected the success it would have with its very offbeat "Tubes," with its mute satires on everything from the Jefferson Airplane's "White Rabbit" to Jenny Holzer's arty L.E.D. signs, and its frighteningly generous use of banana goop and phosphorescent toilet paper?
It's been selling out virtually every performance at the Astor Place Theater in the East Village for three years now.


No Headline
"We'd like the American public to know the Orthodox Church has come of age. The U.S. is not a foreign land. It is our land." ARCHBISHOP IAKOVOS of the Greek Orthodox Church.  [ A22:1. ]


Doing Business In a Manner Most Unbusinesslike
AT the end of her first day at the Seattle offices of Digicom, Meredith Johnson (Demi Moore) can be found charging out of her office with her clothes unbuttoned, yelling, "You get back here and finish what you started!" to the man who got away.
Beyond making the after-hours cleaning woman wonder just how Meredith landed her powerful position, this sequence is meant to provoke debate.
It's also supposed to make "Disclosure," the glossy, techno-torrid film version of Michael Crichton's alarmist novel, look more daring than it really is.
In the brave new corporate culture of "Disclosure," is Meredith's behavior truly threatening?
Are there legions of saucy female executives ready to act this way?
Should nice guys like Tom Sanders (Michael Douglas) be worried about falling prey to such vixens?
And why on earth is Mr.
Douglas, an actor known to audiences as Mr.
Kinky Philanderer for his steamier roles in "Basic Instinct" and "Fatal Attraction," playing the man who is sexually harassed by Meredith but just says no?


Art in Review
Kerri Scharlin
Jose Freire Gallery
130 Prince Street
SoHo
Through Dec. 23


Also of Note
Critics' choices of some other Manhattan art shows:
EMIL LUKAS AND CARY S. LEIBOWITZ, Bravin Post Lee, 80 Mercer Street, SoHo. (Through Dec. 23.) Emil Lukas's work is ingeniously unprepossessing (sculptures made of 50's crockery, etc.) and Cary S. Leibowitz's installation looks like a fire sale in progress.
Mr.
Leibowitz, who personally presides over his mini-mart of paintings, porcelains, T-shirts and dolls, is the last person to drive a hard bargain and will gladly sign any purchase.
"Shalom Poverty" is the title of one of his paintings.
JAMES BROOKS, "Paintings on Paper, 1950's-1960's," Washburn Gallery, 20 West 57th Street. (Through Jan. 14.) This Abstract Expressionist had a terrific touch and it is evident in these works in gouache.
Also included are the artist's seldom-seen Precisionist-style prints from the 30's, some of which already suggest his elegant, classicist approach to the gesture.
THOM MERRICK, John Gibson Gallery, 568 Broadway, at Prince Street, SoHo. (Through Dec. 31.) Sculptures with a loose practical-joke whimsy.
"No Smoking Section" is six folding card tables with wildly impractical leg extensions; "Foot Cow" is a cardboard cylinder that moos when rolled.
Mr.
Merrick has shown mostly in Europe in the last few years.
It's nice to have him back in New York.
ALLAN WEXLER, Ronald Feldman Fine Arts, 31 Mercer Street, at Grand Street, SoHo. (Through Dec. 23.) This ingenious and amusing show consists of Rube Goldberg solutions to the ecological problem of collecting rain water and living without conventional plumbing: Mr.
Wexler has constructed jewel-like models of houses festooned with baroque gutters and has imagined 101 ways, just about, to use a bucket.
KIM MACCONNEL, "The Age of Plastic," Holly Solomon Gallery, 172 Mercer Street, at West Houston Street, SoHo. (Through tomorrow.) A show of new paintings and sculptures, all featuring deft little assemblages made of discarded bottles and plastic trash, from one of the leaders of the Pattern and Decoration movement.
It shows his unerring sense of design, lightness and unpretentiousness to be intact.


Strawberry and Agent Indicted on Charges of Income Tax Evasion
During spring training in 1989, when major league baseball invited I.R.S. and F.B.I. agents to counsel players on the responsibilities of reporting income from card shows, the lesson came too late for Pete Rose.
He landed in Federal prison the next year for filing false returns.
Yesterday it became apparent that the lesson may have come too late for Darryl Strawberry.


Dealer Says It Was Easy To Dupe G.M.
Two years ago, John M. McNamara, a Suffolk County car dealer, confessed to one of the largest frauds in American corporate history, but refused to speak publicly about the crime.
Today, called to testify in a separate case, he broke his silence, explaining that he found it easy to trick General Motors into giving him more than $6 billion in loans for vans that never existed.
Mr.
McNamara, testifying as the Government's star witness in the bribery trial of three Long Island politicians, said that he was able to conceal the fraud scheme for years from the G.M. computer technicians who monitored the serial numbers of the vans and the G.M. auditors who showed up on his lots for what were supposed to be surprise inspections of his inventory.


Simpson Jury Is Sworn In, but Opening Arguments Still Appear to Be Months Away
After months of legal wrangling and often grueling questioning, the process of finding a jury to decide O. J. Simpson's fate ended today as nine women and three men were sworn in as alternate jurors to hear evidence in the double-murder trial.
Even though opening arguments may be months away, with hearings on the admissibility of crucial DNA evidence still to come, today's session nonetheless marked a milestone in a process that began on Sept. 26, with each jury prospect completing an exhaustive, 79-page questionnaire.
Since then, prosecutors and defense lawyers have spent long hours and considerable sums of money to plumb the prospective juror's prejudices and knowledge of the case.


Two Awards for Penn State Quarterback
Penn State quarterback KERRY COLLINS received the Maxwell Award last night as the nation's outstanding college player at the Home Depot College Football Awards Show at Lake Buena Vista, Fla.
Collins finished 98 votes ahead of RASHAAN SALAAM, the Colorado running back, out of 1,171 votes cast.
Collins also won the Davey O'Brien Award as the outstanding quarterback.


Two Piers in the Making


Arafats Expecting First Child
Yasir Arafat, father of the Palestinian cause to many, is going to become a biological father for the first time.
Mr.
Arafat's wife, Suha Tawil, told an interviewer for the Israeli radio's Arabic service today that she was pregnant and had given her husband the news on Wednesday night.
According to an aide, she has been pregnant for a month.


Turkey Sentences 8 Kurds
A Turkish court sentenced eight Kurdish legislators to up to 15 years in prison today but cleared them of treason charges that carried the death penalty.
The eight were accused of backing the banned Kurdistan Workers Party, which is waging a guerrilla war to establish a separate state in southeast Turkey.
The trial, which began in August, has been condemned by human-rights groups.


Cabdrivers Who Discriminate Should Have to Pay Damages
To the Editor:
Your Dec. 4 news article reports that former Mayor David N. Dinkins was refused service on Park Avenue by a New York City medallion cabdriver, who then proceeded to pick up a white passenger just down the street.
"This is not a new thing," Mr.
Dinkins said.
"It happens all too frequently in our town." This raised a bit of history with me.


Friends at Home on Mean Streets of Providence
On Federal Hill, a section of Providence, R.I., that is like a Little Italy inside a Little Italy, a lot of conversations start like this: "Not for nothing, but . . ." It's an opener that acts like a tiny hit upside the head.
Nicky, the good-looking young hero, says it when he's frustrated by his hot-headed best friend, Ralph.
"Not for nothing, Ralphie, but . . ." why did you bash in the windshield of a college boy's Jeep with a tire iron while speeding on the highway?
The wife of one of Nicky's mob-connected friends uses it, too.
When she runs into a Brown University student who is treating Nicky as if he were a sex toy, the friend's wife butts in.
"Wendy," she says, "not for nothing, but I know how much you mean to him."
The story of five punk Italian-American friends, "Federal Hill" is "Mean Streets" in Providence.
Sometimes it seems that every director who comes along has to make a version of Martin Scorsese's 1973 classic.
It's a way of saying, "Not for nothing, but I know how to make a movie."


Gingrich, Now a Round Peg, Seeks to Smooth the Edges
Representative Newt Gingrich said today that he was still struggling to get the barbed side of his personality under control so he could behave in a way that he felt was more appropriate to his new role as House Speaker.
"Either I have to close down that part of my personality or I've got to learn to be more careful, more specific, about what I say," Mr.
Gingrich said at a breakfast with reporters.


Frier Sits Up for First Time Since Crash
Seattle Seahawks defensive tackle MIKE FRIER, paralyzed in a car crash in which two teammates also were hurt last week, sat up for the first time since surgery.


After a Child's Death, Enter Guilt and a Ghost
Nothing is as heartbreaking as the death of a beloved child, and it is not difficult to see what attracted Marlo Thomas to "Points of Light," Linda Gray Sexton's novel about a mother dealing with the death of a 5-year-old son who dies suddenly.
There are primal emotions loose here.
But "Reunion," Sunday's television adaptation starring Ms.
Thomas and directed by Lee Grant, can't seem to gather them into cohesive focus.
The Yates family lives on a New England farm.
Jessie (Ms. Thomas), an amateur painter, dearly loves her husband, Sam (Peter Strauss), and their three children, Anna (Leelee Sobieski) and the younger twins, Jamie (Matthew Kelly) and Meggie (Courtney Chase).
Living with them is Sam's American Gothic mother, Tobie (Frances Sternhagen).
They work hard to keep the farm going, but a warm sense of family dominates everything else.


Restaurants
A good friend of mine has lived on Duane Street for 20 years and she says Bouley ruined the neighborhood.
"It brought limousines!" she says with disgust.
"And then the next thing we knew we had Bob Row."
Bob Row, for the uninitiated, is what locals call the block anchored by TriBeCa Grill on Greenwich Street and Nobu on Hudson; both restaurants are owned by Robert De Niro.
And both, according to my friend, are too expensive for most of the artists who live in the area.
"But then they all are," she says, pointing to the nearby Chanterelle.
She worries that her neighborhood is being taken over by restaurants for rich people, and she considers the new Spartina the sole ray of hope.
"At last," she says, "a real neighborhood restaurant. The food is affordable and they always have something I want to eat."


British Firm Sees Need for Strength in U.S.
S.
G.
Warburg, the leading British investment house, looked like a winner when the German Government named it late last month to handle the British end of one of the biggest transactions in the securities business, the privatization of Deutsche Telekom, the state-owned telephone company.
But for Warburg, which has played an important role in telephone-company privatizations in Britain, Japan and Portugal and had lobbied aggressively for a big role in the Deutsche Telekom sale, it was in some ways a telling defeat to be limited to selling shares in Britain.


Antonio Carlos Jobim, Composer, Dies at 67
Antonio Carlos Jobim, the Brazilian composer, songwriter and musician whose hits "The Girl From Ipanema" and "Desafinado" touched off the bossa-nova craze of the 1960's and inspired many American jazz artists, died yesterday at Mount Sinai Medical Center in Manhattan.
He was 67.
The cause was heart failure, said Leeza Peltz, a hospital spokeswoman.


Corrections
Because of a production error, the continuation of a front-page article yesterday about adoptions in Russia omitted a passage in some copies.
The affected section should have read:
"The local authorities said that because they had technically withdrawn their bid, they would have to start anew. And, until a new law is put in place, the regional administration in Vladimir said no new adoptions would go forward. Mrs. Baslovyak, who tirelessly lobbied local bureaucrats to allow Alyona to be an exception, said today that she felt more optimistic."


AT THE MET WITH: Hans Haacke; Peering at a Wide World Beyond Works on a Wall
HANS HAACKE first achieved a measure of fame in 1971 when he did not have a show at the Guggenheim Museum.
One had been planned.
Then the museum's director, Thomas Messer, discovered that Mr.
Haacke wanted the show to include documentation of the real-estate holdings of New York City slumlords.
The Guggenheim wasn't the place for "active engagement toward social and political ends," Mr.
Messer proclaimed.
He canceled the exhibition, and its curator, Edward Fry, was dismissed.
Seen today in the lobby of the Metropolitan Museum of Art, Mr.
Haacke doesn't look fearsome.
He's friendly, if a little cautious.
He has only one stipulation about touring the museum: no photographs of him.
"I don't want to push myself as a person into the foreground," he says.
"The foreground should be my work. And also the image can be a fetish, a fetishization of the artist, which I don't want." For the record, the 58-year-old German-born Mr.
Haacke is balding, bearded and of medium height, and on this day he is dressed casually in a black leather jacket.


Test of Rights for Municipal Bankers
The Securities and Exchange Commission's efforts to ban political contributions by municipal finance bankers go on trial here on Friday.
On one side of the case, which will be heard in Federal court, is the First Amendment's guarantee of the right to express political views and, by inference, the right to back them with campaign contributions.
On the other side is the fear that those contributions are being doled out to get lucrative municipal bond underwriting business.


Dow Plunges 49.79 Points, To 3,685.73
The stock market, after three sessions of shrugging off news about Orange County's bankruptcy and the prospect of another interest-rate increase by the Federal Reserve, dropped sharply yesterday in unusually heavy trading, in part because of resurgent fears of a recession, some analysts said.
Other analysts attributed the fall to more technical factors, such as traders buying and selling stocks in their portfolios in advance of the expiration of quarterly options and the end of the year, when quarterly profits and losses are recognized.


Another Briton To Command U.N. in Bosnia
Maj.
Gen.
Rupert Smith, a Briton who formed close ties with the United States armed forces during the Persian Gulf war, will replace his countryman, Lieut.
Gen.
Sir Michael Rose, as the commander of United Nations forces in Bosnia next month, American and United Nations officials said today.
"We have been told that General Smith's appointment is now definite," a senior American official said.
"You need a steady guy who is a military diplomat in that job, and he seems to fit the bill."


Mexican State Gets 2 Chiefs: One Official, One Itinerant
The officially elected Governor of Chiapas was sworn in today, defying rebel threats to resume their uprising if he took office.
The inauguration was free of violence, but it did nothing to ease political tensions.
The calm that prevailed in Tuxtla Gutierrez, 430 miles southwest of Mexico City, also marked the first political victory of President Ernesto Zedillo Ponce de Leon.
Mr.
Zedillo, who took office a week ago, had insisted that Eduardo Robledo Rincon, the candidate of the ruling Insitutional Revolutionary Party, be inaugurated despite threats from rebel leaders in Chiapas that such an action would be interpreted as breaking an 11-month-old cease-fire.


Judge Blocks China Engines
A Federal judge has ruled that a shipment of diesel engines from China, held in a San Diego warehouse since they were seized by customs officials in 1992, were made with prison labor and should be blocked from entry.
The decision, lawyers in the case said, was the first in a United States court involving prison labor in China.


Two Benchings, A Boycott and A Bad Beating
He stood outside the locker room, wearing a haggard look.
One of his former starters had twice come to practice with his shoelaces untied; another did not bother to show up on Wednesday, instead boycotting practice over his lack of playing time.
If Butch Beard was looking for relief tonight, the Phoenix Suns provided none.
They routed the Nets, 133-106, at Byrne Meadowlands Arena, leaving Beard with little patience.
After the debacle, his drawn face was a vivid picture of a frustrated coach.


High Broadway Costs Aren't Musicians' Fault
To the Editor:
Re "Panic on Broadway" by Frank Rich (column, Dec. 4): Claiming that the "single heftiest factor" causing Broadway ticket prices to soar is "contracts that require backstage workers who do little work and musicians who do none" is patently absurd and factually incorrect.


Officer Kills 2 Men After Shootout in Queens
A police detective shot and killed two men in Jamaica, Queens, on Wednesday night when he saw one of them reach under a car seat, apparently for a gun, the police said.
The shooting followed a two-and-a-half block car chase that began when the men fired at the detective and another plainclothes officer, the police said.
No gun was found in the car, but the police said witnesses told them that another man in the car may have fled with a gun.


A Carjacking Trial Twist: Defendant Identifies 'Killer'
In the closing moments of his roller-coaster trial, Edward L. Summers identified a Bronx barber and convicted drug dealer named Deno Lloyd as the carjacker who fatally shot a Rockland County teen-ager last January, even though last week Mr.
Summers had told his own lawyers that Mr.
Lloyd was not the culprit.
The turn of events again reminded lawyers and spectators of something out of a Perry Mason mystery because last week Mr.
Lloyd had willingly appeared as a witness on Mr.
Summers's behalf and was even driven to the courthouse by one of Mr.
Summers's lawyers, Pamela D. Hayes.
The point the defense was trying to make then was that there were many drug-dealing "Dinos" in the Bronx who could be the man Mr.
Summers said was the true killer but that the prosecution had not bothered searching for them.


The Stain Spreads in Italy
The abrupt resignation of a Milan magistrate who has spearheaded the investigation into corrupt ties between business and politics will deepen Italy's political crisis.
The magistrate, Antonio Di Pietro, had been pressured by leading politicians and businessmen, most notably Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi, to limit his inquiries.
Other magistrates quickly asserted that the investigation would proceed.
Unless it does, Italians' already low faith in their political institutions is sure to take another tumble.


A Suburban Boy With Cosmic Aspirations
Whatever happened to Hanif Kureishi?
His reputation took a quick route downward after the late 1980's, when his screenplays for "My Beautiful Laundrette" and "Sammy and Rosie Get Laid," both directed by Stephen Frears, established him as one of the freshest, smartest voices to come out of England in a while.
In 1990 Mr.
Kureishi published a curiously mild satirical novel, "The Buddha of Suburbia," and the next year he wrote and directed a film, "London Kills Me," which turned out to be the kind of critical and commercial disaster that can kill a career.
And here, belatedly, is the four-hour 1992 BBC mini-series adapted from "The Buddha of Suburbia." Written by Mr.
Kureishi and directed by Roger Michell, who wrote the screenplay with him, it is more than enough to restore your faith in Mr.
Kureishi and his humane yet acerbic vision.


Wesley Snipes on the Trail of Criminal Sky Divers
The most spectacular sequence in John Badham's deftly paced action-adventure film "Drop Zone" applies the esthestics of water ballet to a sky diving exhibition over Washington.
In a night sky bursting with fireworks, a team of sky divers wearing illuminated uniforms arranges itself in glowing geometric patterns while plummeting earthward.
Simultaneously, the movie's villains, a posse of sky diving criminals, is parachuting into the headquarters of the Drug Enforcement Agency.
Their mission is to obtain computer information, including identification snapshots of a worldwide network of undercover drug agents, to sell to the leaders of an international drug cartel.
The only man who can stop them is Pete Nessip (Wesley Snipes), a United States marshal who has overcome his fear of heights to pursue the gang in one aerial chase after another.


Single Welfare Fathers
To the Editor:
There has been a lot of talk recently about proposed welfare reforms that target single mothers under 21.
But there has been little or no mention of the fathers of these children, or of their responsibility.
We need to keep this in mind before it becomes an assumption that these mothers are the sole cause of illegitimate births.
KELLY FLYNN  Urbana, Ill., Dec. 1, 1994 NO MORE


Mixed Images That Show The Mutability of Time
Ambiguity and the mutability of time and space are the widely divergent themes explored by the work in "New Photography 10," now at the Museum of Modern Art.
The annual "New Photography" series provides an important showcase for contemporary artists and images; the current entry includes works by Shimon Attie, Abelardo Morell, Jorge Ribalta and Michal Rovner, and was organized by Sheryl Conkelton, the museum's associate curator of photography.
Easily the most compelling works are the color photographs by Mr.
Attie, an American who lives in Berlin.
He projected black-and-white shots of Berlin's Jewish quarter taken in the 1920's and 30's onto the same scenes today, working at night; he then photographed the results in color, creating sad, eerie collages of time that seem to come from the depths of dreams.


Serbs Release 55 Canadians But Renew Attack on Enclave
The Bosnian Serbs released 55 Canadian soldiers today among the 300 United Nations troops they have detained for more than two weeks.
But the Serbs also pressed their attack on the Muslim enclave of Bihac, firing a surface-to-air missile into the area.
The release of the Canadians in an area northwest of Sarajevo came as the United States signaled its readiness to take part in a huge NATO operation to assist in a possible withdrawal of all 23,000 United Nations troops in Bosnia.
Although such a withdrawal is not regarded as imminent, preparations for one increase the pressure on the warring parties to make peace.


Willingham Is Said to Be Stanford Choice
The running back coach for the Minnesota Vikings, TYRONE WILLINGHAM, will be named Stanford's head football coach today, The San Francisco Examiner reported yesterday.
Leland refused to confirm or deny the report.
Willingham, 40, would replace BILL WALSH, who resigned last week. (AP)


A Family Laughing Until It's Crying
THE title of Donald Margulies's play "What's Wrong With This Picture?" asks a loaded question.
The temptation is to respond in kind: What's right about it?
In its initial stretches, the work, which opened last night at the Brooks Atkinson Theater, presents itself as a Jewish family sitcom, all bright colors and broad swipes.
It then veers off into loopy fantasy for a while.
By the time the evening is over, it has sobered up considerably and the issues on the coffee table are guilt and mourning.


Mostly Mozart And Its Players Reach Accord
Lincoln Center for the Performing Arts and a committee of musicians from the Mostly Mozart Festival Orchestra agreed on a three-year contract on Wednesday evening.
The contract lays to rest the musicians' fears that Lincoln Center planned to kill Mostly Mozart, although the festival has been reduced to four weeks from seven.
The contract must still be ratified by the orchestra.
The contract gives the musicians increased wages, benefits and seniority pay, as well as health and pension benefits.
Neither the union nor Lincoln Center would discuss the details of the increases, but under the last contract the musicians' minimum weekly pay was $1,165 for a total of nine rehearsals and concerts per week.
The contract also provides for the orchestra to continue post-season concerts in Tokyo and for special concerts during the year.


Market Place; An S.E.C. Warning to Funds On Inside Information Rules
The Securities and Exchange Commission sent a strong message to the mutual fund industry yesterday that fund executives who are active in the affairs of public companies must set up special procedures to prevent the improper use of inside information.
The commission emphatically made its point by bringing a disciplinary action against firms run by the fund manager Mario Gabelli.
The case is the clearest expression so far of how the S.E.C. expects mutual fund managers who play an active role in corporate affairs to cope with a task that is a fact of life for traditional Wall Street firms: the maintenance of what are known as Chinese walls, or internal rules, to prevent the firms from profiting on confidential inside information.


On Eve of Miami Summit Talks, U.S. Comes Under Fire
As they began arriving here today for a huge summit meeting, President Clinton and other Latin American leaders were no doubt relieved that negotiators had resolved a series of sharp disagreements over how quickly to establish a vast liberalized trade zone in the Western Hemisphere.
But despite general agreement about the desirability of lowering barriers to trade, which is to be the centerpiece of the first Western Hemisphere summit meeting since 1967, there were plenty of signs already that Latin American officials remain skeptical of United States intentions on trade.


Fred Lebow's Legacy
To the Editor:
It is impossible to thank each individual for the many hundreds, perhaps thousands of letters and cards of condolence on our beloved brother Fred Lebow's passing.
We read them all and were truly touched.


U.S. Guidelines for Back Pain Reject Some Common Notions
Most people suffering from attacks of lower back pain should seek relief through light exercise and mild pain relievers like aspirin instead of traditional treatments like bed rest, prescription painkillers and surgery, a Federal health panel recommended today.
The new guidelines for treating acute lower back pain, a condition expected to strike 80 percent of Americans at least once by the age of 50, depart from tradition by emphasizing simple therapies and the tendency of the discomfort to go away by itself within a month in 90 percent of cases, experts said.


China Bans 6 More Athletes for Steroids
China has banned six more swimmers from competition for two years after being notified that they tested positive for steroids at the Asian Games in October, officials said yesterday.
YANG CHIAWEN, a deputy secretary of the Chinese Swimming Federation, said it was notified in early December by the Olympic Council of Asia that the swimmers had tested positive for drugs at the games in Hiroshima, Japan.
"We have imposed on them a two-year ban from competition," he said.


Council Bid to Chide Jeffries for Remarks Leads to Argument
A City Council proposal to condemn remarks about Jews made by Prof.
Leonard Jeffries of City College sent the Council into a heated debate yesterday and left several black and Jewish councilmembers raising accusations of racism.
The tempest erupted after Councilman Noach Dear, an Orthodox Jew from Brooklyn, requested a Council vote on a resolution reprimanding Dr.
Jeffries for a speech delivered in Newark and being sold on videotape, which compared Jews to "skunks" and said they had "stunk up everything." Dr.
Jeffries, who is black, has often been criticized for remarks that many people see as anti-Semitic.


Art in Review
Andrew Bush
Julie Saul Gallery
560 Broadway (at Prince Street)
SoHo
Through Jan. 7


Dancing, Singing, Twirling and Swirling With the Go-Go's
Usually, rock fans mosh to anything with a beat.
But at the Academy on Wednesday night, the Go-Go's had the audience pogoing, hopping up and down the way fans did when punk-rock was new.
Belinda Carlisle, the band's lead singer, kicked off her spike heels -- sending them soaring over the head of the guitarist Jane Weidlin -- to dance and twirl around the stage.
The Go-Go's are touring to promote the release of the retrospective, "Return to the Valley of the Go-Go's" (I.R.S.), and much of their set came from their debut album, "Beauty and the Beat," which appeared in 1981.
At the time, punk-rock had found a friendlier, more commercial face as new wave rock, and the Go-Go's became new wave's all-female hitmakers.
They had bright, tuneful songs with roots in California surf-rock and folk-rock, and they smiled through lyrics that talked about lust, heartache and living in the teen-age moment, a chance to "Get dressed up and messed up/ Blow our cares away."


Quake Found To Have Left Hidden Danger
Hundreds of buildings in the West Los Angeles neighborhood and the San Fernando Valley suffered hidden structural damage in the Jan. 17 Northridge earthquake, says one of the nation's leading earthquake experts, and are likely to collapse if another large earthquake occurs in their vicinity.
"It is a serious problem that we've known about for at least six months," the expert, Dr.
Thomas Heaton, a seismologist at the United States Geological Survey office in Pasadena, Calif., said in a telephone interview yesterday.
"But very little has been done about it."


Choosing the Soft Life Over the Good Life
Danny Manning couldn't imagine spending the rest of his professional basketball life in a beat-up joint known as the Los Angeles Sports Arena.
The typically half-empty Omni in Atlanta was better, but not good enough.
Manning liked the idea of a very good team and one of those sparkling new, sold-out luxury-box palaces.
He set his sights on America West Arena in Phoenix.
He took the time to study the calculus-like salary cap that governs the National Basketball Association, then devised his game plan, sobered by the reality that he could have security or freedom of choice, but, for now, he couldn't have both.
He accepted that, and made his choice.


INSIDE
Morgan Stanley in Talks
Morgan Stanley is seeking to buy S. G. Warburg &amp; Company, Britain's largest investment bank.
The result would be the world's largest money manager for institutions.
Page D1. 7 1/2 Rms, Riv Vu
Governor Cuomo, the quintessential son of Queens, has placed a bid on a co-op, in Manhattan.
Extras: oak floors, gold fixtures and a view of his home borough.
Page B3.
Strawberry Is Indicted
Darryl Strawberry, the former Mets outfielder, was indicted by a Federal grand jury on charges of income tax evasion and conspiracy.
Page B9.


After 2,055 Yards, Salaam Among Best
There are no cares allowed here.
They are to be left outside the gate at Disney World where imaginations can run free and any dream seems within reach.
As Rashaan Salaam lives a football fantasy, receiving the kind of adulation reserved for the greats of the game, the tailback from the University of Colorado violated the rule.
Salaam held a small disposable camera to record his visit for the Home Depot College Football Awards Show here and a trip to New York for the announcement of the Heisman Trophy award on Saturday evening.
As he talked about some of the new friends he had made, Penn State running back Ki-Jana Carter and Miami defensive lineman Warren Sapp, Salaam temporarily stopped the conversation to look at his watch.


Art in Review
Cheri Samba
Annina Nosei
100 Prince Street
SoHo
Through Wednesday


TRANSACTIONS
Basketball  National Basketball Association
GOLDEN STATE WARRIORS -- Named Andy Dolich president and chief operating officer, effective Jan. 4.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-15  U.S.
WOULD AID U.N.
PULLOUT  President Clinton has decided to send as many as 25,000 American troops to Bosnia to assist in the withdrawal of U.N. peacekeepers if such a pullout is ordered, senior officials said.
A1  55 PEACEKEEPERS RELEASED  The Bosnian Serbs released 55 Canadian peacekeepers but stepped up an attack on the Muslim enclave of Bihac.
More than 250 U.N. soldiers are still held by the Serbs.
A12


Neighbors Anyone Would Want, And Most Wanted by F.B.I., Too
The man who called himself Greg Peters and the woman known as Jo Elliott went to some of their friends and neighbors a week ago, people they knew from cookouts, favors done and repaid, Halloween trick-or-treating with their children, and said there was something they had to tell them.
They were on the F.B.I.'s "10 Most Wanted List."
In reality, they were Claude Daniel Marks, 45, and Donna Jean Willmott, 44, who lived near each other in the Squirrel Hill neighborhood.
They had been in hiding for nine years from Federal charges that they were part of a plot to blow up the maximum security prison in Leavenworth, Kan., land a helicopter in the confusion and spring a leader of a Puerto Rican nationalist group known as the F.A.L.N.


Last Chance
Here is a sampling of shows and exhibitions in New York City that are to close soon: Closing This Weekend  "ALBERTO GIACOMETTI," Acquavella Gallery, 18 East 79th Street, Manhattan.
Through tomorrow.
Hours: 10 A.M. to 5 P.M.
Admission: $5; $2 for students and the elderly.
The proceeds are to benefit the Association in Manhattan for Autistic Children.
Information: (212) 734-6300.


Grand Jury Won't File Charges Against Police in S.I. Man's Death
After seven months of creeping deliberations that critics called intentionally slow, a grand jury refused to file criminal charges yesterday against three police officers in the death of Ernest Sayon, a small-time drug dealer who suffocated in handcuffs last spring, touching off a week of angry protests and a summer of simmering discontent in a black neighborhood on Staten Island.
The Staten Island District Attorney, William L. Murphy, announced that the panel had returned no charges against Officers Donald Brown and Gregg Gerson or Sgt.
John Mahoney, who had chased, subdued and arrested the 22-year-old suspect during a drug sweep in the Clifton area on the night of April 29.


Corrections
An article yesterday about a journalism ethics class to be taught by the psychoanalyst Jeffrey M. Masson at the University of California at Berkeley referred incorrectly in some editions to a former reporter for The Washington Post who fabricated an article, and who was cited in a Berkeley student editorial on the Masson issue.
She is Janet Cooke, not Cook.


Treasury Notes and Bills Decline
Prices of Treasury notes and bills fell yesterday on continued concerns over the impact of the bankruptcy of Orange County, Calif.
The market is concerned that some Wall Street firms may sell the government securities they hold as collateral for their loans to Orange County.


Giants' Special Teams Have Matured Along With the Coach
He maybe took more heat last season than any other Giants coach.
There were questions on whether Joe DeCamillis, the special teams coach, was qualified for the job.
Before coming to the Giants last season, DeCamillis was the Denver Broncos' defensive quality control coach and assistant to the special teams coach.
Was that enough experience for him to be in charge of one of the most important units in football?


Read the Fine Print, Yankee Fans
Stupid baseball trick, anyone?
The strike must have deep-fried the marketing brain trust at Yankee Stadium.
What else could be responsible for a new commercial on the MSG Network that includes the line, "What's more, it's free!" and flashing letters proclaiming, "IT'S FREE"?
What does a strike-bound team in an embarrassed sport offer as a gift to its beleaguered but loyal fans?
Could the Yankees match the $40 pictorial team history book that the Mets sent its season ticket-holders, gratis?
Whatever could it be?
A free season of MSG service?
An autographed Joe DiMaggio Yankee toenail clipper?
Sparky Lyle's mustache hair?
No, sir.
It's a ticket brochure!


Ulster Peace: A New Snag
As negotiators for the British Government and representatives of the I.R.A. prepare for their first official meeting on Friday in Belfast, a hard truth has become evident: Progress toward peace in Northern Ireland has bogged down.
The stalling did not happen, as many had feared, because trigger-happy Catholic or Protestant gunmen broke the cease-fire.
Instead it came about because the two governments behind the process, London and Dublin, are caught up in simultaneous political crises.


CHRONICLE
DONALD GRATZ is a metal fabricator who worked with PHILIP JOHNSON when he designed the Four Seasons restaurant.
So when his wife, ROBERTA BRANDES GRATZ, decided to give him a party on Tuesday, she booked two rooms off the Grill Room.
That gave the 65 guests -- among them Maya Lin, the designer of the Vietnam Veterans Memorial; Laurie Beckelman, the former chairwoman of the Landmarks Preservation Commission, and James Stewart Polshek, the architect -- another chance to admire his tables, chairs and serving carts.
The occasion was billed as "100 Years of Donald Gratz," but, no, Mr.
Gratz is not 100.
He turned 60 on Wednesday, and the remaining 40 years signify his career with his family's company, Treitel-Gratz.


Children Killed in Blaze Are Buried


For Children
'Gran Fiesta Guadalupana'
All Saints Roman Catholic Church
115 Throop Avenue
Williamsburg, Brooklyn
(718) 388-1951
Recommended for all ages
Tomorrow
Children are as important as the image of the Virgin of Guadalupe in the annual procession honoring this Mexican saint's feast day.
The Virgin is said to have appeared in 1531 before an Indian boy, Juan Diego, at a site north of Mexico City where she wanted to have a church built.
After the Virgin miraculously reappeared and made roses bloom in December, a bishop was persuaded to honor her request.


Pataki Tries Bracing State For Bad News On Spending
In a swing through three upstate cities that was reminiscent of his campaign, Governor-elect George E. Pataki today began the public relations spadework for what will surely be his most arduous legislative battle next year: winning passage of a budget that he is already warning could hurt a broad array of New Yorkers.
Facing a projected deficit of $5 billion, Mr.
Pataki, who takes office Jan. 1, strenuously appealed to two of his strongest constituencies, business leaders and upstate voters, to help him win legislative support for cutting taxes, trimming spending and shrinking government.


As Ex-Chief Awaits Fate, More Brazilians Face Impeachment
Two years after Fernando Collor de Mello resigned the presidency in disgrace, friends and foes in Brazil's largest political scandal are falling victim to what reporters here call the "impeachment curse."
Thinner, grimmer and a virtual recluse in his lakeside mansion, the 45-year-old former President waited today in Brasilia as Supreme Federal Court justices prepared to deliver a verdict on Friday in his first corruption trial.


Robinson Lake Plans Acquisition
Two public relations agencies yesterday announced an acquisition and a revamping.
Robinson Lake Sawyer Miller in Washington said it would acquire the Strategic Alliances Group, which owns three consulting companies that specialize in public policy issues: ABRH Consulting in Washington, American Petition Consultants in Sacramento, Calif., and the Haney Group in Madison, Wis.
The terms were not disclosed.
Milton R. Benjamin, 52, managing partner at Strategic Alliances, was named a partner at Robinson Lake.


The Spoken Word
"L'AMOUR FRANCAIS," Symphony Space, 2537 Broadway, at 95th Street.
"Contingent Loves," a dramatization of the wartime correspondence of Jean-Paul Sartre and Simone de Beauvoir, today at 8 P.M.
"Il Pleure dans Mon Coeur," French love poems by Baudelaire, Blaise Cendrars and others, set to music by Gabriel Faure, tomorrow at 8 P.M.
Tickets: $16; members $12.
Information: (212) 8641414.
ROSEMARY HARRIS, Fifth Avenue Presbyterian Church, at 55th Street.
Today at 1 P.M.
The actress and other members of the cast of the revival of J. B. Priestley's play "An Inspector Calls" recite selections from their favorite poetry and drama.
Sponsored by the International Project to Promote Peace and Unity Through the Arts, Literacy and Cultural Democracy.
Free.
Information: (212) 247-0490.


An Expert Simpson Witness Who Can Give Prosecutors Sleepless Nights
In a world of experts for hire, in which well-heeled litigants can usually buy the testimony they wish, few witnesses are sufficiently clean and eminent enough to make or break a case.
But nearly everyone agrees that when Robert L. Shapiro announced last June that Dr.
Henry C. Lee had signed on with O. J. Simpson's legal team, the defense had scored a major coup.
"If I were Marcia Clark, and I had heard that Henry Lee was coming on, I would not have slept that night," said Hugh Keefe, a prominent defense lawyer in New Haven.
"He's not the kind of adversary you'd want in any case."


Art in Review
Roy Lichtenstein
Nudes
Leo Castelli Gallery
420 West Broadway (near Spring Street)
SoHo
Through Dec. 17


U.S. and Ukraine Cooperate To Destroy Nuclear Arsenal
In the heart of one of the former Soviet Union's largest missile factories, rocket scientists who once built nuclear weapons aimed at the United States are destroying them with the help of Americans.
In the main building, a dilapidated brick structure where the portraits of pioneering Soviet space scientists hang like solemn deities, American defense contractors are working alongside Ukrainian engineers to build a new plant that will vaporize the last drops of fuel from SS-19 missiles.


Faulk Hospitalized With Respiratory Virus
The rookie running back MARSHALL FAULK was hospitalized with an upper respiratory virus yesterday in what the Indianapolis Colts said was a precautionary measure for Sunday's game with New England.
"It's just that the team felt he could get the best care in the hospital," said a club spokesman, CRAIG KELLEY.


Ailey Troupe Opens In Trademark Fashion
The Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater, whose new season runs through Jan. 1, never fails to make its opening-night gala a special celebration.
Other benefit audiences will offer a round of applause, polite or otherwise, but Ailey viewers, always made to feel part of a family, cheer the dancers on more than loudly.
The company's opening on Wednesday night at City Center (131 West 55th Street, Manhattan) was no exception and there was even a rousing revival devoted to the idea of celebration: "Carmina Burana" in John Butler's choreographed version of Carl Orff's familiar choral paean to earthly delights.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
Morgan Stanley is in talks to buy S. G. Warburg.
A combination would be the world's seventh-largest money manager.  [ Page D1. ]


House G.O.P. Would Replace Scores of Programs for the Poor
House Republican leaders are preparing plans to abolish more than a hundred social programs and replace them with grants to state governments, which would then have a virtual free hand in redesigning aid to the poor, although with substantially less money than the current programs provide.
The move would sweep away more than $60 billion in Federal programs that provide cash, food, job training, child care, foster care and other services.
The amount spent by the Government in each category would be reduced, perhaps by as much as 20 percent, and the money would be handed over to the states with a few broad guidelines.


Another Day in Battle Of the Blazing Faxes
Day 69 of the National Hockey League lockout passed without further negotiations, but the two sides kept busy by firing up their fax machines for another bout of battling memos.
Bob Goodenow, the executive director of the N.H.L.
Players Association, sent a letter to Commissioner Gary Bettman yesterday, reiterating the union's opposition to a payroll tax of any kind and its belief that sufficient concessions had been made on other issues to make the tax unnecessary.


Corrections
An article yesterday about the passage of an anti-smoking bill by a New York City Council committee misstated the rule on which restaurants would have to ban smoking in their dining areas.
It is restaurants seating 35 or more people -- not 35 or fewer.


At White House Behest, Postal Service Scraps A-Bomb Stamp
Bowing to pressure from the White House, the Postal Service today scrapped a stamp picturing a mushroom cloud with which it had planned to commemorate the 50th anniversary of the end of World War II.
Instead, it will adopt a design showing President Harry S. Truman preparing to announce the war's end.
The original design and its caption, "Atomic bombs hasten war's end," had drawn protests from the Japanese Government, and even the American pilot of the plane that dropped the bomb on Nagasaki had called the artwork "too heavy-handed."


Johannesburg Journal; Corporate Foe of Apartheid Finds Reward Elusive
After a decade of corporate homage to the anti-apartheid movement, Pepsi-Cola expected to enter South Africa in political and commmercial triumph -- the liberation soft drink.
Unlike its arch-competitor Coca-Cola, which kept its brand in the South African market during years of trade sanctions against white domination, Pepsi pulled out in 1985 and stayed away until this year, when the black majority won the right to elect its own Government.


This Match Play Event Has Open Enrollment
It is the game of choice at country clubs and municipal courses everywhere, from Dyker Beach to Pebble Beach, from St.
Andrews in Westchester County to the Old Course at St.
Andrews in Scotland.
It is match play, the most popular golf format in the world and one that is rarely played at the game's highest levels, especially in America.
Put aside the biennial Ryder Cup matches and the inaugural Presidents Cup that was played this year, and match play is all but invisible on television.
Until this week, that is.


Indiana Executes a Killer of 2
A robber convicted of murdering a Brink's guard and a police officer was executed in the electric chair early today as his son watched.
The condemned man, Gregory Resnover, 43, turned down a last meal and made no final statement.
He was pronounced dead at 12:13 A.M., after 2,300 volts of electricity were sent through his body for 10 seconds, followed by 500 volts for 20 seconds.


Examining Women's Studies Programs
PROFESSING FEMINISM  Cautionary Tales From Inside the Strange World of Women's Studies
By Daphne Patai and Noretta Koertge
235 pages. A New Republic Book/Basic Books. $24.
Toward the end of their chilling new book, Daphne Patai and Noretta Koertge draw some rather unflattering analogies between contemporary feminism (or at least feminism as they say it's being taught in many women's studies programs today) and religious cults, experimental communes and creationist science.


At U.N., Thoughts About Bosnia but No Action
Humiliated by defiant Bosnian Serbs who have snubbed the Secretary General and taken hundreds of United Nations peacekeepers hostage, the Security Council has met every day this week and talked about almost everything, at least officially, except Bosnia and Herzegovina.
There have been no formal requests for a debate on ending the mandate of the powerless peacekeeping and protection operation.
There have been no resolutions taking further punitive measures against the Serbs, nor any calls for renewed NATO action.
There have been no thundering denunciations from the Secretary General, Boutros Boutros-Ghali, nor any new ideas from the European countries that led the United Nations into a policy dead-end and took the Clinton Administration with them.


Democrat Seeks Outsider for Gingrich Inquiry
A leading House Democrat called for the appointment of an outside counsel today to investigate an ethics complaint against Representative Newt Gingrich, who is about to become House Speaker.
Representative David E. Bonior of Michigan said Mr.
Gingrich should also recuse himself from picking members of the ethics committee, which will hear the case.


South African Bonds Sell Briskly at 9.625%
In its first issue of bonds since the end of apartheid, South Africa yesterday sold 50 percent more of the bonds than it originally planned and at a more favorable interest rate than expected.
It was the first market test of the ability of the President Nelson Mandela's Government to raise funds overseas under an investment-grade credit rating won from a Wall Street rating agency in October.


Back to Mental Health, With Pictures
The drawings, stark and elegant, reflect the artist's calm demeanor: a blue vase holding a cluster of slim branches.
Two dancers with legs extended in graceful plies.
A bowl of fruit penciled delicately against a white background.
Raymond E. started sketching when he was 9, papering his bedroom walls with pictures of cartoon characters.
But by the time he was a teen-ager, severe emotional problems ended his hobby and cast a pall over the larger landscape of his life.
He spent 14 years in psychiatric hospitals, being treated for successive nervous breakdowns.


Poised for a Milestone


Kenny Kneitel; Graphic Designer, 52
Kenny Kneitel, a graphic designer who produced logos and signs for paperbacks, stores and restaurants, died on Nov. 30 at his home in the Chelsea section of Manhattan.
He was 52.
The cause was a heart attack, his family said.


Israelis Reaffirm Pact With P.L.O.
Ending a week of soul-searching and doubt, the Israeli Government reaffirmed today that it was committed to the peace agreement that it reached last year with the Palestine Liberation Organization.
But it also suggested that it would seek changes to protect Israeli settlers when Palestinian self-rule expands throughout the West Bank.
The decision by the Cabinet of Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin ended a crisis that had threatened to unravel the "declaration of principles" signed with fanfare and high hopes on the White House lawn in September 1993.


Plans to Trim Government Reach Deep Into Benefits
Leaders of a Federal panel studying the cost of Government benefit programs have suggested far-reaching changes, including an increase in the age at which people qualify for Social Security and Medicare, reductions in Social Security payments to affluent people and new limits on tax deductions for the wealthy.
These and other options are to be discussed at a meeting of the panel on Friday.
The panel, created by President Clinton in November 1993, is headed by Senators Bob Kerrey, Democrat of Nebraska, and John C. Danforth, Republican of Missouri.


COMPANY BRIEFS
CORESTATES FINANCIAL CORP., Philadelphia, a bank holding company, plans to close 20 offices in Pennsylvania next year after this month's $260 million acquisition of Germantown Savings Bank of Philadelphia.


Obesity Gene 'Flaw' Once Served Us Well
To the Editor:
I object to your headline "Researchers Link Obesity in Humans to Flaw in a Gene" (front page, Dec. 1), suggesting that any underlying genetic predisposition toward obesity is a "flaw."


Abroad at Home; Nobody's At Home
In the month since the election we have been waiting to see whether Bill Clinton could recover from the defeat and emerge a stronger person and President.
As of now, the answer looks to be no.
Weakness and vacuity are what we see in the Clinton Administration.
It moves from day to day, empty of vision, a Government without a design.
Mr.
Clinton himself seems more and more like Herman Melville's Bartleby the Scrivener, a dwindling, haunting presence in the White House.


METRO DIGEST
NEWARK GROUP'S FINANCES ARE EXAMINED
Almost every week now, another Newark official or agency receives a subpoena arising from a Federal investigation into municipal corruption.
But prosecutors are not only rooting around City Hall.
Some of their most valuable pieces of evidence may lie a few miles away, at the office of a private fund-raising group founded by Mayor Sharpe James.
A1.
NEW YORK CITY


If the Weather Stays Cold, Maybe the Jets Will Be Hot
The coach wore a heavy jacket and the ball boys covered their heads with green woolen Jets hats today.
"I'd like to see it cold and windy on Saturday," said General Manager Dick Steinberg, his hands safely warm in the pockets of his ubiquitous zippered jacket.


A Bonding of Different Cultures
A sleeper of the current art season is "Worlds Envisioned," a wise and beautiful exhibition at the Dia Center for the Arts in Chelsea.
It convincingly brings together the work of Alighiero e Boetti and Frederic Bruly Bouabre, two artists from vastly different milieus, and in the process shows how bizarre it is to insist, as some parties do, that multiculturalism and quality are mutually exclusive.
Mr.
Boetti, who died last year at 53, was a well-known if elusive player on the international art circuit, a charter member of the Italian art movement known as Arte Povera.
Also something of a maverick Conceptualist, he loved elaborate systems, accumulations of simple facts and bright colors.
Mr.
Boetti made, or had made, works in ballpoint pen, embroidery and weaving, which, among other things, colorfully map the world's nations, chart its longest rivers or simply depict a year's worth of magazine covers.


At the Bar; A Republican senator forces the Administration to rethink its strategy on judicial appointments.
Three senior Clinton Administration officials recently trudged up to Capitol Hill on short notice to confer with Orrin G. Hatch of Utah, soon to be the new chairman of the Senate Judiciary Committee.
It turned out to be something other than a simple courtesy call.
Senator Hatch was, by all accounts, his usual courtly self.
But he was unusually blunt in discussing the new political situation that will come with Republican control of the Senate.
He told the officials that he was now the principal gatekeeper on who gets to be a Federal judge.
And, he said, he would not hesitate to engage the Administration in combat on that issue.


Player Proposal to Seek Partnership
The emphasis in the new proposal the players will present to the owners on Saturday is on cooperation between the two sides, people familiar with the plan said today.
"We certainly can use that," one management official said.


A G.O.P. House Leader Presses Attack on Clinton Foreign Policy
The new chairman of the House Foreign Affairs Committee, Benjamin A. Gilman of New York, today criticized President Clinton's foreign policy virtually across the board.
Mr.
Gilman did so without the vitriol of his counterpart in the Senate, Jesse Helms, chairman of the Foreign Relations Committee, but his remarks still held little comfort for the Clinton Administration.


Portland Journal; Where Trust Rides a Yellow Bicycle
In New York City, it would be madness.
But here in Portland, where cars slow for pedestrians and trolley car fare is collected on the honor system, urban whimsy has become reality.
One hundred lemon-yellow bicycles have been scattered along downtown sidewalks by a local community group, free and available to anyone who needs one.
Dangling from the back seat of each single-speed two-wheeler is a license plate that reads: "Free community bike. Please return to a major street for others to reuse. Use at your own risk."


Another Day, Another 89 Miles to School
The stars were still looming large in the West Texas sky when 14-year-old Joee Barnes devoured her corn flakes and ran for the door, grabbing her book bag, a blanket and a pillow.
She was off in her father's car to catch the bus and head for school, 97 miles away.
The time was 5:20 A.M.
It was another day and another trip to Alpine High School for Joee, her older brother, Charley, and 22 other teen-agers from the Big Bend region along the Rio Grande, who travel the longest daily school bus route in the United States.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article yesterday about the debate over extending the New York City Schools Chancellor's contract referred incorrectly to Deputy Mayor Ninfa Segarra's opinion.
She says she is still considering the issue; she has not yet decided whether to support an extension.


Officers Not Charged In Death of S.I. Man
A grand jury declined to file criminal charges against three police officers in the death of Ernest Sayon, a small-time drug dealer who died of suffocation last spring while being held in handcuffs by the officers.
The death touched off a week of angry protests and a summer of simmering discontent in Mr.
Sayon's Staten Island neighborhood.
Article, page B1.


Shula to Undergo Achilles' Tendon Surgery
Miami Dolphins Coach DON SHULA will undergo outpatient surgery today to repair a ruptured right Achilles' tendon, but he expects to be on the sidelines for Monday night's game against Kansas City.
The operation will require Shula to miss a regular-season practice for the first time in his 25 years with the Dolphins.


Yanks' Lawn Joins Drug Unit
The Yankees lost an instrumental off-the-field player yesterday when John C. Lawn, their vice president, chief of operations and trouble-shooter, left the organization to become chairman and chief executive officer for the Century Council, a nonprofit, alcohol abuse organization in Los Angeles.
The 59-year-old Lawn worked for the Yankees for four and a half years after eight years with the Drug Enforcement Administration.
Lawn strongly opposed Fay Vincent, the former baseball commissioner, on behalf of Manager Buck Showalter and General Manager Gene Michael, who were threatened with suspension for testifying in defense of Steve Howe during his arbitration involving drug violations in 1992.


Light-Rail Line Construction May Start in New Jersey in '96
New Jersey transportation officials said today that they had completed mapping the proposed $1.2 billion Hudson-Bergen Waterfront Light Rail Line and could begin construction on the first phase in mid-1996.
The 20.5-mile route from West Fifth Street in Bayonne to the Vince Lombardi park-and-ride lot on the New Jersey Turnpike in Ridgefield could eventually carry 100,000 riders a day to jobs along the waterfront or link them with park-and-ride lots, PATH stations and ferries to New York.


Shaking Up France's Royal Family Tree
The year: 1572.
The place: The Louvre.
The aristocracy: Scheming and randy.
Patrice Chereau's highly excitable "Queen Margot" presents a slew of double-dealing French noblemen in a struggle for power, fueled by ambition, forbidden passions and religious strife.
At its center is a rare beauty who loves purely, suffers exquisitely and poses for many ravishing close-ups before this tale is over.
It's a big, splashy role for the regal Isabelle Adjani, the French Garbo.
Based on an especially convoluted novel by Dumas Pere that has been "unavailable to American readers for nearly a century" (according to a new paperback edition), this is a story involving dozens of potentially confusing historical figures.
It incorporates the St.
Bartholomew's Day Massacre, features several present or future kings, and culminates in both a poisoning and a beheading.
Be grateful there won't be a quiz when the film is over.


A Mayor's Money -- A special report.; U.S. Investigates Newark Group As a Possible Political Slush Fund
Almost every week now, another Newark official or agency receives a subpoena arising from a Federal investigation into municipal corruption.
But prosecutors are not only rooting around City Hall.
Some of their most valuable pieces of evidence may actually lie a few miles away, at the storefront office of a private fund-raising group founded by Mayor Sharpe James.
Since Mr.
James was first elected Mayor in 1986, between $3 million and $4 million has been deposited into the bank account of the group, the Sharpe James Civic Association, much of it raised from companies and people doing business with the city, senior law-enforcement officials said.


Art in Review
Juan Usle
John Good Gallery
532 Broadway, at Spring Street
SoHo
Through Dec. 17


Funds to Remove Big County's Notes
To reassure investors in their tax-exempt money market funds, two big mutual fund companies said yesterday that they would spend more than $10 million to remove from their funds notes sold by Orange County, Calif.
The two companies -- Franklin Resources and Putnam Investments -- will buy the notes of the financially troubled county themselves for their face value, avoiding the risk of losses in the funds.


300 Said to Die in Fire in China
About 300 people, most of them schoolchildren, died when fire engulfed a movie theater in Xinjiang Province, in northwest China, local officials said today.
About 800 people, including 500 schoolchildren, were in Friendship Hall Cinema in Karamay, an oil town near the border with the former Soviet Union, when the fire broke out on Thursday evening, a local education official said.


Keyes Martin Gets Rickel
Rickel Home Centers in South Plainfield, N.J., has selected Keyes Martin in Springfield, N.J., as the first agency to handle its combined account after the company's planned acquisition of the Channel chain of home improvement centers.
Billings were estimated at $12 million.


Leaders of 11 Orthodox Churches in America Plan Unity Move
Declaring themselves more American than immigrant, the leaders of 11 Orthodox Christian churches with six million members in North America have come together for the first time to establish an administratively united church with one voice on social, religious and political issues.
"We'd like the American public to know the Orthodox Church has come of age," Archbishop Iakovos, the leader of the Greek Orthodox Archdiocese of North and South America, said at a news conference yesterday at the Archdiocesan headquarters in Manhattan.
"The U.S. is not a foreign land. It is our land."


Cuomo's New Home?


Milton Singer, 82, Teacher and Author
Milton Singer, an anthropologist and expert on India, died on Monday at his home in Chicago.
He was 82.
The cause was a heart attack, said a spokesman at the University of Chicago, where Dr.
Singer had taught for 38 years.


Home Video
At a Suncoast Motion Picture store in Connecticut, the scene resembles that at video outlets everywhere.
From floor to ceiling are hundreds of videos for sale at prices as low as $5.99.
Suncoast, a national chain, only sells videos and doesn't rent them, but the situation points up a strong overall trend: customers are buying tapes of all kinds in large quantities and at prices that keep dropping.
Last year, consumers spent almost as much to buy videos as they did to rent them.
This fall, the biggest sales titles have been "Jurassic Park" and "Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs." Distributors say, however, that sales of both have slumped a bit and they may have peaked before Christmas.
Already talk has turned to the next two titles expected to sell in great numbers: "The Lion King," due in March, and "Forrest Gump," to be released in April.


Inside Art
Turnabout at Sotheby's
Sotheby's made an impressive score last week at its Manhattan auction of American paintings, drawings and sculpture.
For the first time since the mid-1980's, American art sales eclipsed the figures at earlier sales of Latin American and contemporary art.
The sale totaled $24.9 million, above the auction house's lower estimate of $21.5 million.
Last month, the big Latin American sale totaled $13.4 million, and the evening contemporary sale brought in $12.1 million.


Financial Monitor Warns Of Added Gap in Budget
A day after the City Council sued Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani over how to make just $100 million in spending cuts, a fiscal monitor announced yesterday that New York City faced an additional budget deficit of $500 million this year and even larger shortfalls in the years ahead.
The state's Financial Control Board, which by law oversees the city's finances, warned that even after the Mayor completes his plan to close a $1.1 billion gap that opened in this year's budget, the city would still have to find ways to close that potential $500 million deficit.
The board said the problem was so great that the Mayor would likely have to lay off workers this fiscal year to balance the budget.


Clippers Finally Cut the Comedy
They were supposed to go winless from here to eternity, or at least through New Year's Day, but the Los Angeles Clippers have a victory to report.
Their gain is the Milwaukee Bucks' embarrassment, but as their guard Pooh Richardson predicted earlier: "We'll win one by accident."
It turned out to be hit-and-run.
With the score tied and seconds remaining in overtime against the Bucks Wednesday night, Milwaukee's Eric Murdock swiped the ball from Richardson, only to knee it back where it came from.
Richardson wheeled, shot-putted a jump shot and drained it at the buzzer for a 96-94 victory.


A Mother Who Is Her Own Worst Enemy
"Ladybird, Ladybird" was shown as part of this year's New York Film Festival.
Following are excerpts from Janet Maslin's review, which appeared in The New York Times on Oct. 7.
The film opens today at Film Forum, 209 West Houston Street, South Village.
Ken Loach's "Ladybird, Ladybird" asks viewers to imagine what it is like for Maggie (Crissy Rock) to open a newspaper one day and see a photograph of a boy in need of adoptive parents.
"I've never had much love," says the caption.
"Can you give me some now?" The photograph is of Maggie's own son.


The Cuomos, Of Queens, Look West
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo, the quintessential son of Queens who regularly tapped the resentments of the boroughs outside of Manhattan, has placed a bid on a three-bedroom co-op on Sutton Place, just across the East River on Manhattan's East Side.
With less than three weeks until he must vacate the Executive Mansion in Albany, where he has lived for the last 12 years, Mr.
Cuomo and his wife, Matilda, have settled on a 2,400-square-foot apartment with seven and a half rooms, 24-carat gold on the bathroom fixtures, oak floors and mahogany closets, said the man who is selling it to them.
The owner, Charles H. Cunliffe, said that the Cuomos placed a bid about three weeks ago and that he expects to close the deal in the next few days.


An End, Maybe, to the Food Fight
There can be few New Yorkers who don't know what it is to eat a hot dog, gyros or falafel off a cart.
Food doesn't come much faster or cheaper -- reason enough for the city to make sure that its licensed vendors flourish.
Many of those vendors are immigrants intent on becoming entrepreneurs, just like the grandparents of some of their customers.
They are taxpayers, too, which means that apart from providing a welcome service, they are helping pay the city's bills.
Food peddlers can create congestion, however, which is why this mini-industry needs regulating.
The 1983 law that prohibited food vending on more than 100 streets was rarely enforced until Mayor Rudolph Giuliani pressed the police last spring to do so.
If the crackdown thrilled restaurant owners, it infuriated the vendors and every New Yorker accustomed to picking up a cheap, al fresco lunch.
Furthermore, though selling food from a cart may sound entrepreneurial, nearly half the permits had been gobbled up by companies.
One owner has 499 of the 2,811 permits now outstanding.


Obesity Gene 'Flaw' Once Served Us Well; To Stop Food Cravings
To the Editor:
Contrary to "The Obesity Gene" (editorial, Dec. 5), effective anti-obesity medications already exist.
Doctors are prescribing two medications, fenfluramine and phentermine, that, when given in tandem, not only stop the abnormal cravings for food but also for alcohol, cocaine and other addicting substances.


A Lady in a Car
Lydia Dover describes herself as a Bulgarian immigrant, an unpublished writer and the divorced mother of two grown sons.
So far, that doesn't sound like anything to get excited about.
But she is also, as she puts it, "a lady in a car" -- and that seemingly innocuous fact has some of the residents of Williamsburg Estates, N.J., very excited indeed.
"Terrified" is more like it.
Ms.
Dover likes Williamsburg Estates ("a very special place," she calls it), likes it so much that since late summer she has become as much a part of the landscape as its waist-high grasses and sweeping lawns.
Once she was seen washing her hair in a backyard brook, and dancing to a music only she could hear, but mostly she just stays in her car hour after hour, writing and sleeping and watching.
It is, perhaps, the watching that most upsets those who live along this subdivision's shaded, hilly streets.
Some parents say they will not let their children play outside if Ms.
Dover is around.


Spanish-Speaking Venture Formed
Siboney USA, an agency specializing in advertising aimed at Spanish-speaking consumers, said yesterday that it had agreed to a joint venture in Dallas with Publicis/Bloom to form Siboney-USA Publicis/Bloom Hispanic Marketing and Advertising.
Siboney USA will own a majority interest, but other terms of the agreement, which does not involve Siboney USA's Miami and New York offices, were not disclosed.
"Our new agency entity was formed to better serve our closely related client partners," said Tory Syvrud, president at Siboney USA in Dallas, referring to the agencies' shared client, Nestle USA.
Siboney USA, which has worked for Nestle for the last year, was recently awarded a new account, to create Spanish-language campaigns for Nestle in the United States.
Adweek estimated billings at $10 million to $20 million.


Morgan Stanley in Talks to Buy S.G. Warburg
The Morgan Stanley Group said yesterday that it was negotiating to buy S. G. Warburg &amp; Company, the largest investment bank in Britain.
The combined company would be the world's largest money manager for institutions and the seventh-largest money manager over all.
The combination would rival Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company as the world's leading adviser for mergers and challenge Merrill Lynch as the biggest global underwriter of stocks.


More Mexicans, More Profit
Like the rest of the state, Monterey County favored Proposition 187, which denies education and health services to undocumented workers and their families.
The clear message of the vote statewide, pundits say, is that we need to do something about illegal immigration.
But as seen from Salinas, the only thing clear is that political leaders like Gov.
Pete Wilson, who offered Proposition 187 as a solution, are hypocritical at worst and wrongheaded at best.
They actually send a different message, one that puts food on the table: "Hay trabajo en Salinas" -- there's work in Salinas.
Keep trekking across the border and up through the Central Valley; at the end of the journey, si, hay trabajo.


25,000 U.S. TROOPS TO AID U.N. FORCE IF IT QUITS BOSNIA
President Clinton has decided to send as many as 25,000 United States troops to Bosnia to assist in the withdrawal of United Nations peacekeeping forces there if a pullout is ordered, senior Administration officials said today.
Until this week, Mr.
Clinton had said he would send American forces to Bosnia only to enforce a peace agreement in the war-shattered country.
But with a settlement appearing ever more unlikely and with Western European governments saying the peacekeepers' withdrawal may now be inevitable, the officials said, the President believes that it is time to make clear that the United States would help in what would be an embarrassing retreat.


Jacob Kassin, 94, Chief Rabbi Of Brooklyn's Syrian Sephardim
Rabbi Jacob S. Kassin, Chief Rabbi of the Syrian Sephardic community in Brooklyn for more than six decades, died on Tuesday at Maimonides Medical Center in Brooklyn.
He was 94 and a resident of Brooklyn.
The cause of death was heart failure, his family said.


Usually Deadly Brain Tumor Responds to a New Treatment
An experimental cancer therapy for irradiating tissue deep inside the brain appears to have halted the growth of an inoperable brain tumor in a Long Island woman, raising hopes for the first practical treatment for a disease that usually kills victims within a year of diagnosis.
The treatment is boron-neutron-capture therapy, a two-step process that delivers radiation to cancer cells by putting an attractant near the cells that soaks up radiation much as a blotter soaks up ink.


Link Sought In Sicknesses At 2 Colleges
Hundreds of college students have fallen ill with nausea, diarrhea and vomiting at Dartmouth College and Harvard University, and Federal epidemiologists are trying to discover if there is any connection between the two outbreaks.
The first illnesses were reported last weekend at Dartmouth, in Hanover, N.H., when more than 100 students were afflicted.
It came at the worst possible time for many of them, during last weekend before final examinations.


Beleaguered Gay Group Chooses New Leader
Trying to emerge from a time of crisis, the National Gay and Lesbian Task Force has chosen as its executive director -- the fourth in two years -- a longtime political organizer who served most recently as a member of the San Francisco Health Commission.
The new executive director, Melinda Paras, 41, has already helped revise the operations of the task force, one of the oldest and most visible gay groups in the nation.
Rather than rely on a single "visionary-spokesperson" in Washington, the organization said, it will emphasize technical and strategic support for local activities like fighting anti-gay ballot initiatives.


Murder and Troubled Young Lives; Behind a Holdup, 3 Suspects Growing Up in Grim Housing
The Housing Authority maintenance workers labored hard this week to clean up the building at 252 Osborn Street in the Brownsville Houses in Brooklyn.
Hallways were disinfected, graffiti were painted over, broken doorways and garbage chutes were fixed.
The workers, who could not fully explain why they had been ordered there, said they thought reporters and television cameras might be coming, perhaps the Mayor.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.50
8.50
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
4.75
4.75
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
5.56
6.09
2.94
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.64
5.62
3.05
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
6.15
6.08
3.23
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.78
7.79
5.65
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.86
7.89
6.15
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.73
8.73
7.17
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
7.08
7.06
5.50
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Not Quite an Opera Transforms a Film
"La Belle et la Bete," by Philip Glass, which received its American premiere at the Brooklyn Academy of Music on Wednesday night, is nothing less than a new form of musical theater.
Mr.
Glass calls his piece "an opera for ensemble and film," but it is not quite an opera, since one never wants to look at the singers or pay any attention to their superfluous gestures and expressions.
But this work is also much more than a film score, because the music is never merely subliminal.
In fact, the music demands equal attention with Jean Cocteau's classic film, which is stripped of its soundtrack and projected on a screen behind the seven players of the Philip Glass Ensemble and the four singers.
The soloists sing precisely the same words the original actors spoke, but the lip-synching never quite works and it never quite matters.
Individual words simply do not make that much difference in this score.
Mr.
Glass's interest is not in word painting but in creating atmosphere in his familiar style, with waves of harmonies, repeated arpeggios and sequences of scales.
The music even at times eclipses the film.


'Miss Julie,' to Rorem's Music
"Until an ideal production is one day mounted and still reaps bad write-ups," Ned Rorem wrote of his opera "Miss Julie" a few years after the original production, "I'll continue to pass the buck in retrospect." James Robinson's production of the work by the Manhattan School of Music Opera Theater may not be ideal in every respect, but it is far too good to allow any buck-passing.
Nor is buck-passing needed.
In its present sleek 90-minute form, Mr.
Rorem's adaptation of August Strindberg's one-act play of the same name, with a libretto by Kenward Elmslie, makes for taut and persuasive musical drama.


Judge Quits Hubbell Case In Little Rock
A Federal judge today removed himself from the criminal case of former Associate Attorney General Webster L. Hubbell, citing a potential conflict of interest because of his political and professional relationships with Mr.
Hubbell and members of President Clinton's family.
The decision by Judge Bill Wilson of Federal District Court in Little Rock, Ark., to recuse himself has no legal effect on Mr.
Hubbell's guilty plea.
But it means that a judge with fewer ties to the President and Mr.
Hubbell will have to be selected to impose his sentence.


E.P.A. to Allow Flexibility in Auto Emission Testing
The Environmental Protection Agency, facing open revolt in New Jersey, Pennsylvania, California and elsewhere, is signaling that it will allow changes to make a new kind of auto emission inspection far less burdensome to car owners.
The agency was pushing for the testing to be done only at central sites using sophisticated equipment, which it believed would be far more effective in measuring tailpipe emissions than neighborhood gas stations, where cars in many states now go.
But state lawmakers complained that drivers would be inconvenienced by having to go to the big test sites and wait in line for inspections.


Fire Guts Old Luchow's Building


High Court Accepts Black District Case
In a case that could resolve crucial questions about the role of race in redistricting, the Supreme Court agreed to hear an appeal of a ruling in which a Federal District court last July threw out Louisiana's congressional districting plan.
The lower court said the state used an unconstitutional "racial gerrymander" to produce a black-majority district of "bizarre and irregular shape."
Article, page 8.


What Quality of Life?
To the Editor:
Driving past Washington Square Park in New York recently, I was stopped by two police officers and issued a ticket for not wearing my seat belt.
Nearby in the park, drugs were being sold in the officers' view.


Pentagon to Cut $7.7 Billion in New Weapons Programs
The Pentagon announced today that it would cut $7.7 billion in new weapons programs over the next six years to help combat readiness by paying for increased salaries and improved living conditions for American troops.
Coupled with President Clinton's decision last week to add $25 billion to the military's budget through 2001, the announcement today reflects a concerted effort by the Administration to increase combat readiness and to support military personnel.


3 Are Charged With Forcing a Captive Man to Sell Crack
Two men and a woman were arrested and charged with kidnapping yesterday after a man from Queens told the police that the three had kept him locked in a basement room for three weeks and forced him to sell crack cocaine.
The man, Dwayne Romney, 36, had been reported missing on Nov. 18 by his wife when he did not return home that evening.
Yesterday, the police found him badly beaten at Francis Lewis Boulevard and 104th Avenue in Hollis, Queens, after he had called 911 from a pay phone.


CLASSICAL MUSIC
Recital of Strauss Lieder And American Works  Christine Brewer, soprano Walter Reade Theater


Mixed Day For Prices Of Treasuries
Prices of Government securities were generally mixed yesterday, with the longest maturities unchanged.
Despite the uncertainty still surrounding the bankruptcy of Orange County, Calif., Treasury prices firmed as the market looked ahead to next week and a new supply of inflation data.
Prices of notes and bills fell sharply on Thursday as traders feared that some Wall Street firms might sell the government securities they hold as collateral for their loans to Orange County.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.50
8.50
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
4.75
4.75
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
5.50
5.53
2.90
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.64
5.64
3.04
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
6.16
6.15
3.23
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.79
7.78
5.73
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.86
7.86
6.20
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.75
8.73
7.24
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
7.04
7.08
5.50
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


POP
Songs About Past Mistakes And Lessons Learned or Not  Lisa Germano Fez


Light at the End of the Tunnel for Bonds?
This has been a terrible year to invest in bonds -- even the best categories show losses.
Particularly shocking are the drastic declines in the municipal bond funds, which are generally considered conservative.
But municipal funds tend to invest at the long end of the yield curve, and the interest rate risk in such a strategy was painfully felt in 1994.


Personal Prayer Is Not Illegal
When Representative Newt Gingrich complains that it is "illegal to pray" to oneself in public school, he misstates the law and the Constitution.
The Constitution forbids organized school prayer because that is government action for the advancement of religion, a violation of the First Amendment's ban on religious establishment.
Individual students remain free to bow their heads and pray or meditate in their own unobtrusive way.
Mr.
Gingrich misrepresents the law to promote his agenda -- a prayer amendment to the Constitution.
He cites the dubious case of Raymond Raines, a pupil in St.
Louis allegedly disciplined for praying over his cafeteria lunch.
School officials say the episode never happened and imply that he might have been disciplined for other, unspecified conduct.
But even if the accusation were true, it would not prove the need to alter the Bill of Rights.


CHRONICLE
Not all Democrats and Republicans are at loggerheads in Washington.
Senator JOHN F. KERRY, Democrat of Massachusetts, and TERESA HEINZ, the widow of the late Senator H. John Heinz 3d, Republican of Pennsylvania, announced yesterday that they are engaged to be married.
According to a statement issued by Senator Kerry's office, the couple began seeing each other when they attended the Earth Summit in Rio de Janeiro in June 1992.


COMPANY BRIEFS
BIOSYS INC., Palo Alto, Calif., a bioinsecticide manufacturer, has agreed to acquire Crop Genetics International Corp., Columbia, Md., for about $11.4 million in stock.
Biosys will exchange one share of its common stock for about 5.25 common shares of Crop Genetics.
GREAT WESTERN BANK INC., completed the sale of its West Florida branch and deposit system to First Union National Bank of Florida.


Bridge
A suitable gift for any bridge player is a magazine subscription.
There are six major English-language magazines, all of which have tournament reports and technical articles.
They are: The Bridge World, $40 for 12 monthly issues; Bridge Magazine (a British publication), $52.95 for 12 monthly issues; International Popular Bridge Monthly (British), $50 for 12 monthly issues; Australian Bridge, $34 for six bimonthly issues; Bridge Today, $24 for six bimonthly issues, and a new magazine, European Bridge, six bimonthly issues for $35.


Ballet Theater Dancers Ratify Contract
Dancers and stage managers of American Ballet Theater ratified a three-year contract yesterday afternoon that gives them raises of 10 or 13 percent over the life of the contract and a guarantee of 36 weeks of work a year.
The vote was 55 to 4.
The contract is retroactive to Aug. 1 and was negotiated by the Independent Artists of America, a new union that represents the company's 75 dancers and stage managers.
They broke away from the American Guild of Musical Artists in July.


Atlantic Storm Casts 31 Adrift As Ship Sinks
Battered all night by ferocious winds and gargantuan seas, a Ukrainian cargo ship foundered in a North Atlantic gale just before sunrise yesterday, casting 31 crew members adrift -- some in life rafts, others clinging to debris -- 1,200 miles off the New Jersey coast in a tense drama that was unresolved last night.
Caught in a howling storm 800 miles across, the ship, the Salvador Allende, went down shortly after 7 A.M. in an area 850 miles northeast of Bermuda, and it was unclear how many of the seamen had a chance to abandon ship or how many had survived, the Coast Guard said.


Maurice Auslander, Mathematician, 68
Maurice Auslander, a mathematician who conceived several algebraic systems that bear his name, died on Nov. 18 in Trondheim, Norway.
A professor at Brandeis University since 1957, he was 68 and lived in West Roxbury, Mass.
The cause was cancer, said Gordana Todorov of Newton Center, Mass., a collaborator and former student who is a professor at Northeastern University.


Adda Bozeman Barkhuus, 85, Expert in International Relations
Adda Bozeman Barkhuus, a writer and scholar of international relations at Sarah Lawrence College, died last Saturday at her home in Bronxville, N.Y.
She was 85.
The cause was complications from a stroke, her family said.


In the Wilderness Of One's Inner Self
Donlin Foreman and Jacqulyn Buglisi have choreographed and directed a striking dance reverie about self-realization in "Runes of the Heart."
True, the inspirational tone of the piece, which is to be repeated tonight at 8 and tomorrow at 3 P.M., does have a queasy lushness.
But the dancers, who include the best of Martha Graham's company, project the movement with such passionate conviction that the 110-minute experience at the Clark Studio Theater (Rose Building, 70 Lincoln Center Plaza) became an ecstatic seance on Thursday night.


2 TYPES OF PLANES GROUNDED BY F.A.A. IN ICY CONDITIONS
The Federal Aviation Administration yesterday banned two models of propeller-driven commuter planes from flying in conditions when ice is likely to build up on their wings, the first time the agency has issued such an order.
The F.A.A. made the decision after conducting wind tunnel tests in recent weeks on the ATR-72 aircraft, the type of plane that crashed in Roselawn, Ind., in late October, killing all 68 people on board.
The plane was operated by American Eagle, a commuter division of American Airlines.


Corrections
An article yesterday about hidden damage to buildings in West Los Angeles and the San Fernando Valley during the Jan. 17 Northridge earthquake misstated the year of the quake in some editions.
It was 1994.


Denny's Hit By Protests At Only Site With Union
The crowd gathered outside Denny's restaurant here on Dec. 2 was not lined up for a Super Slam breakfast (three eggs, three pancakes, three bacon strips and three sausage links for $2.99).
The 40 or so men and women were there for an event rare in the American labor movement: a job action directed against one of the few fast-food, family restaurant outlets in the nation organized by a labor union.


U.S. Hasn't Become Stumbling Economic Giant
To the Editor:
Re "The G.O.P. Contract Is Too Timid" (Op-Ed, Dec. 3): Paul Craig Roberts's diatribe against a United States "welfare state grown soft and fat" suffers from flawed logic, inaccurate insinuations and fatuous conclusions about America and its place in the global economy.


Taiwan Will Choose Its Own Future
To the Editor:
Re "Will the Dragon Lose Its Tail?" (Op-Ed, Dec. 3): James Shinn makes factual errors and shows a lack of understanding of the people of Taiwan and of what the recent elections were about.


Europeans Take Edge Off the Threat to Pull Out of the U.N. Force in Bosnia
Tempering recent threats by France and Britain to withdraw their troops from the United Nations force in Bosnia unless a peace agreement is reached soon, leaders of the European Union agreed today that the troops remained indispensable to keep food and supplies flowing to the war's civilian victims.
With President Francois Mitterrand of France and Foreign Secretary Douglas Hurd of Britain both in agreement, Chancellor Helmut Kohl ordered the 12 foreign ministers of the European Union to prepare a statement overnight in hopes of clearing up confusion about the force's future, British and German officials said.


Heisman Contenders Are Proven Survivors
They are already members of an exclusive club.
Only one of the six finalists invited to the Downtown Athletic Club will be named the 60th winner of the Heisman Trophy this evening.
One will accept a squat ball carrier, the promise of a portrait on the 13th floor and, as Gino Torretta discovered two years ago, an opportunity to make himself useful.
Torretta enjoyed the immortality of a voice-mail message that welcomed the club's callers for a year.
This Heisman was once considered Tyrone Wheatley's to lose, before the final season for the Michigan running back was undone by a shoulder injury and a disappointing year.
It could have belonged to Nebraska's Tommie Frazier, whose regular season was ended by blood clots, or Florida's Terry Dean, whose status dropped from legitimate candidate to substitute.


Charter Airline Cancels Advertised Flights
The advertisements seemed too good to be true $49 one-way from Long Island MacArthur Airport in Islip to Fort Lauderdale or West Palm Beach, Fla.
And they were, Suffolk County Executive Robert J. Gaffney said today, warning travelers who called a "900" number to make reservations with a charter company that had placed the ads, Columbia Air Services of San Juan Capistrano, Calif.


METRO DIGEST
DRAMA UNFOLDS IN THE NORTH ATLANTIC Battered all night by ferocious winds and heavy seas, a Ukrainian cargo ship foundered in a North Atlantic gale, casting 31 crew members adrift -- some in life rafts, others clinging to debris -- 1,200 miles off the New Jersey coast in a tense drama that was unresolved last night.
Page 1.
HEVESI TAKES SIDES IN BUDGET FIGHT: BOTH With the City Council suing the Mayor over who has control of New York City's budget, City Comptroller Alan G. Hevesi has quietly used the municipal computer system to impose his own temporary solution.
Until the lawsuit is settled, Mr.
Hevesi has decided that both sides' cuts will be made.
Page 1.
NEW YORK CITY ANGER AND RELIEF AS S.I.
INQUIRY ENDS A day after a grand jury declined to indict police officers in the death of Ernest Sayon, the Sayon home on Staten Island was filled with the sobs of family members and the growls of their pet pit bull.
A few miles away at the 120th Precinct station house, it was a day for celebration.
Page 27.
KINDNESS OF STRANGERS: A BEAR'S STORY Ever since we heard about Fudge the Bear and how a second-grade class at the Dalton School sent him out into the world to have people take turns showing him a good time, we have been worried.
This, after all, is New York, and who could tell what might happen to a pleasant but innocent bear after a class of 7- and 8-year-olds left him in a food shop with a note asking strangers to take care of him, show him interesting and exciting things, and then pass him on until he was returned along with the journal of his adventures?
About New York, Page 27.
PARDON ME, DO YOU HAVE A ROLLS DEALER?
This may be more than some stuck-in-the-tunnel motorists can take: soon there will be no one to borrow mustard from.
The Rolls-Royce dealer in New York City is closing.
Page 27.
WITH THE VIEW, CUOMO GOT A DEAL, TOO Realtors say Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo and his wife are getting a good deal -- not a steal necessarily, but a nice price -- on a three bedroom co-op with a terrace and river view on Sutton Place.
While neither the Cuomos nor the owner would reveal the exact selling price, the owner confirmed that it is about $600,000, in a neighborhood that is considered one of Manhattan's best.
Page 27.
MAYOR MULLS PRIVATE AIRPORT OPERATORS Having broken off negotiations with the Port Authority over renewing its leases at Kennedy International and La Guardia airports, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani said that he would explore turning over the operation of the airports or the land under them to private hands.
Page 28. 3 CHARGED IN MAN'S ABDUCTION Two men and a woman were arrested and charged with kidnapping after a man from Queens told the police that the three had locked in a basement room for three weeks and forced him to sell crack cocaine.
Page 28.
REGION  FAST-FOOD SHOP DRAWS PICKETS The crowd gathered outside Denny's restaurant in Absecon, N.J., was not lined up for a Super Slam breakfast.
The 40 or so men and women were present for an event rare in the American labor movement: a job action directed against one of the few fast-food, family restaurants in the nation organized by a labor union.
Page 29.
Neediest Cases...26


Boston Trades Nixon to Texas for Canseco
Doug Melvin, the Texas Rangers' new general manager, set out to get a pitcher for Jose Canseco.
But he traded the controversial slugger to the Boston Red Sox last night for a player who won't pitch for the Rangers but will play an outstanding center field and serve as an excellent leadoff hitter.
With Canseco taking his big bat to friendly Fenway Park, the Rangers acquired Otis Nixon and a minor league third baseman, Luis Ortiz.
They will use the money they freed with Canseco's departure to sign a free-agent pitcher, possibly starter Kevin Gross or reliever Jim Gott.


Sports of The Times; Past Tense And Future Perfect
CHARLIE WARD's term as the reigning Heisman Trophy winner will end tonight.
Ward will celebrate the anniversary in the same place he celebrated receiving the award a year ago: at Madison Square Garden.
The difference is that last year Ward was an invited guest; this year he is a hired hand for the Knicks as New York plays Philadelphia.


TIMBERLAND WARNS OF DECLINE IN SHOE EARNINGS
Timberland Inc. warned yesterday that its earnings would decline this year after the explosive growth of its trendy brand of rugged outdoor shoes slipped because of warm weather this season.
Timberland, based in Stratham, N.H., said its sales had not kept pace with its aggressive outlook, and it expected 1994 earnings per share to fall below last year's results.
Last year, the footwear company earned $22.5 million, or $2.01 a share, on sales of $418.9 million.
Timberland's stock skidded 16 precent, falling $4.375, to $22.875, on the New York Stock Exchange.


Enos Curtin, 99, Financial Adviser
Enos Curtin, a retired financial consultant and investor who also helped direct advocacy groups for the blind, died on Tuesday at New York Hospital.
A resident of the Upper East Side, he was 99.
The cause was pneumonia, his family said.


Bargains Now Abound In Closed Equity Funds
EXXON is trading just above $61.
Would you jump to buy it at $51?
Or what if Merck, now about $37, could be had for $32?
Sorry, these deals are just pipe dreams.
But closed-end funds offer the nearest thing.
The funds, whose shares trade on exchanges like any stock, offer the diversification and management of regular mutual funds.
But while the latter issue an unlimited number of shares priced at the portfolio's net asset value, closed funds issue finite shares that often trade at premiums or discounts to that value.


A Maple Leaf in Central Bosnia


No Stopping the Clippers Now
Clippers 109, Lakers 84  The Los Angeles Clippers, who needed 17 games and an overtime to get their first victory of the season, won their second in a row last night.
Malik Sealy's 25 points helped beat the Los Angeles Lakers, 109-84, at Inglewood, Calif.
Pooh Richardson added 20 points and 10 assists to help the Clippers cruise to their first road victory since April 5 and their first consecutive victories since March.


Disability Policies Face New Coverage Limits
INDIVIDUALS who want to buy disability insurance still have time to act before several leading insurers revamp their policies to limit coverage.
The coming changes in disability policies are the result of years of rising claims that have left the industry leaders, including the Paul Revere Corporation of Worcester, Mass., theProvident Life and Accident Insurance Company of America in Chattanooga, Tenn., and the UNUM Corporation of Portland, Me., with large losses.
These companies are responding with new policies providing reduced coverage, albeit at lower premiums.
Companies that do not reduce coverage are expected to continue the trend of raising prices.


POP
Brand-New in Song, Spirit And Performing Lineup  Cibo Matto Knitting Factor


CLASSICAL MUSIC
A Natural Pairing Of Mendelssohn Works  New York Philharmonic Avery Fisher Hall


Judge Clears Nynex Plan For Cable
A Federal judge in Maine has ruled that the Nynex Corporation should be permitted to offer television programming over its local networks in New York State and New England, an action that should free the regional Bell company to compete against the cable television industry.
The decision, issued Thursday by United States District Judge Gene Carter in Portland, marks the fifth time this year that one of the regional Bell companies has succeeded in overturning a Federal law that prohibits them from enter the cable television market.


Museum Acted Properly on Leonardo Manuscript Auction Sale; In the Owner's Name?
To the Editor:
"Rush to Auction" (Op-Ed, Nov. 26) points up an irksome trend among owners of art: attaching their own name to a work.
Thus, Leonardo's Codex Leicester became the Codex Hammer in 1980 by the will of its then new owner.


USAir Transcript Shows Terror but Offers Few Clues
An edited transcript released yesterday of exchanges between air traffic controllers and pilots of USAir Flight 427 before it crashed in September reflects the horror of the final seconds of the flight but sheds no light on what might have caused the crash.
All 132 people aboard the USAir Boeing 737 were killed when it crashed on Sept. 8 near a strip mall just outside Pittsburgh.


Small-Time Gamble Pays Big: Officers to Share $27.1 Million
Small-time gambling paid off big for members of the Denville Police Department today when 16 police officers, a secretary and a dispatcher -- more than half the tiny township's crime-fighting force -- came to Trenton to claim a $27.1 million lottery jackpot.
"We're a happy bunch of people right now," said Patrolman Kenneth McEvoy at a crowded news conference held at the State House.
He was flanked by Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman and surrounded by his fellow winners, who beamed into the television lights.


Seeking Hemispheric Unity
President Clinton opened the Western Hemisphere summit with talk of cooperation, but officials were finding agreement elusive on issues like drug trafficking.
Page 6.


California, Here She Comes (Again)
Mary Cobb of Pittsfield, Mass., a leading contender for top honors at today's national high school cross-country championships in San Diego, has been training in extra layers of clothing to be ready for the California heat.
"I've really been sweating, even in the snow," said Cobb, winner of the Northeast regional on Nov. 26 at Van Cortlandt Park in the Bronx.
"But I'm not sure it's going to help."


Margaret A. Hickey, Women's Leader, 92
Margaret A. Hickey, a longtime advocate of women's rights, died on Wednesday in a Tucson, Ariz., nursing home, where she had lived for several years.
She was 92 and had been a Tucson resident for more than 20 years.
At her death, Miss Hickey held the title of public affairs editor of Ladies' Home Journal, a position she had held since 1946.


Salary Arbitration May Be Negotiable
When nearly 100 striking players met in Atlanta earlier this week, they considered but rejected proposing the elimination of salary arbitration.
The debate, however, indicated that the players would be willing to make that offer later in the negotiations if it could bring a resolution to their dispute with the owners.
"There's some room to maneuver with percentages and givebacks, up to and probably including salary arbitration," an agent familiar with the players' deliberations said yesterday.


Tennessee Williams, Chilled Out
Plays don't get much more febrile than "Suddenly Last Summer," Tennessee Williams's gloriously grotesque variation on that perennial school composition theme "How I Spent My Vacation." So why does JoAnne Akalaitis's mounting of the work at the Hartford Stage Company seem so chilly?
This ever-adventurous director has achieved the seemingly impossible: she has sucked the emotion out of a Tennessee Williams drama.
Certainly, she has stocked her production of this grisly tale of sex, art and cannibalism with enough hallucinogenic effects to induce delirium.
In the hands of the designer, Marina Draghici, the garden of the New Orleans mansion in which the play is set has been turned into a reverie out of Salvador Dali.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
Some Wall Street firms are being blamed for the fiasco involving the loss-plagued investment fund of Orange County, Calif.
Both the county and bondholders have filed lawsuits, and the S.E.C. has subpoenaed at least two brokerage firms.  [ Page 39. ]
The arms industry faces another round of cutbacks.
The Pentagon plans to cut $7.7 billion in new weapons programs.  [ 11. ] Companies
The order affects planes operated by the commuter divisions of Delta, Continental, T.W.A. and American.  [ 1. ] Two pager companies spurned a three-way deal with Metrocall, which had offered to buy the two, USA Mobile and Premiere Page, for $384.3 million in stock and assumed debt.  [ 41. ] Blockbuster's plan for a South Florida sports park was canceled by the company's new owner, Viacom.
The $1.4 billion complex would have been home to two professional sports teams owned by Blockbuster's chairman, H. Wayne Huizenga.  [ 41. ] Intelligent Electronics said the S.E.C. had begun an inquiry.
The company also reported a loss of $3 million for the quarter.  [ 41. ] A Gannett executive was put on administrative leave and forced to resign from the board of a New York savings bank.
The executive and five others have been accused by the S.E.C. of illegal insider trading in the savings bank's stock.  [ 41. ] The only Denny's restaurant to be organized by a labor union is being picketed in a town near Atlantic City.  [ 29. ] Is Manhattan too pricey for a Rolls-Royce dealer?  [ 27. ] International
Business ventures are growing in South America, as the region's executives, spurred by free-trade pacts at home, look for opportunities beyond their own borders.
Increasingly, South American governments and businesses are thinking regionally.  [ 39. ]
Free trade is high on the agenda of the first summit meeting of Western Hemisphere nations in nearly three decades.  [ 6. ] Markets
Blue-chip stock indexes gained, but the overall market was weaker in heavy trading.
The S. &amp;P. 500 index rose 1.51 point.  [ 40. ] Treasury prices were mixed, with the yield on the 30-year bond unchanged.
The municipal market steadied.  [ 49. ] The dollar held its ground, slipping slightly against the Japanese yen and the German mark.
The Canadian dollar weakened.  [ 50. ] Hog prices rose, helped by high meatpacker demand and colder weather in the Midwest.
Energy and grain prices gained.  [ 50. ] Your Money
The Treasury plans to revamp savings bonds.
Among the expected changes is eliminating the guaranteed minimum yield.  [ 37. ] Bargains now abound in closed-end funds, largely as a result of rising interest rates and year-end selling.  [ 37. ] Time is running out for small-business owners with Keogh retirement plans.
Under changes mandated by the Tax Reform Act of 1986, they must sign documents updating their plans by Dec. 31 or risk making the money in their plans immediately taxable.  [ 37. ]


Switch Making Linebackers Beam
The smile on linebacker Corey Miller's face said it all.
He was asked if he liked the new scheme the Giants used against the Cleveland Browns last Sunday, a scheme that freed him to rush the passer more often.
"I hope," he said rather bluntly, "we get to use it more."


U.S. Judge Says Pentagon Erred in Canceling a Plane
In a decision favoring two of the nation's largest military contractors, a Federal judge ruled today that the Defense Department improperly canceled a contract for a new Navy attack plane in 1991.
The decision by Judge Robert H. Hodges Jr. of the United States Court of Federal Claims in Washington paves the way for the two contractors, the McDonnell Douglas Corporation and the General Dynamics Corporation, to receive a settlement from the Government that could reach $750 million, industry officials said.
The two companies had reduced their earnings by hundreds of millions of dollars because of the canceled contract.


Insurers Fail to Keep Pace With New Diseases
To the Editor:
Re "New Ailments: Bane of Insurers" (Business Day, Nov. 28): The insurance claims submitted by people suffering from newly recognized ailments may be the bane of insurance companies, but the bane of patients suffering from a "new ailment" is insurance company ignorance.


Small Dow Gain Masks Signs of Eroding Prices
After bidding stock prices down on Thursday, traders pushed them up yesterday in unusually heavy trading as bond prices steadied.
But the broader stock market continued to show signs of a deep erosion in prices.
The Dow Jones industrial average rose 5.38 points, to 3,691.11, while the broader Standard &amp; Poor's 500 index rose 1.52 points, to 446.97.
The smaller-company Nasdaq composite index fell 0.07 point, to 719.05.


Security or Therapeutic Freedom?; Escapes Raise Unsettling Questions for Psychiatric Centers
Floodlights have been bolted to the front gates at Kingsboro State Psychiatric Center in Brooklyn.
The tunnel running below the main buildings has been barred to patients.
Double doors with automatic locks are being installed on the wards.
Those are only a few of the emergency measures that have been instituted in the last few days as the 140-year-old mental hospital deals with a recent rash of escapes, including one by a patient who walked away on Nov. 19, returned the next day and, according to the police, stabbed a man to death with a knife he had smuggled onto the ward.


Suburban Streets Foster Needless Fears
To the Editor:
Re your Dec. 8 news article about Lydia Dover, the "lady in a car," whose eccentric presence on a New Jersey suburban street has alarmed residents:


Religion Journal; Being Welcomed in Faith Near the End of a Life
Charles Scheidt lay still in his hospital bed last Sunday surrounded by anxious friends and visitors whose voices hummed in gentle prayer.
Clergymen offered blessings and Communion, their words promising eternal life even as Mr.
Scheidt's sunken eyes and reed-thin frame hinted at imminent death.
They had come not to say goodbye, but to welcome him.


Great Run Of Rutgers Is Stopped By Virginia
Rutgers had a 1-0 lead and was on the attack against Virginia today.
The Scarlet Knights had several other good opportunities to pull the upset.
But these were the Cavaliers, the three-time defending champions.
Virginia rallied for a 2-1 triumph in the semifinals of the National Collegiate Athletic Association tournament, ending Rutgers' exciting season.
The Cavaliers (21-3-1) will face Indiana (23-2) for the championship Sunday here at Davidson College.
The Hoosiers defeated U.C.L.A., 4-1, in the other semifinal match that was played before a crowd of 11,848.


Behind a Shining Image, a Mess to Clean Up


Corrections
A chart on Dec. 8 showing the membership of House committees for the 104th Congress misstated the party breakdown.
A corrected chart appears today on page 30.


Transactions
Baseball  USA BASEBALL -- Named George Doig media relations director.
American League BALTIMORE ORIOLES -- Agreed to terms with Matt Nokes, catcher, on a one-year contract.
Designated John O'Donoghue, pitcher, for assignment.
CLEVELAND INDIANS -- Agreed to terms with Ed Smith, outfielder, on a minor-league contract.
National League ATLANTA BRAVES -- Acquired Aldo Pecorilli, first baseman, from the St.
Louis Cardinals to complete an earlier trade; assigned Pecorilli to Greenville of the Southern League.
FLORIDA MARLINS -- Sent Brian Barnes, pitcher, outright to Edmonton of the Pacific Coast League.
NEW YORK METS -- Announced that Bob Apodaca, pitching coach at Norfolk of the International League; John Tamargo, manager at Binghamton of the Eastern League; Rafael Landestoy, manager at St.
Lucie of the Florida State League; Dave LaRoche, pitching coach at Pittsfield of the New York-Penn League, and Bobby Floyd, Chuck Hiller, Rich Miller, Al Jackson and Ken Berry, roving instructors, will return.
Named John Gibbons manager and Dave Jorn pitching coach at Kingsport of the Appalachian League; Howie Freling manager and Ray Ripplemeyer pitching coach at Columbia of the South Atlantic League; John Stephenson manager in the Gulf Coast League; Ron Gideon manager at Pittsfield; Bill Latham pitching coach at Bingamton; and Randy Niemann pitching coach at St.
Lucie.
PITTSBURGH PIRATES -- Agreed to terms with Mackey Sasser, catcher, and Milt Hill, pitcher, on minor-league contracts.
ST.
LOUIS CARDINALS -- Named Lou Brock special instructor.
Named Chris Maloney manager; Rich Folkers pitching coach; John Lewis coach; and Brad Bluestone trainer at St.
Petersburg of the Florida State League, and Roy Silver manager; Ray Searage pitching coach; Keith Smith coach; and Bert Boyd trainer at Peoria of the Midwest League.
Football  National Football League ATLANTA FALCONS -- Signed Thomas Williams, defensive tackle, off their practice squad.
Placed Alton Montgomery, defensive back, on injured reserve.
NEW ENGLAND PATRIOTS -- Signed Paul Francisco, tight end, off their practice squad.


A Message to Bosnians; Allied Talk of a U.N. Withdrawal Warns The Combatants They Risk All-Out War
The highly publicized plans for a big NATO operation to withdraw United Nations troops from Bosnia carry a blunt message to the belligerents: Stop fighting a buffered, low-level war or risk an all-out war.
But any withdrawal of the more than 24,000 United Nations troops in Bosnia is almost certainly several months away.
"The watershed will be next spring," Yasushi Akashi, the top United Nations official in the Balkans, said today.


Help From the Sky


Making Do And Doing Very Well
Here and there in the world of orchestras, one finds the very good outdoing the very best.
Common ingredients create this paradigm for success, among them relative isolation, a loyal, longtime conductor and an abiding sense of place.
There is an export trade involved, with busy self-promotion, tours and recordings.
But in these more modest institutions, the effort to survive begins at home, with service to one's constituency.
Britain offers one example.
The City of Birmingham Orchestra, with only average talent, has used the salesmanship and ingenuity of Simon Rattle to create a photogenic oasis in the midst of urban industrial grimness.
In quite another venue, the Oslo Philharmonic, which played two concerts at Carnegie Hall this week, provides a stimulating antidote to a city's smothering Old World charm.
In the process, both groups have proved that the worth of an orchestra can be greater than the sum of its assets.


Big Switch: Net Players Try Talking Things Out
The Nets' players sat in a circle in the locker room today, explaining their roles to one another.
No coaches, no media, no one to blame for their misfortune but themselves.
Rules? Only two.


Giuliani Suggests Privatizing of Airports
Having broken off negotiations with the Port Authority over renewing its leases at Kennedy International and La Guardia airports, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani said yesterday that he would explore turning the operation of the airports or the land under them to private hands.
Mr.
Giuliani, who as a candidate often raised the idea last year, said a decision to privatize the city's two airports had become more likely after months of negotiations to rewrite the leases to increase the city's revenues from the airports proved fruitless.


World News Briefs; Pope Issues Statement On Women in Public Life
Pope John Paul II issued an endorsement today of the advancement of women, but he qualified his remarks by saying that their role within the family is "unique" and that their presence in public life should not detract from it.
The pronouncement, made in a statement marking World Peace Day on Jan. 1, reflected the uneasy relationship between the Vatican and women opposed to its thinking on issues such as its rejection of the ordination of women.


In New York City's Budget Fight, Comptroller Chooses Sides: Both
With the City Council suing the Mayor over who has control of New York City's budget, City Comptroller Alan G. Hevesi has quietly used the municipal computer system to impose his own temporary solution.
For weeks, the Council and Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani have fought over whose list of cuts should be used to address a $1.1 billion budget gap.
They are to take their fight to court next week.


Rail Shooting Suspect To Represent Himself
Although his lawyers insisted he was insane, Colin Ferguson was declared mentally competent to stand trial for the killing of six people aboard a Long Island Rail Road train last year.
Mr.
Ferguson also said he would represent himself at the trial, scheduled to start Jan. 17, which means that he will be cross-examining survivors of the shooting.
"I believe I can prove my innocence and I feel I can be acquitted," he said. -- Article, page 29.


CLASSICAL MUSIC
A Lesson Accompanied By a Little Something More  Sandra Miller, flutist Merkin Concert Hall


Corrections
A brief Company News report in some editions of Business Day yesterday, about the sale of some assets of the Pilgrim Group, referred incorrectly to the company's status.
Six funds are being sold to Express America Holdings and will remain under the name Pilgrim, and the other four funds will be retained by the seller under a new corporate name; Pilgrim Group is not disbanding.


Propaganda for Peace
Hate campaigns on Serbian and Croatian television helped brew Bosnia's horrors.
The Hutus' Radio Mille Collines ordered half a million murders and a death march of two million Rwandans.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-7  CUBAN REFUGEES IN LIMBO
Although the Guantanamo refugee camp at the American naval base in Cuba has not experienced riots like the one in Panama, it is filled with refugees who are desperate to resume normal lives. 1


Museum Acted Properly on Leonardo Manuscript Auction Sale
To the Editor:
Re "Rush to Auction" (Op-Ed, Nov. 26): Lee Rosenbaum says the auction sale of the only Leonardo da Vinci manuscript in America "marked a new low for museum ethics" and implies incorrectly that the University of California at Los Angeles and I acted improperly.


Yugoslav Path Cited For Missiles at Bihac
A Croatian official asserted today that Russian-made surface-to-air missiles recently used by Bosnian Serbs in the Bihac region were smuggled into the area through Montenegro.
Montenegro and Serbia constitute the rump Yugoslavia, all that is left of the former state.
Serbia's President, Slobodan Milosevic, has promised to close the borders from Yugoslavia to Bosnia to all but relief goods.


Nice View if the Footing's Secure


Hurley Powers Seaton Hall
For once, home was the friendly confines for Danny Hurley.
Appearing more relaxed than he ever has in a college basketball uniform, the Jersey City native scored a career-high 25 points on 10-for-15 shooting and handed out 8 assists tonight.
Together with freshman Donnell Williams (23 points), Hurley helped lead Seton Hall (3-2) to a 97-83 victory over Wagner (0-6) in a rare home contest for the Pirates at Walsh Gymnasium.


Attacks Begin on Plan to Cut Social Programs
In a taste of battles likely to dominate American politics for the next decade, labor unions and spokesmen for the elderly today attacked proposals from a panel advising President Clinton on how to slow the growth of Social Security, Medicare and other Government benefit programs.
After three hours of debate, the chairman of the panel, Senator Bob Kerrey, Democrat of Nebraska, admitted that he had only four or five votes of the 20 needed to win an official endorsement of his recommendations.
The 32-member panel, the Bipartisan Commission on Entitlement and Tax Reform, is scheduled to hold its final meeting on Wednesday, with no consensus in sight.


L.S.U. Search Continues
PAT SULLIVAN will not be coaching the Louisiana State football team because the Tigers will not buy out his contract with Texas Christian.
"We have reached an impasse," the L.S.U. athletic director, JOE DEAN, said yesterday.


THEATER IN REVIEW
One Play Is New; 2 Have New Versions  'Shelter,' 'Live Witness' and  'Older People' Greenwich Street Theater


Corrections
A picture caption last Saturday about a news conference held by the new Senate minority leader, Tom Daschle of South Dakota, misidentified two of his colleagues in some copies.
They were John B. Breaux of Louisiana, second from the left, and Wendell H. Ford of Kentucky, third from the left (not John D. Rockefeller 4th and Byron Dorgan).


A Surgeon General's Untimely Candor
In a political storm, some go ashore in lifeboats and some get thrown over the side.
So after the decorous departure of Lloyd Bentsen as Secretary of the Treasury, President Clinton dismissed Surgeon General Joycelyn Elders for speech crime.
Dr.
Elders, a target of Republicans and conservative Democrats, supported teaching schoolchildren to masturbate as a way to limit the spread of the AIDS virus.
As a health measure, it might be defended.
As politics, it was a reckless act of indifference to Mr.
Clinton's political fortunes.
This is not the time for any Administration official to make adventurous sallies on sensitive issues.


POP
Band Leader Honors His Father, Himself a Band Leader in Cuba  Juan Carlos Formell and Cubalibre S.O.B.'s


U.S. Hasn't Become Stumbling Economic Giant; Great Leap Backward
To the Editor:
"The G.O.P. Contract Is Too Timid" (Op-Ed, Dec. 3) can be characterized as proposing a Great Leap Forward into the 19th century.


World News Briefs; U.S. and North Korea Move Closer on Ties
American and North Korean officials have cleared away most of the obstacles toward opening liaison offices in their capitals, State Department officials said today.
The move represents another step toward carrying out the accord to end North Korea's nuclear weapons program.
North Korea has frozen the program and allowed inspectors from the International Atomic Energy Agency to visit its nuclear reactors.


The Neediest Cases; Summer Camp Gives Boy, and Mother, Independence
Martin Grindley, a 10-year-old, lives to skate.
He goes to the local roller rink with his friends as often as possible and loves the New York Rangers.
But it was only recently that he could go out by himself or with friends.
Martin's independence, a result of his mother's growing trust in his maturity and good sense, came after he went to the Salvation Army's Starlake Camp in Bloomingdale, N.J., last summer.
After two weeks of camp, his mother said, he blossomed.


RESULTS PLUS
MEN'S COLLEGE BASKETBALL Rutgers Beats Valparaiso for First Victory  Rich Ashmeade scored 20 points and Charles Jones had 17 to lead previously winless Rutgers past Valparaiso, 75-60, last night in the opening game of the Boilermaker Invitational in West Lafayette, Ind.
The Scarlet Knights (1-3) led by only 38-37 at the half before breaking away early in the second period.
Rutgers built the lead to 54-44 with 13 minutes 22 seconds remaining on a 6-foot baseline jump shot by Jones. (AP)
Canisius 72, Cincinnati 69: Michael Meeks hit a 3-pointer and Darrell Barley sank a pair of free throws in the final 13 seconds as Canisius rallied from a 20-point deficit to beat No. 13 Cincinnati (3-2).
Canisius (4-2) will play Marshall in the championship of the Delta Air Lines Classic tonight in Cincinnati.
Barley had 21 points and Craig Wise added 19 and 11 rebounds. (AP) WOMEN'S COLLEGE BASKETBALL First-Half Rally Sparks No. 7 Penn State  Angie Potthoff came off the bench to lead a 12-2 run late in the first half that sparked No. 7 Penn State to a 94-55 victory over Richmond (2-3) in the Central Fidelity Invitational in Richmond.
The Nittany Lions (5-0) will play No. 1 Tennessee, which beat No. 12 Virginia by 84-73, in today's championship game. (AP) TENNIS Off Night: Agassi Loses Temper, Match  Magnus Larsson of Sweden and Todd Martin of the United States won quarterfinal matches in the Compaq Grand Slam Cup in Munich, Germany, yesterday, with Larsson beating Andre Agassi, who came close to being disqualified from the $6 million tournament for swearing.
Larsson won, 6-3, 1-6, 6-0, and Martin beat Sergi Bruguera, the French Open champion, 6-4, 7-6 (7-5).
Agassi received a warning and was penalized a point when he repeated the obscenity, giving Larsson a break and a 3-1 lead in the first set.
On the next point, Agassi whacked a return that nearly knocked down the microphone of Umpire Mike Morrisey of Britain.
"That was very unfortunate, wasn't it?" Agassi said.
Larsson said he never heard what Agassi said.
"But obviously he said it, and the umpire heard it," he said.
"If he gets a warning that easy and the point penalty that easy and then he hits the ball at the umpire, of course, he should be defaulted. But it didn't matter to me. I was just glad to win the game." Agassi said there were too many microphones on tennis courts, put there to enhance coverage. (AP) GOLF In Seniors Game, One Legendary Victory  Arnold Palmer and Jack Nicklaus teamed up for a dramatic victory in the Diners Club Matches in La Quinta, Calif.
Nicklaus came up with the winning shot.
He hit his second shot, an 8-iron, out of a difficult hillside lie 146 yards from the green, within 20 feet of the pin on the first playoff hole.
After both Tom Weiskopf and Simon Hobday missed their chances at par on the par-4 hole, they conceded the hole and the match to Nicklaus and Palmer.
Their 1-up, 19-hole victory came in the opening Seniors match of the inaugural triple-tour, match-play event and advanced them to the semifinals. (AP) YACHT RACING Frenchman Gains Ground on American  It has become a race within a race for two of the top contenders in the BOC round-the-world competition: Christophe Auguin of France and Steve Pettengill of Middletown, R.I.
Auguin, the BOC defending champion, was 209 miles ahead of Pettengill in the Indian Ocean yesterday aboard his 60-foot yacht, Sceta Calberson.
But Pettengill, who sails the 60-foot Hunter's Child, still has an edge over Auguin in over all elapsed time, a day-and-a-half margin he accrued in the first leg of the four-stage BOC race.


Executive Changes
BORG-WARNER AUTOMOTIVE INC., Chicago, appointed John Fiedler, its president, to the additional position of chief executive.
FLORISTS' TRANSWORLD DELIVERY INC., Southfield, Mich., named Dick W. Boyce, a former Pepsico Inc. executive, to be president and chief executive.


Financial Survival in Tokyo
John Harlow (pictured right), a senior vice president with Korn Ferry, an international recruiting firm, recently returned to San Francisco after a four-year stint in his company's Tokyo office.
Before he went, he had to consider the financial impact as well as the changes in quality of life for his wife, Carole, and his sons, John Junji, 11, and Ben, 10.
Tokyo is an extremely expensive city.
When he moved there is 1990, the cost of living was 79 percent higher than in the San Francisco area.
To compensate, his company gave him a raise and agreed to pay many of the family's expenses.


THEATER IN REVIEW
Lady Macbeth, It Turns Out, Didn't Sleep in Pajamas  'Macbeth' Classic Stage Company Theater


Public &amp; Private; The Good Mother
Sometimes when she was in jail awaiting trial, Paula Oldham would wonder what she might have done differently.
She had lost so much: her job as a vice president at Wells Fargo, her house in one of the pretty communities near San Francisco, her salary, her savings.
Her freedom.
Little by little, she had begun to suspect that her daughter was being molested.
Other people saw the signs, but the authorities were unconvinced.
Finally, she took the girl and ran to France.
And when they were found the child went to live with the man Paula believed was a pedophile: her daughter's father, who denies the allegations.
So in the end she lost her daughter, too.


The Freshman Prince Reigns at St. John's
Minutes after St.
John's had won the 20th annual Joe Lapchick Tournament at Alumni Hall last month, the Red Storm players were all sitting on their bench awaiting the awards ceremony, all except for one.
In the middle of the seated players, Felipe Lopez stood with his back to the court obliging a group of fans who were leaning over a guardrail desperately seeking his autograph.
The more he signed, the bigger the group became as pens and programs stretched forward.


INSIDE
Musical Chairs in House
House Republicans scaled back plans to reduce committee sizes but left Democrats with a quandary: whom to kick off the panels.
Page 30.
Police Hit the Jackpot
Sixteen officers, a dispatcher and a secretary -- half the crimefighting force in Denville, N.J. -- claimed a $27.1 million lottery prize.
Page 25.
Rethinking Emission Rules
Facing a revolt in several states, the E.P.A. is considering changes to make auto emissions inspections easier for vehicle owners.
Page 8.


CHRONICLE
It's hard to talk about POPE JOHN PAUL II as the man of the moment, but what else can be said about someone who has a book at the top of the best-seller list, a play in New York and, it is said, a new CD in the wings?
Tomorrow, the book, "Crossing the Threshold of Hope," published by Knopf, will have been on the New York Times best-seller list for six weeks.


Panama Camps Are Calm But 40 Cubans Are Missing
After more than 24 hours of sporadic rioting in which about 250 people were injured and more than 1,000 detainees briefly escaped, American officials said today that calm had returned to the four camps housing Cuban refugees here.
But the officials said about 40 Cubans are missing and damage to the camp is still being tallied.
Of the injured, 221 were American military personnel, 25 of whom were hospitalized; 19 Cubans were also hospitalized.
Four Cubans were hit with birdshot fired by American military guards, the officials said.


House Democrats Face Painful Choices
House Republicans scaled back their plans to reduce committee sizes today to accommodate Democrats, but still left the minority party with a serious problem: deciding whom to kick off major committees.
Women, blacks and Hispanic lawmakers would suffer disproportionately if Democrats followed seniority and dropped the members who were last to join the panels.


Health Dept. Criticizes E.M.S. Crew
The New York State Health Department yesterday criticized the performance of two New York City emergency medical technicians who failed to examine a homeless man who later died on a sidewalk grate across from a hospital.
The homeless man, William Black, 55, died on Oct. 18 on 114th Street and Amsterdam Avenue, across from St.
Luke's-Roosevelt Hospital Center.
The evening before his death, a friend sought help for him at the hospital's emergency room, but he was told that doctors were not to leave the premises.
He then called 911.


Anger and Relief as S.I. Inquiry Ends
A day after a grand jury declined to indict police officers in the death of Ernest Sayon, the Sayon home on Staten Island was filled with the sobs of family members and the growls of their pet pit bull.
A few miles away at the 120th Precinct station house, it was a day for celebration.
Surrounded by supportive buddies, the officers expressed relief that their families might live normal lives again, and they gleefully teased each other about their muscles and love lives.


Jets Versus Lions: Call This Game Playoff Lite
This is something new for the Jets this season: an almost-playoff game.
Then again, for a team that is almost winning, why not?
In this topsy-turvy season, a record 25 clubs remain alive for a playoff berth with three games to go.
Count the Jets among them with a 6-7 mark.


Corrections
A caption yesterday with a Reuters picture from the trial of O. J. Simpson referred incorrectly in some editions to the man shown at the left, with his back to the camera.
He was Carl Douglas, a Los Angeles lawyer and member of the defense team, not Mr.
Simpson.


No Headline
"President Clinton and I maintain our strong mutual respect for each other -- a respect and friendship that has endured for many years." -- DR.
JOYCELYN ELDERS.  [ 30:1. ] "If she had not resigned, she would have been terminated. -- LEON E. PANETTA, the White House chief of staff."  [ 1:6. ]


Unable to Buy a Basket, Starks Offers to Take a Seat
A night of frustration left the Knicks searching for answers.
John Starks, who continued his season-long shooting slump with a 4-for-14 performance, said he would suggest that he be taken out of the starting lineup.
Coach Pat Riley tried to be innovative in the fourth quarter by playing 6-foot-8-inch Anthony Bonner in the backcourt, and more changes by Riley may be in store if the Knicks do not find consistency.


Counselor Is Asked What Simpson Said in Jail
The trial of O. J. Simpson veered into the religious realm today when Roosevelt Grier, a former football star who is now a minister and has counseled Mr.
Simpson in jail, was questioned about their private conversations.
At issue is whether Mr.
Simpson may have made incriminating statements to Mr.
Grier.
A fellow prisoner in Los Angeles County Jail has been reported in news accounts to have overheard a conversation between the two men and told prison officials about it.
Contents of the conversation are unknown, but a written report summarizing it was later turned over to Judge Lance A. Ito.


Motion in Jordan Case
A motion to dismiss charges against one of two men accused of killing the father of the retired basketball star MICHAEL JORDAN was delayed yesterday in Lumberton, N.C.
The hearing before Superior Court Judge GREGORY WEEKS, who will decide on the motion next month, was unusual because a former prosecutor was called to the stand to defend his handling of the case.
The motion was made by attorneys for DANIEL ANDRE GREEN, 20, of Lumberton.
Green and LARRY MARTIN DEMERY, 19, of Rowland, N.C., are charged with first-degree murder, armed robbery and conspiracy to commit armed robbery in the July 1993 death of James Jordan.


For Guantanamo Refugees, Hope Fades as Time Passes
About once a week, one or two Cubans housed in refugee camps here attempt an escape back to the Cuban side, either by diving into a cove and swimming to the border or by sprinting for it.
Having risked their lives to leave their country in August by taking to the sea on flimsy rafts and boats, at least three refugees have already died trying to return.


Gritty and Green, Rodman Returns
DENNIS RODMAN, this time with green hair, returned to the San Antonio Spurs yesterday, met with Coach BOB HILL and the team captains, then practiced for nearly two hours.
Afterward, Rodman said little about basketball or his clashes with the team management.
But he did explain his new hair color.
"Christmas green," he called it.
Rodman's attendance at practice ended a week of speculation about when the unpredictable forward would rejoin the Spurs.
On Wednesday, Rodman was suspended without pay for the second time this season because he failed to show up when a three-and-a-half-week paid leave of absence ended.
The leave followed a three-game suspension at the start of the season because of Rodman's conduct during the preseason.


Enrique Lister, 87, Dies in Spain; Communist Who Battled Franco
Enrique Lister, one of the most highly regarded Loyalist combat officers in the Spanish Civil War and an unrepentant Communist to the end, died on Thursday in a hospital in Madrid.
He was 87.
He was in a coma and had been treated for a brain hemorrhage in November.


South America's Big Trade Strides
Spurred by free trade pacts at home, South American businesses are making giant strides toward transforming their continent into a single seamless market by the end of this decade.
Business ventures are growing across borders, as Latin American executives design regional strategies for banking, manufacturing, transportation and generating electricity that could present opportunities as well as obstacles for competitors from the United States.


Investigation Into Memorabilia Is Not Finished
The indictment of Darryl Strawberry this week on charges of conspiracy and income tax violations does not signal the end of the Federal Government's investigation into baseball players' involvement with lucrative sports memorabilia shows.
Inquiries in two districts by the Justice Department have resulted not only in the indictments of Strawberry and his agent, Eric Goldschmidt, but also guilty pleas by at least two memorabilia dealers, William J. F. Hungach and Michael Bertolini.


Corrections
A film review of "The Buddha of Suburbia" in Weekend yesterday misstated its scheduled closing date at the Joseph Papp Public Theater in the East Village.
The film runs through Dec. 27, not Dec. 17.


Observer; Newt's Pal Warbucks
It's hard to see Little Orphan Annie.
Oliver Warbucks has seen to that.
First you have to find her agent.
Then the agent says you have to see the lawyers.
They're the best lawyers the Warbucks billions can afford.
Absolute masters of inaction.
All graduated top of their class with degrees in having cases postponed until all parties die of old age.


3 Nobel Winners Get Away From Home
Israeli and Palestinian leaders flew off today to pick up their shared Nobel Peace Prize in Oslo, where they are likely to find the political climate considerably warmer than what they left behind.
Their departures for the Nobel ceremony on Saturday said a lot about the balance of power.


Suspect in L.I.R.R. Killings Ruled Competent for Trial
Although his lawyers insist he is insane, Colin Ferguson was declared mentally competent today to stand trial for the killing of six people aboard a Long Island Rail Road train last year.
Then, rejecting the advice of his lawyers and a Nassau County Court judge, Mr.
Ferguson said he would represent himself at his trial, which is scheduled for Jan. 17.


Gay Men's Chorus
The New York City Gay Men's Chorus is to present its annual holiday concerts on Dec. 20 and 21 at 8 P.M. at Carnegie Hall.
This year's presentation is called "A Family Holiday" and features Liz and Ann Hampton Callaway, singers who are also sisters.
The program, conducted by the chorus's music director, Gary Miller, includes the New York premiere of Conrad Susa's "Carols and Lullabies," a collection of Spanish carols accompanied by guitar, harp and marimba.
Tickets are $10 to $40.
Information: (212) 247-7800.


Giza Journal; Now Even the Sphinx Might Protest
The great limestone figure of the Sphinx, its nose on display in the British Museum and its shanks eroded by wind and sand, has suffered many indignities over the last 4,000 years.
But the latest may be the worst.
A mile south of the ancient monument, construction workers have been hastily trying to complete an eight-lane highway that would send traffic barreling across the Giza plateau on which the Sphinx and the three great Giza Pyramids stand.
And the highway, which was approved in 1984 but kept secret because it violates the 1972 World Cultural and Natural Heritage Convention, is only one of several illegal encroachments on the site.


A Leisurely Path to Small Epiphanies on a Homey Stage
Victoria Williams ambled through a two-and-a-half-hour set at Tramps on Thursday night.
She would play a song, confer with her band, say a few words and eventually choose the next tune.
Every so often, she'd invite a guest onstage: Lou Reed, Evan Dando of the Lemonheads or Ms.
Williams's husband, Mark Olson, a member of the Jayhawks.
Old table lamps turned the stage into a parlor; Ms.
Williams was keeping things homey while setting a pace all her own.
It's no wonder her new album is called "Loose" (Mammoth/Atlantic)
In her leisurely way, Ms.
Williams carried listeners into her own world.
It's a musical attic where she dusts off curios -- standards, hymns, country songs, backwoods blues, bits of rock -- and displays them or reassembles them to suit her own quirks.
Her songs are gently off-center, following free-associative paths to find small epiphanies.
She writes about moonlight shining on frogs, about a poor crazy outcast, or about a woman whose dog is named "Happy"; when she calls the dog, neighbors think she's shouting about her happiness.


Kindness of Strangers: One Fuzzy Bear's Story
EVER since we heard about Fudge the Bear and how a second-grade class at the Dalton School sent him out into the world to have people take turns showing him a good time, we have been worried.
This, after all, is New York, and who can tell what might happen to a pleasant but innocent bear after a class of 7- and 8-year-olds leaves him in a food shop with a note asking strangers to take care of him, show him interesting and exciting things, and then pass him on until the first week of December, when he is to be returned along with the journal of his adventures.


Court Accepts a Crucial Redistricting Case
The Supreme Court today accepted a voting rights case from Louisiana that raises crucial questions about the role of race in legislative districting that were left open by the Court's unsettling decision in a North Carolina case 18 months ago.
The Court agreed to hear a joint appeal by the Federal Government and the State of Louisiana from a Federal District Court ruling in July that threw out the state's Congressional districting plan as an unconstitutional "racial gerrymander."


Hemisphere Trade Talks Open; U.S. Hedges Its Hopes
President Clinton tonight opened the first summit meeting of Western Hemisphere nations in nearly three decades, asking leaders of 33 nations to become "true partners for prosperity" with the United States.
But even as he and other leaders dined at the historic Biltmore Hotel here, Administration officials conceded that the United States was unable to get many other nations to agree to take far stronger collective action against money laundering, drug trafficking and threats against democratic governments.


Finger-Pointing in Orange County Fiasco
The search for people to blame for the Orange County, Calif., bankruptcy fiasco reached beyond county officials today to include some of the Wall Street firms that sold Orange County bonds to investors.
The Securities and Exchange Commission, widening its investigation of the county's loss-plagued investment fund, subpoenaed at least two brokerage firms, including Merrill Lynch &amp; Company.
Meanwhile, owners of bonds issued by the county sued county officials and Merrill Lynch and Smith Barney, contending that the brokerage firms concealed "reckless investment practices" of the investment pool.


Britain and I.R.A. Wing Open Landmark Public Talks
Representatives of the political wing of the Irish Republican Army and the British Government met publicly for the first time today in talks intended to lead to a political settlement of the 25 years of sectarian violence in Ulster.
Both sides described the session, held at Parliament Buildings in East Belfast, as useful.
They acknowledged that it had been exploratory, with an agenda that could lead to the formal inclusion of Sinn Fein, the I.R.A.'s political arm, in broader negotiations with other Ulster parties and with the British and Irish Governments.


Poultry Empire Under Scrutiny In Espy Inquiry
The independent prosecutor investigating the departing Secretary of Agriculture, Mike Espy, has expanded the scope of his inquiry and is intensively examining the global operations of Tyson Foods Inc., the Arkansas poultry empire with ties to the Clintons, Government officials said.
Subpoenas issued by the prosecutor, Donald C. Smaltz, and the scope of his interviews with company officials and others suggest that he is trying to compile a broad profile of Tyson's dealings with the Government and a detailed portrait of the personal and political associations between Don Tyson, the company's chairman, and Mr.
Espy and other officials.


SURGEON GENERAL FORCED TO RESIGN BY WHITE HOUSE
The White House today surrendered to Republican pressure by forcing the resignation of Surgeon General Joycelyn Elders, whose outspoken views about drugs and sexuality had made her the target of a conservative campaign to oust her from office.
The dismissal of Dr.
Elders came as some news organizations were preparing to report that at a United Nations conference on AIDS earlier this month, she had condoned the idea of teaching schoolchildren to masturbate as a way of avoiding the spread of the AIDS virus.


With the View, Cuomo Got Deal, Too
Realtors say Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo and his wife are getting a good deal -- not a steal necessarily, but a nice price -- on a three bedroom co-op with a terrace and river view on Sutton Place.
While neither the Cuomos nor the owner would reveal the exact selling price, the owner, Charles H. Cunliffe, confirmed this week that it is about $600,000 in a neighborhood that is considered one of Manhattan's best.


THEATER IN REVIEW
The Return of a Reminder On the Horrors of Battle  'Oh What a Lovely War' Pulse Ensemble Theater


Breakthrough on Legislative Secrecy
A New York State Court of Appeals ruling this week should help solve an irritating mystery: how the State Legislature -- the most expensive in the nation -- spends its $177 million budget.
The legislative budget is skimpy on details, the better to hide from voters the re-election apparatus they underwrite, not to mention the relatives and cronies they employ.
Secrecy has been tightest in the Republican-led Senate; indeed, Ralph Marino, the deposed majority leader, dispatched state-paid attorneys to court to defend the Senate's right to hide the number and cost of promotional mailings sent out by individual lawmakers.


Neil McCaffrey Jr., Book Club Chief, 69
Neil McCaffrey Jr., the founder and president of the Conservative Book Club, died on Thursday at his home in Pelham Manor, N.Y.
He was 69.
The cause was lung cancer, his son Neil said.


CLASSICAL MUSIC
3 Chamber Works Combine Both Energy and Quiet  Miami String Quartet Weill Recital Hall


Foote, Cone Is Planning Big Changes
Foote, Cone &amp; Belding Communications, the worldwide advertising and communications concern, said yesterday that it was planning significant changes in its operations that would include renaming the company, centralizing its media buying and forming a joint venture with a multimedia company.
The "rapidly changing communications environment," as well as "clients' changing communications needs," motivated the moves, Bruce Mason, chairman and chief executive at Foote, Cone in Chicago, said in an interview.
Foote, Cone also declared a 2-for-1 split of its common stock.


U.S. Hasn't Become Stumbling Economic Giant; Post-Welfare Vacuum
To the Editor:
Paul Craig Roberts bemoans that "The G.O.P. Contract Is Too Timid" (Op-Ed, Dec. 3).
But his discourse is equally vague and mischievous.


World News Briefs; U.S. and Russia Plan Meeting to Ease Strains
Secretary of State Warren Christopher and Foreign Minister Andrei V. Kozyrev will meet soon, perhaps within the next few weeks, in an effort to ease strains in Russian-American relations, senior Administration officials said today.
Mr.
Kozyrev and Mr.
Christopher discussed the need to review relations between their two countries after a fiery speech by President Boris N. Yeltsin in Budapest on Monday.
In the speech to a 52-nation summit meeting to strengthen security throughout Europe Mr.
Yeltsin accused NATO of trying to split Europe with its plans to move toward admitting new members and said the United States should not be allowed to dominate the world.


Pardon Me, Do You Have A Place to Buy a Rolls?
This may be more than some stuck-in-the-tunnel motorists can take: soon there will be no one to borrow mustard from.
The only Rolls-Royce dealer in New York City is closing.
The dealer, Michael Schudroff, says that he is shutting down his showroom on East 61st Street near First Avenue after 25 years, a victim of the recession, "the pricing of these cars" -- in the $150,000 to $315,000 range -- and what he calls astronomical overhead.


Military Rescue Mission in Bosnia
President Clinton was right to resist earlier pressures to commit U.S. forces either to repel the Serbian aggressors in Bosnia or to serve as neutral peacekeepers there.
But he is now right to agree in principle to send substantial numbers of American troops should NATO be called upon to cover the withdrawal of United Nations forces.
First, however, Mr.
Clinton must get Congressional approval; and Congress has an obligation to define strict time limits for any U.S. involvement and to insist on force levels that provide maximum protection to American and allied troops.


THEATER IN REVIEW
Celebrating Oneself And One's Road Through Life  'Naked Breath' Performance Space 122


G.O.P.'s Kind of Boot Camp
When the Democrats ruled, freshmen in Congress had orientation at Harvard.
For Republicans, a conservative foundation moves to the head of the class.
Page 34.


Browns Defeat Cowboys By a Nose
What a lousy way to lose.
What a great way to win.


Charity Is No Excuse for Bribery
To the Editor:
Rachel Ehrenfeld ("To Fight Foreign Bribery, Try Charity," Viewpoints, Nov. 13) is dead wrong on both law and policy.
She insinuates that the Foreign Corrupt Practices Act proscribes only direct bribery and advocates currying favor with foreign officials by making charitable contributions in their names.


Games People Are Playing. A Gift, Perhaps?
Here are four games that are popular this holiday season.
WHAT: VISIONARY.
IDEAL PLAYERS: People who can't get enough of Jeopardy, 7 years old and up.
HOW TO PLAY: There are five categories of subjects, including music and entertainment, travel and geography, and animals and nature.
Cards display multiple choice questions, plus an optional "risk" question, on which players gamble for bonus points.
THE APPEAL: The questions are more basic (and less trivial) than in Trivial Pursuit, so different age groups can play together.
There are also special cards for younger children, and parents can tell themselves that the game is educational.
SAMPLE QUESTION: The twisted shape of the pretzel was derived from: (a) arms folded in prayer, (b) people seated cross-legged, (c) the Boy Scouts' slip knot.
Risk question: A pretzel is displayed on the emblem of what group of tradesmen? (Answers: (a), bakers.) AVAILABLE: At specialty stores, like F. A. O. Schwarz, Learningsmith and the Museum Company, and through the Worldwide Games catalogue, (800) 243-9232.
Suggested price is $36.
WHAT: CAREY DeVUONO'S HOLLYWOOD MOGUL .
EQUIPMENT NEEDED: An I.B.M.-compatible computer and Windows 3.1.
IDEAL PLAYER: Hard-hearted, with a head for negotiation, and tall enough to reach the mouse.
HOW TO PLAY: You are the owner of a studio and make all the decisions to produce your own movies, from choosing the script and hiring stars to budgeting the production and the release of the films.
If a movie loses money, the game moves to the natural next step: choosing whom to blame.
One option is to fire everybody.
EDUCATIONAL?
Sure.
The instruction book explains the lingo of "players," like above-the-line costs and P &amp; A. You don't go to a meeting, you take a meeting.
Got it, babe?
RAISON D'ETRE: A struggling screenwriter, Carey DeVuono, wanted to prove that his screenplay, "The Highland Street Generals," would be a hit.
He taught himself to program and created Hollywood Mogul.
"The Highland Street Generals" is one of the scripts available in the game, but outside Hollywood Mogul, it has yet to be sold.
AVAILABLE: Only by mail, for $39.99.
Telephone: (800) 350-5550.
WHAT: THE DOONESBURY GAME.
IDEAL PLAYER: Opinionated and makes sure everyone knows it.
Likes parlor games to show off a mocking wit.
Can talk about any subject without knowing anything about it.
HOW TO PLAY: Land on squares with categories like Public Opinion, Flashback and Soundbites.
Pick a card, which supplies a topic for that category.
Depending on the category, a player gives a presentation or tells a story from his own life relating to the topic, and the other players judge the performance.
Or a player writes down words in response to the topic, while other players write their responses and try to match his words.
Points are scored.
Sarcasm ensues.
SAMPLE TOPICS: "John Kennedy Jr. dials you by mistake. Keep him on the line." "Talk about a rock group you saw before they were who they became." WHAT THIS GAME HAS TO DO WITH DOONESBURY: Not much, except for capturing the comic strip's satiric baby-boomer sensibility.
Reading the Garry Trudeau strip is not a requirement, although some board spaces make more sense with some background.
For example, landing on Boopsie's Channel Change makes players switch places, identities and points.
AVAILABLE: At specialty stores and through the Worldwide Games catalogue for $32.
WHAT: MANCALA .
ORIGINS: Commonly believed to be 3,000 years old, the game is thought to have originated in Egypt, and it is played throughout Africa, with regional variations.
IDEAL PLAYER: Any age; enjoys strategy games.
HOW TO PLAY: Two players face each other across a wooden board.
Colored stones are distributed equally in the 12 shallow bowls carved into the board; the two larger bowls (the mancala) on either end are empty.
Each player in turn distributes his stones among the six bowls on his side.
There are many variations to the game, but in the most common set of rules, each time a stone is placed in an empty bowl, the player captures the stones from the opposite bowl and places them in his mancala.
The object of the game is to capture the most stones.
THE APPEAL: Like backgammon or chess, the complexity of the game depends on the skill of the players, so all ages can play.
And it looks nice on the coffee table: the woods used for the board include pine and oak, and some versions use semiprecious stones.
AVAILABLE: Widely available from many different manufacturers.
Prices range from $10.95 to $26.
MICHELLE SHIH


Friel's 'Faith Healer'
TALK about substitutions!
After canceling "Two for the Seesaw," a once popular American comedy (750 performances in 1958-59) about marriage, divorce, sex and mundane things like that, Wordplay II scheduled "Faith Healer," an unpopular Irish drama (16 performances in 1979) about myth, miracles, memory and other weighty matters.
Death, too.
Some might even argue that Brian Friel's series of four monologues spoken by three noninteractive actors is no play at all.
But it is theater -- civilizing theater of verbal density and intellectual intensity -- and Cara Caldwell-Watson, the company's director, has faith in an audience's appreciation of rich language, of the sound of graceful word pairings.
And the Schoolhouse's intimate theater space, in an inviting visual arts center, where Wordplay II performs consistently, is entirely conducive to life's contemplative aspects.


WHAT'S NEW YORK THE CAPITAL OF NOW?
Unfortunately, the West Side "Waterfront of 2004" will not be the "emerald necklace" Elizabeth Hawes describes but an overpriced strand of costume jewelry.
If the Urban Development Corporation, the public authority that controls the waterfront, has its way, the Hudson will be dotted with megastores, mini-malls, amusement complexes and restaurants, with here and there a few acres of grass.
Greenwich Village, for example, has 23 acres of waterfront.
The U.D.C.'s plan calls for building on 21 of them.


WHAT'S NEW YORK THE CAPITAL OF NOW?
As an amateur photographer, I sometimes wonder if there's room in a media-drenched America for the still photograph.
There is.
Michael O'Neill's stunning photo of Paloma Herrera proves it.
JACK LABUSCH Niles, Ohio


State Officials Worry That a Federal Budget Will Be Balanced on Their Backs
State officials from both parties are voicing concern about the centerpiece of the Republican agenda for the new Congress, a proposal to amend the Constitution to require a balanced Federal budget.
They fear that Washington will achieve that balance by shifting costs to the states.
Consequently, governors and state legislators are demanding that the constitutional amendment include language to prohibit the Federal Government from imposing new requirements on states without paying for them.
The ban on such "unfunded mandates" must be written into the Constitution, the officials say, and not just passed as a freestanding bill, which could be overridden by later legislation.


Rose's Name Popping Up Yet Again
A memorabilia dealer who has pleaded guilty to income tax violations in connection with cash payments to baseball players at a card show is the same businessman who major league officials considered integral to their investigation into the gambling activities of Pete Rose.
Baseball officials who investigated Rose in 1989 before banning the all-time hits leader for life for actions not in the best interest of the game, including gambling, had assumed since then that Government revelations about the investigation of the memorabilia dealer, Michael Bertolini, could eventually be forthcoming.


Letters
To the Editor:
Sylvia Nasar ridicules as "absurd" the hypothesis that Alicia Nash's pregnancy played a role in precipitating her husband's decompensation with a paranoid schizophrenic disorder in the 1950's.
The idea of fetus envy is dismissed as Freudian nonsense.


When East Meets West, Creativity Blossoms
The Metropolitan Museum's benefit party celebrates Asian influences in fashion, Dec. 5.


James R. Gillen and Edda L. Swart
Edda Lya Swart, a former director of the Mount Carmel Guild Rehabilitation Center in Newark, was married yesterday to James Robert Gillen, a senior vice president and the general counsel of the Prudential Insurance Company in Newark.
Mayor J. Joseph Frankel of Eatontown, N.J., officiated at the Morris County Golf Club in Convent Station, N.J.
Mrs.
Gillen, 53, graduated from Upsala College and received a master's degree in education from New York University.
She is the daughter of Francisco Pacheco of Hackensack, N.J., and the late Lily Pacheco.
The bride's father is a retired metalworker.
Her previous marriage ended in divorce, as did the bridegroom's.


A 'Jewish Yuletide' Can Never Lead to Spiritual Fulfillment
To the Editor:
Frank Rich's column on Hanukkah ("Jewish Yuletide," Dec. 1) sadly reflects the spiritual narcissism typical of people detached from, yet critical of, their religious and cultural traditions.


Lord Joseph, 76, Tory Official And Architect of Thatcherism
Lord Joseph, a former Cabinet Minister and one of the main ideological architects of the Conservative Party's free-market philosophy under Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher, died today.
He was 76.
His office said the cause of death was chest complications from a stroke suffered last year.


Corrections
A brief report in the Playing in the Neighborhood column last Sunday misstated the date of the performance by Yuri Naumov, a guitarist, at the Bitter End in Greenwich Village.
It is tonight at 8; it was not last Sunday.


A Ceremony In Mexico City Shows Growth In Mormonism
The Mormon Church will mark a symbolic milestone today in its global growth when church leaders gather in Mexico City to organize the church's 2,000th stake, a geographic unit similar to a diocese.
That the stake will be created within Mexico City highlights the recent growth in the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints in Latin America.
The church's highest official, President Howard W. Hunter, will be among those at the event.


Splendor in the Glass, 3 Kings, Many Menorahs
DOWNTOWN -- En Garde Arts, the site-specific theater company, had a site-specific benefit on Dec. 5.
It was held on the vast, unfinished 51st floor of one of those Wall Street financial towers with offices so high up that they seem almost above the law as well as the city.
"Great performance in a great setting," Ruth W. Messinger, the Manhattan borough president, said from a lectern in front of floor-to-ceiling windows that were looking out at a glittering panorama of the metropolis.
"That's what En Garde Arts is all about, and I submit to you that that's what New York is all about, too."


Heather A. Stark, David Anderson
Heather Anne Stark, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Walter J. Stark of Baltimore, was married yesterday to Dr.
Russell David Anderson, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Russell D. Anderson of Morristown, N.J.
The Rev.
Dr.
Emora T. Brannon officiated at Grace United Methodist Church in Baltimore.
Mrs.
Anderson, a graduate of Johns Hopkins University, is studying for an M.D. degree at the University of Maryland.
Her father is a professor of ophthalmology at Johns Hopkins and is the director of corneal services at the Wilmer Eye Clinic there.
Her mother, Carey Pauline Stark, is an interior designer.


James Houghton, Constance B. Coburn
Constance Bradstreet Coburn, a daughter of Nancy C. Snyder of Aptos, Calif., and the late Robert L. Coburn, was married yesterday to James DeKay Houghton, the son of May K. and James R. Houghton of Corning, N.Y.
The Rev.
C.
Hugh Hildesley performed the Episcopal ceremony at the Church of the Heavenly Rest in New York.
The Rev.
Alanson B. Houghton, an uncle of the bridegroom, took part in the ceremony.
The bride, 30, is keeping her name.
She graduated from Hamilton College and was until recently an associate fashion editor at Self magazine in New York.
Her father was the general manager of the Milwaukee office of J. L. Case, a manufacturer of farm and construction equipment.
Her stepfather, Dr.
Cecil John Snyder, is a surgeon in private practice in Santa Cruz, Calif.


P.R. Spending Is News
To the Editor:
"The Myth of 'Negative Stories' " (editorial, Dec. 4) sensibly argues that the job of worrying about the negative or positive aspects of news articles is the business of public relations, not journalism.


McNair, Not Your Ordinary Tourist
Like a lot of first-time visitors to New York City, Steve McNair craned his neck to look up at the soaring buildings.
Unlike a lot of visitors, his is a size 18 neck.
"Those buildings seem to go into the sky," he said.
Another unusual circumstance was that while he looked at the city with wide eyes, some of the city looked back at him in quite the same way.
He was one of a group of husky fellows that, as part of a tour of the city, took the Staten Island ferry on a gray morning yesterday.
Other passengers noted them because they were being followed by another group of television and still photographers, and reporters.
"Who are you?" asked a young man with a baseball cap, with typical New Yorker diffidence.
"Steve McNair," he replied, softly and, perhaps, warily.
"You the quarterback from that small school in the South?"
"Alcorn State," said McNair.
"Hey, you had some year, guy!" He turned to his friend.
"This guy was outrageous. He's got unbelievable stats!"
McNair, who has set several Division I and Division I-AA records in passing and total yardage, was in town along with five other college football players who were considered the top candidates for the Heisman Trophy, emblematic of the best college football player in the land.
Each of the other candidates were from Division I-A schools: Ki-Jana Carter, the running back, and Kerry Collins, the quarterback, both from Penn State; Rashaan Salaam, running back, Colorado; Jay Barker, quarterback, Alabama, and Warren Sapp, defensive lineman, Miami.
The winner was Salaam, who had rushed for 2,055 yards this past season.
McNair was third, with 111 first-place votes, tying him for the highest finish for a Division I-AA player in Heisman history.
Gordie Lockbaum, the two-way player from Holy Cross, finished third in 1987, and Neil Lomax, a Portland State quarterback, finished seventh in 1980.
"I think that with the numbers I put up, that should erase questions about the level of competition," said the 6-foot-2-inch, 220-pound McNair.
"While the other players had butted heads against some of the best teams in the country on a week-to-week basis, McNair's Southwestern Athletic Conference -- the Gramblings, Southerns and Mississippi Valley States -- while competitive, could hardly be classed with the Michigans and Notre Dames.
The other players on the trip to visit young patients at St.
Vincent's Medical Center on Staten Island -- were generous, if not in fact diplomatic, in their comments about McNair.
"I don't think that his level of competition should take anything away from how he should be considered as a football player," said Collins.
"I saw film clips of him. He's a great talent."
Said Salaam: "He's got a nice size and a nice shape, and what he did he did on a college level -- it wasn't like junior college. And I've talked to coaches about him. They tell me he's legit."
McNair had opted for Alcorn State because when he was a star high school quarterback out of Mount Olive, Miss., the Division I schools interested him -- Miami, Mississippi State, Notre Dame and Florida, among others -- wanted him to play defensive back.
"Alcorn State was the only one that wanted me as a quarterback," he said.
Before learning he had lost, he said, he was happy to be in the running for the Heisman.
"After this," he said, "I'm going back to school and get my degree in May." He will earn a bachelor's in recreation.
"And then I'll see what I can do in the next level." Which means the National Football League.
Pro scouts have talked with him and, he says, they have informed him that he has "the total package" to be an N.F.L. quarterback.
"They said they like my size, my arm strength, my stamina, my ability to elude the rush."
Was he concerned that as a black quarterback he had special hurdles in the N.F.L.?
"Twenty years ago I might have said yes, but not today," he said.
"The N.F.L. wants great players. They don't care if they're black or white."
As for Charlie Ward, last year's Heisman winner who was not drafted by a single N.F.L. team but wound up as a basketball player with the Knicks, McNair said, "The way I understand it, the N.F.L. wanted a firm commitment that he would play football and not basketball, and he didn't give it to them."
On Friday night in New York, McNair and the other Heisman candidates saw the skating rink at Rockefeller Center, the Empire State Building and stopped off at the Hard Rock Cafe.
"It's amazing," McNair said.
"There are more people out in the nighttime than in the daytime." He admitted it was nothing like his hometown or Lorman, Miss., where Alcorn State is located.
And while he has enjoyed much of what he saw, he still misses certain elements of home, like Mary's, a hangout in Lorman, where they serve his favorite dish, the pork chop platter.
When he entered Alcorn State, he only had a size 17 neck.
What was more responsible for his adding an inch to his neck, a weight program or the pork chop platter?
"Both," he said, with a convincing smile.


Charity Is No Excuse for Bribery
To the Editor:
Rachel Ehrenfeld posits that American companies "have only two choices" -- either pay bribes or lose out in global competition.
Her proposition that charitable donations should be used instead of bribes to secure orders is as destructive to legitimate philanthropy as bribes are to world trade and stable democracies.
It ignores the best choice -- eliminate bribery.


Nordstrom Gets Set For Opening Benefit
WESTCHESTER was at the top of the list as the prime location for our first Nordstrom store in New York State; the demographics, population density are just what we were looking for," said John N. Nordstrom, co-chairman of the board, in speaking about the Nordstrom store under construction in White Plains. "So we decided to build a large store -- 225,000 square feet, on what we think is one of the most desirable retailing sites in the country."
Mr.
Nordstrom was at the Westchester Country Club here recently as the host of a fashion lunch to honor the 200 volunteers who will be working to make an upcoming Nordstrom opening party a success.


Annemarie Olvany, Edward Vierling Jr.
Annemarie Patricia Olvany, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
George L. Olvany of Garden City, L.I., was married there yesterday to Edward J. Vierling Jr., the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Vierling, also of Garden City.
The Rev.
Richard F. Delaney performed the ceremony at St.
Joseph's Roman Catholic Church.
Mrs.
Vierling, 31, is the eastern sales manager in New York for Bicycling magazine.
She graduated from St.
John's University.
Her father retired as a financial consultant, in Manhasset, L.I., for Merrill Lynch &amp; Company.


Journal; Son of Cinerama
Life once again proving a rotten disappointment, we trooped off to escape it at the movies.
But not just any movie.
My family would settle for nothing less than a 3-D movie playing on the 80-foot-high, 100-foot-wide IMAX screen that just opened to torture anyone with children in New York.


New President Envisions Social Service For Cornell
Hunter R. Rawlings 3d, a classics scholar who was named the 10th president of Cornell University yesterday, said that he hoped to apply the expertise of Cornell's faculty to the solving of social problems.
Mr.
Rawlings has been president of the University of Iowa since 1988.
At Cornell, he will succeed Frank H. T. Rhodes, who has led the university since 1977, making him the longest-serving sitting president of an Ivy League institution.
Mr.
Rhodes announced his retirement last March.


PHOTOGRAPHER'S JOURNAL


SUNDAY, December 11, 1994; Straw Man
William Cahill is pretty sure he's the country's only full-time roof thatcher.
He's on the road 200 days a year, plying his trade on everything from historic structures to garden show displays.
He has thatched a historic house near Boston, a pre-Columbian Indian mound village in Evansville, Ind., and jungle huts at the Memphis Zoo.
A native of Ireland, Cahill apprenticed for five and a half years before he came to the United States in 1986.
His primary raw material is the meadow reed.
He says that every time he drives the New Jersey Turnpike, "I look down at the Meadowlands and I think I'm in a thatcher's paradise."


Quincy, Ill.
To the Editor: How pleasantly surprised I was to discover the wonders of my hometown, Quincy, Ill. ("A House-Proud Town," Oct. 23).
Visitors to Quincy might also want to see a different house, Temple B'nai Sholom, on Ninth Street between Broadway and Spring.
Jewish life in Quincy dates from the late 1840's, and the Reform community founded its own congregation in 1864, building the synagogue in 1869.
This 125-year-old red-brick building, whose every nook and cranny I explored as a child, eventually became the permanent home of the entire Jewish community.
Like the other citizens of Quincy, this congregation could trace their religious and national origins to Germany.


Posters to Shopping Bags: 20th-Century Commercial Artists
ITS title notwithstanding, "The Art of the Marketplace" at the Rockland Center for the Arts here has nothing to do with the "Artist in the Marketplace" series exhibited by the Bronx Museum of the Arts.
Whereas the museum's shows consist of up-and-coming fine artists selected for its seminars on survival in the real world, the Rockland display, at the center at 27 South Greenbush Road, deals with the artists' commercial counterparts who, by definition, have a very secure spot in the marketplace.
They are the designers of images, graphics, packaging -- you name it -- whose business is catering to fashion, even creating it, and who at times seem to have the whole world in their hands.


POSTINGS: A Start's on the Horizon; Rooftop Condos For the Plaza
A long-delayed $20 million project to build 14 multimillion-dollar condominium apartments on the roof of the Plaza Hotel is to begin within eight months, according to Donald Trump.
Mr.
Trump says he will target sales of the two- and three-bedroom units to "very wealthy people from foreign countries, and some corporations." Outside rentals may be arranged through the Plaza, which will supply the apartments with hotel services.
The penthouses are to have a private entrance on 58th Street and a separate elevator leading to them.


Beyond Dinosaurs
EMBEDDED in New York's consciousness as a repository of totem poles, taxidermy and dinosaur bones, with bright yellow school buses perpetually parked outside, the American Museum of Natural History is a bit of a dinosaur itself.
But slowly, in small steps, it is cracking through its musty Victorian shell, struggling to become a more modern museum.
Part of the change is generational, with a fresh crop of thirty- and fortysomethings heading up, and striving to reawaken, many of the major research departments.
Part is social, like trying to bring more women and minorities into science careers, and onto the museum's professional staff.
And part is simply inevitable, as technology and mass culture overlap with the museum's specialties.


Citizens Learn How Officers Do Their Jobs
Elaine Hudson watched with horror and amazement as one of her classmates put a gun to the head of her instructor.
It was all part of an exercise at the Citizens' Police Academy, where model citizens get an abridged version of the training given to actual police officers.
In this exercise, the classmate, playing the role of an officer, was confronting the instructor, who was shouting across the room, pretending to be in a fight.


How Real Is 'Realness' In Rap?
TUPAC SHAKUR'S LATEST CONVICTION, FOR felony sex abuse of a 19-year-old woman, has brought back all the recurring questions about gangster rap.
Is it just pulp entertainment, sensationalizing and exploiting real suffering?
Is it propaganda that promotes a vicious, woman-hating subculture?
Does it reinforce negative stereotypes of young black men as feral, sex-crazed, armed predators?
Is it, as some of its practitioners insist, simply reportage from the inner city, a critique of the lives and deaths it describes?
And have its adherents confused fiction with reality?
There are no clear-cut answers, though the best might be "all of the above, sometimes." The exploitation, anyway, is a success.
Raps about gunplay, with breaks for sex, booze and pot, have become bankable, selling beyond the inner cities that they so painstakingly depict.
They join favorite American pastimes like action movies and video games, offering violence without real consequences.


Getting Beyond Beep-Beep, Pow and Zap!
THERE were no Power Rangers, Ninja Turtles or Nintendo games, and Coleen LeQuire did not expect them.
Instead, as Ms.
LeQuire and her two daughters strolled through the wide aisles of the Zany Brainy store in the Philadelphia suburb of Wynnewood, they paused at a computer station to try out a drawing program and turned to watch a tiny movie screen showing the classic children's film "Willie Wonka and the Chocolate Factory."
The atmosphere inside Zany Brainy, a toy store with an educational tilt, feels something like the Museum of Natural History meets Romper Room.
And it is just that combination that has made the store a favorite stopping place for Ms.
LeQuire and her children, 2 and 5.


And to All a Good Time


The Folks on Fifth Reject Postal Delivery of New Name
Last week, some residents of a tony section of Fifth Avenue were startled by letters labeled, in big block type: "An Official Notice From the United States Postal Service Regarding the Correct Delivery of Your Mail."
"Dear Postal Customer," said one, opened by Marcy Sigler, of 1080 Fifth Avenue.
"To ensure accurate and timely delivery, it is very important to make sure all the mail sent to you displays the EXACT address as it appears here: 1080 Museum Mile." The letter was even accompanied by some handy address stick-on labels.


Cruising
To the Editor: After we booked and paid the entire fee ($17,000.12) five months before sailing, the cruise line Renaissance canceled our reservation for a cruise in mid-September 23 days before departure.
It would have been our fourth sailing with Renaissance.


SUNDAY, December 11, 1994; Scat, Scat!
Hikers Against Doo Doo (animal and human) is looking for a new motto.
The group was founded in 1990 by Bernhoff Dahl, a Maine parasitologist who was incensed by what he found on mountain paths around the world.
The group claims 1,000 members, 19 of whom attended its 1993 International Congress in Moscow, and has developed model urban pooper-scooper ordinances as well as plans to help clean up Mount Everest.
The 1995 motto?
"One Small Movement for a Man, One Giant Movement for Mankind." Send suggestions for the 1996 slogan to HADD, P.O Box 271, Hampden, Me. 04444.


The Echoes Of Piaf In Paris
AMONG the enduring icons of Paris is Edith Piaf, the tiny singer who burned herself out more than 30 years ago but who remains for Parisians, and for the French generally, the embodiment of some cherished values: a gritty romanticism, a profligate willingness to give everything for love and art, and a love of Paris that embraces equally its squalor and splendor.
"My heart," she sang, "is at the corner of a street/And often rolls into the gutter."
And it was almost in the gutter of the 20th arrondissement, legend inaccurately claimed, that Edith Gassion was born in 1915 when her father failed to get a doctor in time and Edith's mother gave birth on a policeman's cape on the steps of 72 Rue de Belleville.
Fifteen years later, and long since abandoned by her mother, Edith left her father to begin a career as a street singer in the district's Belleville-Menil montant neighborhood.


In the Region/Westchester; Relocation of Ciba Takes Big Step Forward
THE relocation of the Ciba-Geigy Corporation to the Tarrytown Corporate Park has moved a significant step forward with the Town of Greenburgh's completion of the park's rezoning.
The move would keep the company, which is the American subsidiary of the big Swiss chemical enterprise, in Greenburgh.
Acting at what could be considered warp speed by usual county standards, the town and its planning and zoning boards last month capped a five-month review process by granting a myriad of exemptions and variances from property setback rules and other requirements.


Little Boxes, All Decked Out And Ready to Play
Boxed sets have become an annual holiday ritual for fans and record companies alike.
And if all the gold- and platinum-selling sets are any indication, record companies have figured out how to please both first-time listeners and dedicated collectors.
Here are 26 choices our critics found noteworthy.
Prices are suggested retail. 'The Casablanca Records Story'  Casablanca/Chronicles; four CDs ($59.98)


Washington Journal; Officer's Parade of Death Rivets Capital's Youth
The cynical laughter stopped around the time Lieut.
Winslow McGill of the Metropolitan Police Department clicked on a slide of a young man slain by a rival drug gang.
He had been shot in the back of the head and lay in a pool of blood.
To this point, many in the audience of 500 sixth through ninth graders at the Fletcher-Johnson Educational Center in Southeast Washington had expressed only mild interest in Lieutenant McGill's presentation.
While the slides showed police officers making arrests and symbols of what he called "the positive side of life in the fast lane" -- fancy cars, piles of cash, packets of marijuana, cocaine and crack -- children talked and joked and acted as if they were only watching television.


Cyberlingo
SIR WINSTON Churchill is turning over in his grave.
Peering into the mists of the future, the keepers of all the books and papers of the past and present at the Library of Congress came up with a dreary name for its plans to reproduce a core of its holdings as on-line digital bits: the National Information Infrastructure.


Museums Offering A Little Night Music To Lure a New Crowd
As the Tibero Nascimento duo sang and played the guitar and drums Friday night, the bouncy rhythm of their Brazilian jazz wafted through the room with the very high ceiling.
A few people took seats at tables covered with white cloth and ordered drinks and food, while others gathered on benches nearby.
It was a new Upper East Side nightclub, bar and restaurant -- and it was also the Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum.
Along its grand spiraling ramp, gallery viewers paused to look down and listen to the music.


Putting It All Together
For geography trivia buffs, the easiest way to memorize the capital of Indiana or the countries bordering India is to study a map.
And two new jigsaw puzzles offer plenty of time for geographical cramming.
Produced by American Map, of Maspeth, Queens, the 500-plus-piece United States puzzle features the 50 states, plus smidgens of Mexico and Canada, while the World Map, with over 600 pieces, includes everything from Antartica to the North Pole.
And for something out of this world, there's a 500-plus-piece puzzle of the planets.
The puzzles are $11.95 each.
To order, call American Map at (800) 432-6277.


Word for Word / Anthropology Abstracts;; A Trans-Narrating, Ethnographic Good Time Was Had by All
"THE 21st century should be anthropology's century," began the president's report by James Peacock when the American Anthropological Association held its 93d annual convention in Atlanta recently.
Maybe so.
After all, these are the guys who were multicultural before it was cool.
Even the snippets of overheard conversation (". . . and then he sent the poisoned chocolates to . . .") were a lot more interesting than the small talk at the conventions of, say, chemical engineers.
Still, from the gatherings (Network for Nordic Anthropology) to the seminar topics ("Chaos and Counterhegemony: The Improbable Problems of Empowerment Movements") to the overall look (early Ed Koren New Yorker cartoon scruffy), it was not clear whether the 4,500 assembled anthropologists were likely to find their way into the heart of cultural mainstream.


Sports of The Times; Players Weren't the Only Ones Holding Paper Bags
BACK when there used to be baseball -- before greed shut it down -- most teams stayed at the Hyatt on 42d Street.
Actually, the hotel is called the Grand Hyatt -- Grand as in grandiosity, as befitting its remodeler, an 80's kind of guy named Trump.
Back when there used to be baseball, a certain type of entrepreneur used to congregate outside the Grand Hyatt, carrying a briefcase or a cigar box or an album with vinyl pockets.


The World; Why Russia Still Bangs Its Shoe
WHAT if suspicion, not friendship, is the basis for building peace in Europe?
That certainly seemed the case in both Brussels and Budapest in recent days, when the Russians were accused of violating a cardinal rule of diplomacy: Never surprise your friends.
Much as Nikita S. Khrushchev once railed against his enemies to get their attention, President Boris N. Yeltsin, in Budapest, denounced NATO expansion as anti-Russian and warned of the dangers of a one-superpower world.
A few days before, in Brussels, Foreign Minister Andrei V. Kozyrev had stunned NATO by refusing to sign on to a plan for ushering Russia into military cooperation with it.
To explain such unruly conduct, consider the possibility that the end of Communism hasn't transformed the West and the Russians into friends.
And that, for all their good intentions, they have different ways of seeing the world, different fears to calm, different domestic needs to meet.
In that case, the reasonable thing to do might be to get their differences on the table in plain language for the sake of -- remember the phrase? -- peaceful coexistence.
Consider, too, that if surprises are alien to diplomacy, they are indispensable in politics.
Although Mr.
Yeltsin might have found a nicer way and a better time to say it, he certainly captured his audience's attention by declaring that "Europe, which has not yet thrown off the legacy of the cold war, is in danger of plunging into a cold peace." That is one way of saying that even though Russia has sworn allegiance to democracy, it is still driven by its own interests.
Humiliated by the loss of its empire, embittered by the sad shape of its economy, Russia's leaders have rediscovered the political power of nationalism and are determined to recover at least some of their influence in their own back yard.
Sobered by the new assertiveness in Russia's foreign policy, mindful of Moscow's history of expansionism, the Western powers have begun to realize that Moscow cannot be counted on as a reliable strategic partner.
Mr.
Yeltsin's speech laid bare all the suspicions: If there are no blocs, splits, enemies or suspicions, why do you in the West still need NATO?
Why shouldn't Russia be the eastern pillar of European security?
In his view, moving the Western alliance eastward is just an American-led plot to isolate Russia in case it turns undemocratic again.
That may overstate Western assumptions about NATO, but it is precisely why a number of Central European countries are clamoring to get in.
"We often say we don't want to create new lines in Europe," said Poland's Foreign Minister, Andrzej Olechowski.
"But the lines exist." Between the lines are what Mr.
Olechowski calls the "gray zone" -- countries like Poland, Hungary and Czechoslovakia -- and his priority is to move this zone behind NATO's protective line.
From the American standpoint, NATO is still the center of Europe's security universe.
Why?
Because Russia, it seems, cannot be trusted completely.
Mr.
Clinton essentially said that in Budapest, where he called on Europeans to "guard against the assertion of hegemony or spheres of influence."
Despite public claims to the contrary, American officials do not expect Russia to lobby -- or qualify -- for admission to a NATO that has such goals.
Why, one senior Administration official in Budapest was asked.
"History," he said.
No one knows that better than the Russians themselves.
In an article last week in Nezavisimaya Gazeta, Galina Sidorova, Mr.
Kozyrev's top political adviser, wrote that the West has not followed through on its promises of "partnership" because of Russia's "peculiarity."
"The problem, in my opinion, is that even quite sincere well-wishers in the West on the surface attribute Russia's 'peculiarity' to its geography, geopolitical situation, the scale of its military and economic potential, and the cataclysms it is living through, while implying something else, which remains unspoken: a certain threat of instability and hostility coming from an allegedly eternal incompatibility with the surrounding world."
Russia's recent posturing has left American policy makers angry, puzzled and split among themselves.
But the Clinton Administration's measure of success for its Russia policy has always been a modest one: keep Russia on a steady course toward greater democracy and free markets, in small steps, while understanding that there will be backpedaling and bumps along the way.
Forgiveness
The Administration has also tended to forgive Mr.
Yelstin and Mr.
Kozyrev their verbal excesses, if only because those two are seen as Russia's best hope.
So officials in Washington took heart last week when Mr.
Yeltsin wrote Mr.
Clinton in the midst of the dust-up that "The Russia-NATO partnership will be concluded."
Still, that begged the question of how best to air, and in the process defuse, the suspicions both sides have.
Russia's tug-of-war style of doing business is deeply frustrating to some American policy makers who, however much they want to see Mr.
Yeltsin succeed, are getting tired of the damage control the relationship requires.
They wonder if the Russians can be trusted when they reject a proposal at the Budapest summit to condemn the Bosnian Serbs, press for lifting of economic sanctions against Iraq, and assert a historic right to intervene in their former empire.
One person who understands the new reality is Warren Christopher.
The night before the all-European summit in Budapest, the normally calm and deliberate Secretary of State discovered that the Russians were threatening to block Ukraine's accession to the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty, and immediately went operational.
Alarmed that the move would rob the European summit meeting of its only clear-cut success and embarrass President Clinton, he jumped into his limousine to confront Mr.
Kozyrev with a blunt message: No stunts.
The Russians backed down.
But Russia's message had been delivered: Don't take our cooperation for granted when you cozy up to our neighbors.
We just don't trust you enough.
In that chilly atmosphere, Mr.
Clinton would be hard-pressed to repeat the assessment he made when he stood with Mr.
Yeltsin outside the White House less than three months ago: that the relationship with Russia was "at last, remarkably, a normal one."


Beyond the PGA
To the Sports Editor:
In "One Golfer Does Not a World Tour Make" (The Times, Nov. 27), Larry Dorman spends a good deal of his column on the fact that so-called key American players have not publicly committed to the proposed World Tour.
But just who are these players, and with the exception of Fred Couples, what have they really achieved?


Community Boards To Meet in Brooklyn
DISTRICT 1 Greenpoint, Williamsburg; second Tuesday of month; next meeting, Dec. 13, 7 P.M.; 211 Ainslee Street, corner of Manhattan Avenue; (718) 389-0009.
DISTRICT 2 Fort Greene, Brooklyn Heights; second Wednesday of month; next meeting Dec. 14, 6 P.M.; St Joseph's Services, 540 Atlantic Ave., between Third and Fourth Avenues; (718) 596-5410.


A Fresh Relic of a 'Lost Generation'
HOW DO YOU LOSE A MASTER TAPE OF "Pictures at an Exhibition," Modest Mussorgsky's evocative piano suite from 1874?
It is smaller than a breadbox, to be sure.
But the piece itself, pianists might argue, is bigger than a bakery, with its mighty handfuls of brawny chords in the concluding "picture," "The Great Gate of Kiev." This is not the sort of project any party to it would be likely to treat casually even today, let alone three decades ago, when recordings of the original piano version numbered only a dozen or so.
Yet here it is: a previously unreleased recording of "Pictures," and a compelling one, by the American Byron Janis, made by Mercury in 1961 in New York and newly delivered on CD, an un-Mercurial 33 years later.
The tape, long thought to have been permanently lost or destroyed, turned up six months ago in the Netherlands, at the home of Mercury's parent label, Philips.


INSIDE
MAKING IT WORK 3  These are tough times, imagewise, for civil servants.
This week, six of the best get their 15 minutes of revenge.
NEW YORKERS &amp; CO. 4  There are plenty of food vendors these days on the streets of Chinatown.
But there is only one Cecilia Tam.


Correction
An entry in the New &amp; Noteworthy Paperbacks column on Nov. 20 about "The Sailor Who Fell From Grace With the Sea," by Yukio Mishima, credited the author erroneously with an award.
He was nominated several times for a Nobel Prize, but he never received one.


Corrections
A film listing on page 46 of the Arts and Leisure section today misstates the language in which "Temptation of a Monk" is made.
It is Mandarin, not Cantonese.


Of Orchids, Warm to Cool and In Between
ORCHIDS are like potato chips.
You can't grow just one.
Although the plants themselves are often just a bunch of ugly leaves, when the orchid finally blooms, the enchantment is indescribable.
And their amazing variety causes hobbyists to try one species after another.
The plants will reward patient growers about once a year, with blooms ranging in size from those you have to peer at with a hand lens to those that fill the hands.
Orchids may have spots, stripes, frills, tails, fringes and amazing colors.
Some are even deliciously fragrant.


Little Boxes, All Decked Out And Ready to Play
Boxed sets have become an annual holiday ritual for fans and record companies alike.
And if all the gold- and platinum-selling sets are any indication, record companies have figured out how to please both first-time listeners and dedicated collectors.
Here are 26 choices our critics found noteworthy.
Prices are suggested retail. 'Tina Turner: 'The Collected Recordings -- 60's to 90's'  Capitol; three CD's ($50)


Wall Street; Jitters About That Poor Little Rich County
LEMON COUNTY, the wags are calling it -- and investors sure have a sour taste in their mouths.
It is Orange County, Calif., which last week became the largest local government ever to file for bankruptcy protection (its investment fund has lost $1.5 billion by betting against Alan Greenspan, using borrowed money, to boot).
So far, the poor little rich county has defaulted on just one bond issue, but concerns about fallout from the bankruptcy sent the municipal bond market tumbling last week, just as it was beginning to recover from a protracted slump.


Philadelphia Reopening American Art Museum
The Pennsylvania Academy of the Fine Arts in Philadelphia was scheduled to reopen its newly renovated Museum of American Art yesterday with an installation of works drawn from the permanent collection.
"Two Centuries of Collecting at the Museum of American Art" comprises more than 300 paintings and sculptures, representing artists including Charles Willson Peale, Benjamin West, John Singleton Copley, Mary Cassatt, Thomas Eakins, Winslow Homer, Edward Hopper, Horace Pippin and Andrew Wyeth.
The museum, which was built in 1876, was designed by the architects Frank Furness and George Hewitt.
The six-month renovation by the Philadelphia architectural firm of Tony Atkin &amp; Associates cost more than $3.5 million.
In addition to reinstallation work and improved access to the collections, the building now houses a new orientation theater in which , a cafe and an expanded museum shop.


Cries of 'Betrayal' Greet Nursing Home's Plans to Expand
Twenty years is not long enough to dim memories in Manhattan Beach.
In 1974, Menorah Homes, a not-for-profit nursing home provider, was given a plot of land on Oriental Boulevard to build a four-story complex.
At the time, Menorah board members told the community board that they did not foresee future expansions.


Little Boxes, All Decked Out And Ready to Play
Boxed sets have become an annual holiday ritual for fans and record companies alike.
And if all the gold- and platinum-selling sets are any indication, record companies have figured out how to please both first-time listeners and dedicated collectors.
Here are 26 choices our critics found noteworthy.
Prices are suggested retail.
Various Artists: 'The Jazz Scene'  Verve; two CDs ($30)


Staterooms Aboard Yachts
Would-be sailors can now cruise the Caribbean or South Pacific on a yacht without chartering the whole thing.
A new program from Moorings Preferred Yachting Holidays allows passengers to book just a stateroom on selected 50- to 82-foot crewed sailing yachts, each with three or four two-passenger staterooms.
Stateroom-only guests have their own small private bathrooms and access to the rest of the yacht, including sun decks and the dining area.
High-season prices -- Dec. 20 to April 14, 1995 -- start at $1,299 a person a week.


The Egg-Cake Lady of Mosco Street
JUST OFF Mott Street, in the heart of Chinatown, clinging to the bustling Hop-Kee restaurant, there is Cecilia Tam's Hong Kong Egg Cake Company, a humble, unobtrusive red shack that most of the time eludes the attention of tourists.
There are no fancy signs or display shelves.
Just an aluminum tray, three stove-top burners and a tiny woman working furiously to churn out golden nuggets the size of melon balls from a concoction that looks like pancake batter.
But on lunch breaks and weekends, the stall is often a street scene unto itself.
A line forms by the shack on Mosco Street and sometimes wraps around the corner onto Mott.
Mrs.
Tam has gained a following that is the envy of the other cake stalls that have sprung up in Chinatown during the last three years.
Customers say they would rather wait in the rain or cold than go elsewhere.


Man Is Charged in Murder Of College Student in 1986
Douglas Benson was a winsome and naive college student from Massachusetts on a solo cross-country bus trip when he stopped in New York City for a weekend celebration marking the rededication of the Statue of Liberty in July 1986.
Mr.
Benson, 21, an Eagle Scout, was led by a prostitute and her two companions to an old West Side rail yard, where he was beaten to death during an apparent robbery, said Sgt.
Robert Fiston of the 10th Precinct.


Letters
To the Editor:
You should be complimented on the article on John Nash.
As a friend of Alicia Nash, I found the article sensitive, respectful and thoughtfully written.
It will be treasured, I am sure, in the archives on John Nash, Nobel laureate.
ELIZABETH J. KEEGAN  Manhattan, Nov. 19


Of Orchids, Warm to Cool and In Between
ORCHIDS are like potato chips.
You can't grow just one.
Although the plants themselves are often just a bunch of ugly leaves, when the orchid finally blooms, the enchantment is indescribable.
And their amazing variety causes hobbyists to try one species after another.
The plants will reward patient growers about once a year, with blooms ranging in size from those you have to peer at with a hand lens to those that fill the hands.
Orchids may have spots, stripes, frills, tails, fringes and amazing colors.
Some are even deliciously fragrant.


Little Boxes, All Decked Out And Ready to Play
Boxed sets have become an annual holiday ritual for fans and record companies alike.
And if all the gold- and platinum-selling sets are any indication, record companies have figured out how to please both first-time listeners and dedicated collectors.
Here are 26 choices our critics found noteworthy.
Prices are suggested retail.
The Who: '30 Years of Maximum Rhythm-and-Blues'  MCA; four CDs ($41) or cassettes ($23.25)


World Markets; In Britain, a Stiff-Upper-Lip Market
IT was a most unsettling week for investors in Britain.
Prime Minister John Major suffered a humiliating defeat in Parliament on a proposed tax increase, leaving him politically wounded, casting doubt on his Conservative Government's ability to serve out its five-year term and forcing a hasty revamping of his budget for next year.


Iran Gives Partial Prison Tours to Offset Human Rights Charges
Iran declared today that education and rehabilitation had replaced punishment for convicts and invited international organizations to inspect the country's prisons.
As part of the new policy, journalists were granted a tour of a penitentiary where tens of thousands of political dissidents have been detained, tortured and executed since 1964.
"The doors of our prisons are open to everyone," Assadollah Lajevardi, the head of Iran's prison system, said at a news conference.


The View From Far-Left Field
To the Editor:
"A Fond Farewell to Big Government" (At Work, Nov. 13) is as disturbing as it is intriguing.
Barbara Presley Noble argues that the many beneficiaries of the welfare state have finally turned their back on it, potentially denying similar benefits to the needy and disenfranchised today.
I do not see any statistical underpinning for this thesis but encourage her to share any such data with her readers.
Some other reminders:


Little Boxes, All Decked Out And Ready to Play
Boxed sets have become an annual holiday ritual for fans and record companies alike.
And if all the gold- and platinum-selling sets are any indication, record companies have figured out how to please both first-time listeners and dedicated collectors.
Here are 26 choices our critics found noteworthy.
Prices are suggested retail. 'The Music of Bill Monroe From 1936 to 1994'  MCA; four CDs ($27.99) or cassettes ($23.25)


Staying on the Cutting Edge in Christmas Cards
WHEN autumn's hues were orange and gold, the Fravessi Greetings warehouse here was awash in red and green.
Was it another instance of the Christmas season's coming early?
Yes, twofold.
At either end of the greeting card company's 25,000-square-foot warehouse, work on Christmas greetings was in full swing.
In one area, orders for 1994 Christmas cards were filled, and the cards were packaged and stacked high on skids for shipping throughout the country.
In another area, printing presses were being inked for the first run of the 1995 Christmas collection.


Only the Dead Could Forget
THE FIRST WORLD WAR A Complete History.
By Martin Gilbert.
Illustrated. 615 pp.
New York:  Henry Holt &amp; Company. $35.


At Christmas, Life Can Be Wonderful For Robbers Too
A Low Down Dirty Shame  Keenen Ivory Wayans, Jada Pinkett, Charles S. Dutton, Salli Richardson, Andrew Divoff Directed by Mr.
Wayans R 108 minutes


Entrepreneur Solves Problem of the Slipping Bra
Lisa Gable is championing what many women see as a valiant cause: a remedy for the falling bra strap.
The 71-year-old Mrs.
Gable lived most of her life bothered by the problem, which she came to discover affected many other women.
Five years ago, she set out to do something about it.
As a result, these days Mrs.
Gable is spending a lot of her time in sales meetings.


Little Boxes, All Decked Out And Ready to Play
Boxed sets have become an annual holiday ritual for fans and record companies alike.
And if all the gold- and platinum-selling sets are any indication, record companies have figured out how to please both first-time listeners and dedicated collectors.
Here are 26 choices our critics found noteworthy.
Prices are suggested retail. 'The Complete Aladdin Recordings of Amos Milburn'  Mosaic; seven CDs ($109)


IN SHORT: FICTION
RAT  By Andrzej Zaniewski. Arcade, $19.95.


In 'Grimes,' Low Tragedy Makes for Great Opera
THERE REALLY WAS A Peter Grimes, or a man like him.
When the 18th-century English poet George Crabbe wrote "The Borough," a psychologically acute portrait of a Suffolk fishing village, he took several characters from real life, and among his subjects was a savage-tempered fisherman whose boy apprentices had been found dead under mysterious circumstances.
Benjamin Britten and Peter Pears came across a collection of Crabbe poems in a Los Angeles bookshop in 1941; they were spellbound by the lurid tale of Grimes and began planning an opera on the subject.
Nearly 50 years after its first performance, by the Sadler's Wells Opera Company, Britten's "Peter Grimes" has lost none of its luster and force.
The work returns to the Metropolitan Opera in the 1967 production by Tyrone Guthrie on Monday evening.
It has been gone for 10 years, and 10 years is surely far too long.
This is one of the supreme 20th-century operas, perhaps the greatest opera ever written in English.
Not only does the music still have a tremendous impact, but the story and principal character exercise an endless, insatiable fascination.
Who was Grimes?
What was his crime?
Every generation has new answers, and the low tragedy of "Peter Grimes" begins to take on Shakespearean dimensions.


A Witty Thriller By Tom Stoppard Doubles the Fun
BY TOM STOPPARD'S OWN account, John le Carre apparently was not amused by "Hapgood," Mr.
Stoppard's merciful, witty, glancingly cerebral espionage drama, which is being given a bang-up production at the Mitzi E. Newhouse Theater in Lincoln Center.
No wonder.
"Hapgood" doesn't abide by the gentlemanly rules of the kind of fiction of which Mr. le Carre is a master.
"Hapgood" is a fastidious play, but it often seems as highhanded and opaque as its enchanting title character (Stockard Channing), nicknamed Mother, the head of a top-level British intelligence agency in London in 1989.
Hapgood is brainy: she plays chess without a board.
She runs a tight office.
She's good at her job, but she's also a hopeless romantic, having had a son by Kerner (David Strathairn), the Russian spy she turned into a double agent.
She doesn't hesitate to use her 10 Downing Street hot line to make private telephone calls elsewhere.
On a secret mission overseas, she sends home cheery, wish-you-were-here picture postcards.
She breaks rules in a way that would be unthinkable in Mr. le Carre's oeuvre.
When caught between the demands of her job and domestic responsibilities, she will assign an assistant agent to deliver a pair of rugby boots to her son's boarding school.


Mob Inquiry Focuses on Reputed Boss Who Eludes Trial
Is Vincent Gigante a persecuted invalid who has to be cared for by his aging mother, or is he a despotic Mafia boss who feigns mental illness by walking around Greenwich Village in his bathrobe?
For four and half years, Federal prosecutors in Brooklyn have vainly tried to bring Mr.
Gigante into court on murder and racketeering charges.
Now, in what appears to be a final attempt to try Mr.
Gigante, prosecutors have asked a Federal judge to order him confined in a Federal jail for 28 days so that psychiatrists and physicians can "comprehensively monitor Gigante's mental and physical condition."


Mutual Funds; Tax Steps for a Happier New Year
THE remaining days of 1994 can be rewarding for mutual fund investors using these last-minute strategies to reduce their taxes:
*
Give a fund gift.
Giving fund shares, instead of selling them and giving cash, postpones payment of any capital gains taxes until the shares are sold.
And if the shares are worth $10,000 or less, you would also avoid paying a gift tax.


Marilyn Sollar, John McCormack
Marilyn Jo Sollar, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Arnold R. Sollar of New York, and John Luhrs McCormack, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
John P. McCormack of Pebble Beach, Calif., were married on Friday in New York.
Judge Gregory W. Carman of the United States Court of International Trade performed the civil ceremony at the Harvard Club.
The bride, 34, graduated summa cum laude from the University of Pennsylvania.
She is a broker associate with Charles H. Greenthal Residential Sales, a real estate company in New York.
Her father is a real estate developer and private investor in New York.


Fining Upkeep Laggards
IT can be downright annoying when a neighbor continues to enjoy all the amenities of a co-op or condominium but lags in paying a fair share of the upkeep.
Tempers have flared so high recently in New York City that some boards have begun imposing steeper and steeper late fees on delinquent maintenance charges.


The Way She Talked
To the Editor:
By speaking all of Dorothy Parker's lines like a sloppy drunk at the end of a bar, Jennifer Jason Leigh succeeded in demolishing Parker's well-deserved reputation as a wit and a poet.
After all, her fame rests on her mastery of concise, brittle English, not on her vulnerability and self-destructiveness.
Ms.
Leigh and her director, Alan Rudolph, had an obligation to see to it that Parker's witticisms were delivered in an appropriately brisk, abrupt manner, befitting the conciseness of her retorts and the context of the Algonquin Round Table.


In Praise of the Counterculture
Generational bonding experiences have always been important in American life.
Civil War veterans kept meeting until time scythed down the last of them.
The Depression shaped the economic dreams, and fears, of millions of young couples and their children.
People who fought in World War II have moved through history with a fortifying set of common memories.
So have the children born to them during and shortly after that war.
This last group profoundly altered the way Americans think about their inner lives, their fellow citizens, the earth upon which we live and the process by which older citizens in Washington decide when and where young Americans die in combat.


Nets Run Their Game Instead of Their Mouths
One could talk about their impeccable defense, how they challenged nearly every shot.
Or that 35-point first quarter that set the tone.
Most of all, though, the Nets stopped bickering and started running again.


Panel's Proposals to Divide A District Divide a District
With 32,000 students in Woodhaven, Richmond Hill, Ozone Park, South Ozone Park, Howard Beach and the Rockaways, School District 27 is one of the city's most crowded.
Because demographic projections predict continued growth in southeast Queens, a Board of Education advisory panel has recommended splitting the district in two.
But the proposal has divided the local school board and pitted neighborhoods against one another in a debate over its geographic, economic and racial implications.


Democrats Seek a Plan To Salvage Their Party
Assembly Speaker Sheldon Silver plans to convene a meeting of prominent Democrats in Albany on Monday to begin rebuilding a party left rudderless, penniless, divided and demoralized by Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo's defeat in the Nov. 8 election.
Mr.
Silver, trying to fill the vacuum left by Mr.
Cuomo's decapitation as head of the party, expects to be joined by 16 elected Democrats, including United States Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan and State Comptroller H. Carl McCall, at a private luncheon at an Albany restaurant.


PLAYING IN THE NEIGHBORHOOD
FLATIRON An Opening in Manhattan And Off to the White House
On Dec. 27, the kids of TADA! will perform at the White House for a group of touring diplomats.
But before they do, they will open their new musical revue in Manhattan -- "The Prop Shop," on Friday.


Pitfalls of Finding an Underground Leak
Con Edison says that with its vast network of pipelines under the battered streets of New York City, it is only natural that there will be problems.
For example, the company has 630 miles of underground pipes that carry cables, which are bathed in a cooling fluid.
Sometimes the pipes leak because of age, construction work, or because stray electric currents in the ground, usually from the subway system, eat away at the metal.
And every time they leak, there is a violation.


Recalling a Time When Luck Was a Lady Called Tyche
IN Greek mythology Tyche appears first as the personification of fortune, good and bad luck, chance -- in other words, the unpredictable.
But during the Hellenistic period, in the fourth century B.C., she metamorphoses into a goddess -- not top drawer perhaps but divine enough to be worshipped with Athena, Aphrodite and other major deities, to warrant a cult of her own and now to inspire an exhibition at Yale University Art Gallery.
"An Obsession With Fortune: Tyche in Greek and Roman Art" consists of 74 objects ranging from coins and small figures dated fourth century B.C. (and earlier) through larger-than-life marble heads including one depicting Aristaios of Cyrene (first century B.C.) all the way down to present-day labels for bottles of German beer.
The display, organized by Susan Matheson, curator of ancient art, comes with a catalogue that fills two-thirds of the gallery's 1994 bulletin.
It contains essays by, among others, Ms.
Matheson and J. J. Pollitt, who is John M. Schiff Professor of Classical Archeology and the History of Art at Yale.


BEST SELLERS: December 11, 1994
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
2
25
POLITICALLY CORRECT BEDTIME STORIES, by James Finn Garner. (Macmillan, $8.95.) Classic tales respun to avoid offending current sensibilities.
2
1
41
THE CELESTINE PROPHECY, by James Redfield. (Warner, $17.95.) An ancient manuscript, found in Peru, provides insights into achieving a fulfilling life.
3
3
8
INSOMNIA, by Stephen King. (Viking, $27.95.) A widower and a widow, victims of sleeplessness, behold sinister forces at work in their small Maine town.
4
5
15
DEBT OF HONOR, by Tom Clancy. (Putnam, $25.95.) Jack Ryan and C.I.A. agents vs. a Japanese plot to strike America's territory and economy.
5
4
2
WINGS, by Danielle Steel. (Delacorte, $23.95.) A woman pursues her ambition to become a record-setting aviator in pre-World War II America.
6
6
5
THE LOTTERY WINNER, by Mary Higgins Clark. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $22.) Stories about a couple who win a lottery and devote themselves to solving crimes.
7
10
122
THE BRIDGES OF MADISON COUNTY, by Robert James Waller. (Warner, $16.95.) A photographer and a farmer's lonely wife in Iowa.
8*
7
10
TALTOS, by Anne Rice. (Knopf, $25.) The survivor of a species of witches copes with his heritage; a sequel to "The Witching Hour" and "Lasher."
9
8
3
GOD'S OTHER SON, by Don Imus. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $23.) A 1981 novel about Billy Sol Hargus, a lecherous television evangelist from Texas.
10
9
3
DARK RIVERS OF THE HEART, by Dean Koontz. (Knopf, $24.) A man and a woman, who meet by chance, must flee a powerful Government agency.
11
12
20
THE GIFT, by Danielle Steel. (Delacorte, $15.) A woman's visit to a small town changes many lives.
12
11
12
NOTHING LASTS FOREVER, by Sidney Sheldon. (Morrow, $23.) Three women doctors in San Francisco contend with lovers, betrayers and killers.
13
14
2
STAR TREK GENERATIONS, by J.M.
Dillard. (Pocket, $20.) Capt.
Jean-Luc Picard and Capt.
James T. Kirk must track down a scientist at large with a dangerous weapon; plus an account of the filming of the movie.
14
22
THE CHAMBER, by John Grisham. (Doubleday, $24.95.) A lawyer represents a racist who is on death row for his part in a 1967 bombing in Mississippi.
15*
10
MUTANT MESSAGE DOWN UNDER, by Marlo Morgan. (HarperCollins, $18.) In Australia's outback, an American woman learns about aboriginal philosophy.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Nonfiction
1
1
6
CROSSING THE THRESHOLD OF HOPE, by John Paul II.
Edited by Vittorio Messori. (Knopf, $20.) The Pope discusses matters of belief, suffering and hope.
2
2
10
DON'T STAND TOO CLOSE TO A NAKED MAN, by Tim Allen. (Hyperion, $19.95.) Anecdotes and meditations on life by the star of "Home Improvement."
3
3
14
COUPLEHOOD, by Paul Reiser. (Bantam, $19.95.) Essays on the ups and downs of marriage by the television star and stand-up comedian.
4
4
11
JAMES HERRIOT'S CAT STORIES, by James Herriot. (St. Martin's, $16.95.) A collection of tales.
5
6
13
BARBARA BUSH: A Memoir, by Barbara Bush. (Drew/Scribners, $25.) The former First Lady's life.
6
9
9
DOLLY, by Dolly Parton. (HarperCollins, $25.) The autobiography of the country singer.
7
5
6
THE BELL CURVE, by Richard J. Herrnstein and Charles Murray. (Free Press, $30.) Ways in which differences in intelligence affect American life.
8
8
51
THE BOOK OF VIRTUES, by William J. Bennett. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $30.) Moral stories adapted from the Greeks, the Bible, folklore and elsewhere.
9
7
9
THE HOT ZONE, by Richard Preston. (Random House, $23.) The discovery of a lethal virus, more infectious than H.I.V., and the efforts to keep it from spreading.
10
13
40
MIDNIGHT IN THE GARDEN OF GOOD AND EVIL, by John Berendt. (Random House, $23.) The mysterious death of a young man in Savannah, Ga.
11
16
10
BASEBALL, by Geoffrey C. Ward and Ken Burns. (Knopf, $60.) An illustrated history of the game.
12
12
7
ALL THE TROUBLE IN THE WORLD, by P.J.
O'Rourke. (Atlantic Monthly, $22.) A humorist considers problems like overpopulation, famine and plague.
13
8
NO ORDINARY TIME, by Doris Kearns Goodwin. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $30.) The roles of Franklin and Eleanor Roosevelt during World War II.
14
10
6
NICOLE BROWN SIMPSON, by Faye D. Resnick with Mike Walker. (Dove Books, $14.95.) The former wife of O.J.
Simpson as remembered by a friend.
15
15
2
THE WARREN BUFFETT WAY, by Robert G. Hagstrom Jr. (Wiley, $24.95.) An account of the career of the man said to be the world's most successful investor.
16*
14
3
STRANGE JUSTICE, by Jane Mayer and Jill Abramson. (Houghton Mifflin, $24.95.) The nomination and confirmation of Clarence Thomas.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
81
MEN ARE FROM MARS, WOMEN ARE FROM VENUS, by John Gray. (HarperCollins, $23.) Ways to improve communication and relationships between the sexes.
2
2
33
IN THE KITCHEN WITH ROSIE, by Rosie Daley. (Knopf, $14.95.) Recipes by Oprah Winfrey's cook.
3
3
11
MAGIC EYE III, by N.E.
Thing Enterprises. (Andrews &amp; McMeel, $12.95.) Oscillating designs in color.
4
4
2
THE BUBBA GUMP SHRIMP CO.
COOKBOOK. (Oxmoor House, $14.95.) Seventy-five shrimp recipes, said to have been inspired by Forrest Gump.
Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending Nov. 26, at 3,050 bookstores plus wholesalers serving 28,000 other retailers (gift shops, department stores, newsstands, supermarkets), statistically weighted to represent sales in all such outlets nationwide.
An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
And Bear in Mind (Editor's Choices of other recent books of particular interest) THE COLLECTED STORIES OF LOUIS AUCHINCLOSS. (Houghton Mifflin, $24.95.) Nineteen stories, the oldest from the 1940's, by a writer unfashionably and passionately concerned with the beliefs and behavior of the WASP civilization that until very recently produced America's ruling class.
D.H.
LAWRENCE: The Story of a Marriage, by Brenda Maddox. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $30.) Lawrence's violent life with the formidable Frieda Weekley, who bedded him 20 minutes after she met him, makes for absorbing if unappetizing reading.
THE DIVINE CHILD: A Novel of Prenatal Rebellion, by Pascal Bruckner. (Little, Brown, $21.95.) A wonderfully appalling story by a French novelist about a monster in utero.
IN PHARAOH'S ARMY: Memories of the Lost War, by Tobias Wolff. (Knopf, $23.) The follow-up volume to Mr.
Wolff's memoir "This Boy's Life" is a series of small, elegant, personal sketches of his year in Vietnam.
THE LAST SHOT: City Streets, Basketball Dreams, by Darcy Frey. (Richard Todd/Houghton Mifflin, $19.95.) Mr.
Frey examines the myth of deliverance through basketball on the courts of Coney Island, where black youths compete to be exploited by coaches, colleges and, in the rarest cases, by professional sports.
LOST PURITAN: A Life of Robert Lowell, by Paul Mariani. (Norton, $27.50.) This approach to the "real" character of a protean confessional poet uses letters and diaries to reveal a writer whose fascination with preachers, statesmen and generals hints at restlessness with his own art.
MAKING MALCOLM: The Myth and Meaning of Malcolm X, by Michael Eric Dyson. (Oxford University, $19.95.) Malcolm X is the thread that stitches together these eloquent, freewheeling essays on hip-hop culture, black films and the tragic lives of poor black men.
THE MASTER OF PETERSBURG, by J.M.
Coetzee. (Viking, $21.95.) The hero of Mr.
Coetzee's grimmest novel yet is Dostoyevsky himself, trapped in generational and political clashes, trying to scrape meaning from the death of a son.
THE PRIVATE LIFE OF CHAIRMAN MAO: The Memoirs of Mao's Personal Physician, by Li Zhisui. (Random House, $30.) A detailed recounting of Mao Zedong's prodigious hankerings for fatty pork, young women and sleeping pills.
SEARCHING FOR MERCY STREET: My Journey Back to My Mother, Anne Sexton, by Linda Gray Sexton. (Little, Brown, $22.95.) An intimate account of growing up the daughter of a mad, child-abusing, suicidal, brilliant poet, and of resolving such an upbringing from the inside out.
TOULOUSE-LAUTREC: A Life, by Julia Frey. (Viking, $34.95.) A valuable life of the only great painter of France's golden age who was an aristocrat, incorporating much family correspondence recently made available.


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
'SHEPHERD'S CANTATA'
"La Cantata dei Pastori," or "The Shepherd's Cantata," will be the commedia dell'arte-style Christmas entertainment with which audiences at the Caramoor Center for Music and the Arts in Katonah will be regaled next Saturday by I Giullari di Piazza, or Jesters of the Square.
This rollicking, bespangled, cloaked and masked troupe of 15 actors, dancers and musicians, aided and abetted by giant puppets, has re-created a 17th-century Neapolitan Christmas play filled with dragons, angels, comedy and suspense revolving around demons who have terrible things in mind for the Christ child.


For Holiday Crowds, Buffet Can Be Ideal
As the calendar runs down, thoughts inevitably turn to holiday parties.
The buffet supper is not only one of the easiets ways to entertain a crowd, it can be one of the most enjoyably relaxed for both guests and hosts.
But a buffet table calls for some pragmatic planning.
The array of food should look bountiful and inviting.
It must involve dishes that can be prepared in advance and will not be damaged by sitting out for an hour or so.


INSIDE
Search for Missing Crew
With weather over the Atlantic clearing, rescuers found two survivors of a Ukrainian cargo ship that sank and searched for 29 other crewmen.
Page 42.
Commuter Flights Grounded
Airlines canceled hundreds of flights that were to be flown by the propeller-driven aircraft that were banned by the F.A.A. from flying in icing conditions.
Page 30.
Change at Ford Foundation
Franklin A. Thomas, president of the Ford Foundation for the last 15 years, will step down in 1996 to pursue other interests.
Page 51.
A Record N.F.L.
Catch
For the 178th consecutive game, Art Monk caught a pass, establishing a new N.F.L. mark.
The Jets, however, lost, 18-7.
SportsSunday, section 8.


THE PAINTER'S LIFE IS CRACKING
Arthur Lubow's story about R. B. Kitaj was heartbreaking -- another American artist lynched by the London press ("The Painter's Life Is Cracking," Nov. 13).
A century ago, James McNeill Whistler struck back at the nasty notices he got, in a fat book he titled "The Gentle Art of Making Enemies." Some art-world Brits are still a little miffed that Benjamin West, a Yank, became president of the Royal Academy -- and that happened in 1792.
So it's no surprise that resentment over Kitaj's getting a Tate show has brought out the worst in the art bunch.


Q. &amp; A.
Buying A Co-op In Default Q In June 1993 I purchased a co-op unit from the sponsor.
In December 1992 the co-op had stopped paying the mortgage.
I was sold the co-op without being told that the mortgage payments by the co-op had been discontinued.
Now the bank is taking the building back.
Can I sue the sponsor and the managing company for not telling me? . . .
Meta Stryzko, Brooklyn.


New &amp; Noteworthy Paperbacks
HONEY: Stories By Elizabeth Tallent.
Vintage Contemporaries, $11.
The relationship between partners in love affairs and marriages is the territory explored in these nine tales, which examine the often confused feelings that intimacy engenders.
"They are full of wisdom and, finally . . . tender grace," Jay Parini said here last year.
W.
E.
B.
DU BOIS: Biography of a Race, 1868-1919 By David Levering Lewis.
John Macrae/Owl/Holt, $17.95.
Winner of a Pulitzer Prize and selected as one of the best books of 1994 by the editors of The New York Times Book Review, this study reconstructs the first half of a long and complicated life.
The book shows how W. E. B. Du Bois worked to create an image of himself as well as one of the future of black people, whose civil rights he tirelessly championed both in the United States and the rest of the world.
Our reviewer, Waldo E. Martin Jr., said: "Mr. Lewis is a deft and sensitive guide. . . . He so vividly evokes the environments that shaped Du Bois that one almost participates in the life."


DEC. 4-10: One Gaffe Too Many; Controversial to the End, Surgeon General Is Undone By Her Outspokenness
Jocelyn Elders has been nothing if not controversial.
So it was no surprise that the abrupt end to her tenure as Surgeon General on Friday generated controversy itself.
The White House said President Clinton had seen no alternative but to dismiss Dr.
Elders after learning about her latest surprising remark -- this one, a suggestion that she could support teaching schoolchildren to masturbate because that might limit the spread of AIDS.


The Virtues Of Jewelweed
Jewelweed, also known as balsam, snapweed, spotted touch-me-not and lady's earrings, is "my" plant.
I object to its dismissal as a "dreadful weed nuisance" in the Gardening column of Oct. 16, although, to be fair, it noted several positive attributes.
For the last two decades, its germination characteristics and population variability have kept me and other botanists from Massachusetts to Nebraska professionally occupied.
Because it is an annual and produces both showy out-crossing flowers and tiny self-pollinating ones (its old name was Impatiens biflora), it has been a suitable subject for investigating challenging evolutionary and ecological questions.
Gene flow between individuals and over ecological gradients has been studied.


DEMOCRATS READY TO BATTLE G.O.P. OVER NEW BUDGET
Democrats, both in the White House and on Capitol Hill, are keenly aware that the first great defining battle of the 1996 election cycle may center on the Federal budget, and they are struggling to find a way to turn it to their advantage.
The stakes are apparent to every Democrat, particularly the Congressional leaders who met with White House officials this week in a room at a Capitol they no longer control, near a portrait of the late Speaker Thomas P. O'Neill Jr. that struck some as a particularly poignant backdrop.


Rape Accusations Linger Against Officer
More than one year after five black men working in the unlicensed van trade in the Rockaway area accused a male police officer of raping them at gunpoint, there remains no resolution in the bizarre and racially charged case.
Despite an investigation that the Queens District Attorney says is one of the most exhaustive his office has ever conducted, the office has neither dropped the case nor presented it to a grand jury for possible prosecution.
The unexplained delay has increased calls for a state-appointed special prosecutor to take control of the case.
Several Queens community leaders and legislators have asked Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo to name a special prosecutor, and they were recently joined by State Senator David A. Paterson, a Manhattan Democrat, who wrote to the Governor that he did not understand why the case had been allowed to languish.


Camping It Up
To the Editor:
Who am I to argue with a $37 million advance, but Vincent Canby's review of "Sunset Boulevard"  [ "A Glittering 'Sunset' Rises," Nov. 27 ]  is as over the top as Glenn Close's performance.


Study Breaks?
To the Sports Editor:


Margaret Mullen And Paul Chmiel
Margaret Mary Mullen, a daughter of Judge and Mrs.
Michael F. Mullen of Huntington, L.I., was married yesterday to Paul Bernard Chmiel, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Felix J. Chmiel of Tequesta, Fla.
Msgr.
John F. Casey, an uncle of the bride, performed the ceremony at the Church of St.
Vincent Ferrer in New York.
Mrs.
Chmiel, 27, is a marketing manager at Polo/Ralph Lauren in New York.
She and her husband graduated from Fairfield University.
Her father is an acting justice of the State Supreme Court and the supervising judge of the Suffolk County Superior Criminal Court, both in Riverhead, L.I.


The Nation; Hardy Perenials In U.S. Farm Policy
POLICY buffs who enjoyed this year's impassioned debate over health care will love the battles next year over farm policy.
Congress has to agree by next fall on how to replace the expiring 1990 farm rules.
For the new Republican majority, it will be a stark test of how deeply it really believes that the Federal Government does more harm than good by interfering with market forces.
In the end, the battle is bound to illustrate just how tough it will be for Republicans to deliver on their promise to trim the role of Government in the average citizen's life.
Bewildering Barriers
Current farm policy looks at first glance to be an easy target for radical reformers.
No one is denying it is made up of a hodgepodge of sometimes conflicting programs, many of them dating from the Great Depression of the 1930's, when both farming and rural life in general were vastly different.
Most of the billions of dollars spent these days on subsidies goes to big corporations or farmers who are wealthier than the average taxpayer.
Farm programs are intended to boost incomes for producers of dairy products and crops through a bewildering array of barriers to the free flow of goods and prices.
There are import quotas protecting the dairy industry and crops like sugar and peanuts.
The Agriculture Department sets price floors for the dairy industry by region.
And it enforces marketing programs, developed by the growers themselves, of more than 40 different fruits and crops.
The Government also provides bargain loans and subsidized insurance.
And, in a program subject to unpredictable multi-billion dollar swings in cost to taxpayers, Washington makes direct payments to corn, wheat, rice and cotton growers when market prices for those crops fall below Federally designated targets.
Critics say those policies contribute to ills ranging from the loss of Indonesian rain forests to the decline of the small American family farm.
Farmers for their part have deep misgivings about whether the benefits they get are worth all the restrictions they must also accept on how they farm.
A recent survey by the University of Illinois and Purdue University of 10,000 farmers found that 37 percent wanted the entire system scrapped, almost as many as the 41 percent who supported it.
For all its faults, though, American farm policy has a long track record of winning bipartisan support, and some who have followed it over the years wonder why there is so much griping.
Americans spend about 12 percent of their disposable income on food, among the lowest percentage in the world.
The nation's farmers set new production records this year in corn, soybeans, cotton and rice and, with cooperative weather, clearly have the tools to break those records for these and other crops in years to come.
Farm goods make up one of the brightest spots in the trade picture -- American farmers are the world's most productive -- and with exports invariably top imports by a wide margin.
Moreover, farm incomes have been rising in recent years and farm debt has fallen.
To be sure, small farms continue to disappear by the thousands, but the rate is down sharply from 30 years ago.
Soil is being more carefully preserved.
And the newer pesticides are more benign environmentally and used more carefully.
"I think the programs are working reasonably well," said Dan Glickman, a Kansas Democrat who lost his seat last month and now is said to be the leading candidate to replace Mike Espy as Agriculture Secretary in January.
The trend in recent times has been to renew the concept of Federal income support for farmers every fifth year, but each time at a lower level and with new environmental, production and accounting strings attached.
Payments have already fallen to less than half the record $25.8 billion in direct assistance farmers received in 1986 as the result of reforms in farm legislation passed in 1985 and 1990.
This year's bumper crops drove prices down to levels that are expected to send the payments soaring by several billion dollars next year, creating new fodder for critics who see the programs as budget dynamite.
But Republicans who will lead the debate for their party are already warning off those inclined to push for sweeping reform.
"There's something to be said for stability," said Pat Roberts, the Kansas Republican who will head the House Agriculture Committee.
Mr.
Roberts' constituents include wheat farmers who have been among the biggest beneficiaries of subsidies.
The problem for those who would settle for tinkering with the existing structure to save money -- say, by decreasing the percentage of land on which a farmer can get support payments or lowering the price targets at which the subsidies kick in -- is that many farmers may simply drop out.
That would make a shambles of related "voluntary" programs like those requiring farmers to accept soil conservation rules in order to remain eligible for subsidies.
'Close to the Bottom'
"We are pretty close to the bottom of the barrel on what you can cut and still get voluntary compliance in other areas," said Abner Womack, an agricultural economist at the University of Missouri who has studied various possible packages of farm policy for the Food and Agricultural Policy Institute, a research organization sponsored by six universities.
With the trend toward a slimmed-down Agriculture Department already under way, most notably in plans announced last week to shut down hundreds of field offices, the department looks more dependent than ever on farmers' willingness to observe both the letter and spirit of regulations.
Congress may get a shock when it adds up the cost of replacing the most popular pieces of the current policies.
If the Government does not subsidize exports, American farmers will be playing on an uneven field in world markets and lose market share to subsidized foreign producers.
If it does not pay to protect rural environments -- through incentives to farmers or bigger budgets for enforcers -- environmental problems will mount.
And if Congress does not want to risk much more volatility in food prices, the Government will have to play a role in supply management.
Indeed, when it comes to getting the Government out of agriculture, it looks like you cannot get there from here.


Anthony And Starks Sit One Out
John Starks wanted to come off the bench.
Instead, he and Greg Anthony wound up being benched by Pat Riley.
With Riley shaking up the Knicks' lineup in an effort to shake his team out of its recent funk, Starks and Anthony sat for all 48 minutes against the Philadelphia 76ers last night, while Doc Rivers enjoyed his first significant playing time in almost a year.


THE PAINTER'S LIFE IS CRACKING
Lubow has captured a realistically somber image of Kitaj's traumatic experience as an artist.


The World; Poachers 'n' Tigers 'n' Bears
IN the wretchedness of the Cau Mong animal market in Vietnam's largest city, another band of smiling foreign tourists has arrived.
The boisterous tour group from Taiwan is not here simply to browse among the dingy, foul-smelling cages crammed with exotic wildlife -- baby chimps and doe-eyed gibbons, sea turtles and tangles of lime-green jungle snakes, scaly anteater-like pangolins and squawking birds with plumage in every color.
The Taiwanese are here to buy.
"If you can wait a couple of weeks, we can also get you a tiger cub or a bear," said one of the Vietnamese merchants.


Sports of The Times; The Jets Must Pursue Jimmy J.
NOW that the Jets' record is 6-8, now that the Super Bowl XXIX playoffs are virtually unattainable, Leon Hess must pursue Jimmy Johnson as the new general manager and coach.
Would the Jets get him? They'll never know unless they try.


Secrets of Central Park West
BEYOND the big whale and the dinosaurs, the museum holds many well-kept secrets.
Indeed, a mere 2 percent of its 36 million-piece collection -- which ranges from stuffed mountain gorillas to nickel-striped meteorites, 90 million-year-old insects preserved in globs of amber and the world's biggest topaz -- is on view at any time.
Here is a highly selective listing of things you would probably never find yourself.
Some are open to the public, some are regularly open only to scholars.
Twice a year, however, the museum does give tours of selected areas behind the scenes; for information, call (212) 769-5606.
THE GALLERY On the fourth floor, behind the primitive-vertebrates hall now in the throes of renovation, the library gallery has periodic shows of material from the museum archives.
Right now, there are photographs, including old black-and-white prints of Indian chiefs and animals in the wild.
Some vintage cameras are also on display.
If you go, you'll probably have the place to yourself.


For 3DO, a Make-or-Break Season
AS the Brazilian soccer team on the television screen goes on the attack, thousands of cheering fans chant to a throbbing samba beat, captured on a lush Dolby soundtrack.
Though it is only a video game, the image is so lifelike that when players scramble, their colliding shadows appear darker, as they would in real life.
Released last month in time for Christmas by the 3DO Company, FIFA International Soccer, as the long-awaited game is known, has already achieved cult status among video game fans for its realism.
"By far, the best sports game ever made," wrote one enthusiast on America Online last month.
"It surpasses what the term video game stood for."


'Baseball,' Unlike Anything the Babe Knew
A TRUE CHILD OF NEW England, Moses Pendleton knows exactly where he was on the night of Oct. 25, 1986 -- following the World Series in his large Victorian home here.
When Mookie Wilson's grounder mysteriously slithered through the withered ankles of Bill Buckner and the game was lost, Mr.
Pendleton kicked angrily at the wooden floor, driving a four-inch splinter into his foot, which was nearly as painful as the ache in his heart.
Mr.
Pendleton, 45, has lived with the gloomy history of the Red Sox in the sport that once dared call itself the National Pastime.
Long before a dismal labor stoppage in August led to cancellation of the 1994 season, Mr.
Pendleton was working on a baseball work for the Momix troupe.
The new event is called "Baseball" and will have its premiere on Friday as part of a three-week Momix season at the Joyce Theater that begins on Tuesday.


Just Say No
To the Editor:
Unlike your reviewer, Michael Vincent Miller, who saw Linda Gray Sexton's "Searching for Mercy Street: My Journey Back to My Mother, Anne Sexton" (Nov. 20) as just another volume in "our growing library of biographies and autobiographies that emphasize depression, substance and sexual abuse, family violence, suicide and just plain general misery," I read it as a contribution to the growing literature of mothers and daughters, full of insights and (to me) very moving.
If Mr.
Miller craves books in which, in his reductionist view, "parents don't have to be pried loose from beating up the kids or each other and packed off to an alcohol rehab clinic or the locked ward of a mental hospital," why didn't he just say no to reviewing this one?
HELEN EPSTEIN  Cambridge, Mass.


P.L.O. Leader And 2 Israelis Share Award
Three men who started a long, far-from-completed journey toward peace in the Middle East stood in the ceremonial limelight here today and were presented with emblazoned gold medals, symbols of the world's recognition of their risky and historic endeavor.
One was an aging soldier and statesman, looking back on the grave silence that would descend each time he ordered the start of a military campaign.
Another was a diplomat recalling his youth in an agricultural village in Israel, a time of working the fields with scythes by day and defending one's home with rifles by night.


Certifiably Nuts
Cracking a nut is like tearing through holiday ribbons and wrapping.
One must display a certain respect for the package while caring for little other than its contents.
Aggressive abandon, in either case, can damage the gift within, though something has to be shattered in order for the essence to be revealed.
It's never entirely clear whether a nut will reveal itself as a practical gift or a frivolous one.
Nuts can go either way.
When combined with herbs and aromatics to create savory dishes, nuts tend to taste sweet.
When combined with sugar and spice, they taste rich and earthy and lend a certain substance to cookies, pies or cakes.


Wall Street; Bonds for the Strong of Stomach
IT is hardly for widows and orphans.
But some traders think that the former Soviet Union's $26 billion worth of commercial bank debt, which is trading on secondary markets for around 32 cents on the dollar, could prove a good bet for those investors with the stomach to hold it for the long term.
The loans, one of several classes of Russian debt that are traded in Europe and the United States, have been a volatile investment for several years, and the coming months could bring more of the same.


Bridge Players to Gather
Players from the Netherlands, Italy, Denmark, Ireland and Poland are among the 200 to 400 participants expected for Malta's first International Bridge Festival, Feb. 10 to 19, 1995.
Besides Robert Sheehan, a world title holder, a slew of bridge notables are invited, including the actor Omar Sharif.
Play, at the Mediterranean Conference Center in Valletta, commences weeknights at 8.
For information, call the Malta National Tourist Organization, (212) 695-9520.


Ideas &amp; Trends; Is This Really a Bitter Winter? Or Did the Almanac Cry Wolf?
AS an extraordinarily long Indian summer gives way to weather more typical of winter's approach, Northeasterners are looking over their shoulders at the incessant snowstorms that battered their region in early 1994 and wondering with a shiver if the weeks ahead hold more of the same.
Earlier this autumn, the 1995 Old Farmer's Almanac fed the fear of a repeat performance by predicting a snowier than normal winter for most of the Northeast.
The credibility of that forecast took a major hit when November, which the almanac said would be cold and wet in the eastern two-thirds of the country, turned out to be warmer than usual everywhere east of the Rockies.
Instead of the frigid, snowy month predicted by the Almanac for them, New Yorkers, for instance, experienced a gloriously warm November: Temperatures averaged more than 4 degrees above normal, slightly less precipitation fell than average and the merest trace of snow dusted the area on Thanksgiving Eve.
Prediction or Prestidigitation?
Now the National Weather Service, which itself is not always right but whose November forecast was on the mark, is predicting a milder than normal winter for most of the country.


Only Stoics Need Apply For BOC
Sailing alone around the world isn't for everyone, much less anyone.
But during the last two weeks, mighty doses of Indian Ocean wind and waves have given new meaning to the word stoicism when it comes to racing in the BOC Challenge.
Two sailboat masts have toppled into the sea, and a third one almost gave way.
A rudder disappeared from the back of a boat as if a sea serpent had done its dirty work.
Gear fittings have come undone.
And sails the size of swimming pool covers have ripped and torn like paper through a shredder.


Comparison Shopping on the Tree Circuit
SALES of Christmas trees are beginning to accelerate.
For a sense of price and variety, here is a brief sampling of the open-air sites that sell the trees around town.
MANHATTAN  PLACE At Hannas, a food-and-plant store, Third Avenue, 90th Street.
TYPE Douglas firs, balsams, Norfolk pines.
PRICES Firs, $50 each at eight feet; pines, from $25 to $50; Small potted two-foot Italian pines for $25 each.
NOTES Free delivery in 12-block radius.
PLACE Hudson Pier, West Street and 11th Street.
TYPE Frasier firs; Douglas firs, balsams, blue spruces, noble firs and grand firs.
PRICES Eight-foot balsam sells for between $60 and $80; The most expensive tree: a $200 noble fir.
NOTES Guarantees given for needle retention and fragrance.
PLACE Broadway and 73d Street, southwest corner.
TYPE Balsams, Frasier firs, Douglas  firs, scotch pines, blue spruces.
PRICES Most expensive: a Frasier fir, between $120 and $150.
The 12-foot Douglas fir sells for $125.
The most popular tree, the balsam fir, sells for between $80 and $100.
NOTES In past years, customers have included the weatherman Al Roker and John F. Kennedy Jr. and Darryl Hannah (a Douglas fir, delivered).
BROOKLYN  PLACE Knapp Street, Avenue V, Sheepshead Bay TYPE Douglas fir, balsam, Frasiers and scotch pine.
"The best tree is a Douglas fir -- they are the fullest tree," says Tom Farrell, the owner.
PRICES Varies by size.
Ten-foot Douglas firs sell for $70.
NOTES "It's cold out," says Mr.
Farrell.
"We're open 24 hours until the twenty-third. Then I'm going to take my wife to the Caribbean." PLACE Seventh Avenue and 11th Street, Park Slope.
TYPE Douglas firs.
PRICES From about $18 to $130. $45 for a five-foot tree.
NOTES "Business is great," says the seller, Paul Collins.
"We plan to sell every last tree. We have 600." QUEENS  PLACE Gino's Garden Center, Hillside Avenue and 196th Street, Hollis TYPE Douglas firs and Balsams.
PRICES Balsam, $20 to $50; Douglas firs, $16 to $60.
NOTES "When Mario Cuomo was Governor, he'd come here with his bodyguards dressed in jeans just like regular people," says the owner, Gino Gattuso.
"He'd duck between the trees when they came so they wouldn't recognize him." PLACE Behind the Georgia Diner, Queens Boulevard and 86th Avenue, Elmhurst.
TYPE Paul Katsihtis, the owner, breaks it down: balsams ("The traditional tree. Makes the whole house smell nice"); spruce ("They stink"); pine ("No smell"); Douglas firs (Overrated, he says).
PRICES From $15 to $75.
NOTES On the Douglas fir: "People ask for them because they don't know any better." BRONX  PLACE Outside Hub Cap City, Bruckner Boulevard and Leggett Avenue, Hunts Point.
TYPE Only Douglas firs.
"They're full; people love them," says the seller, Louis Nieves.
PRICES Six and seven-foot trees, $35 to $40.
NOTES "We don't get rich on it but we're filling the need," says Mr.
Nieves.
PLACE Bedford Park Boulevard and Webster Avenue, Bedford Park.
TYPE Douglas firs and balsams.
PRICES Low: $30.
High: $55 (for an 11-foot Douglas fir tree).
NOTES "I chain my trees up," says the seller, David Stretch.
"There is a lot of crime here."


Late-Night Run for the Environment
The midnight train is an odd sight on the commuter line that cuts through the suburbs: 72 coal cars strung out for almost a half mile and filled with 5,000 tons of freshly dug soil bound for Liberty State Park in Jersey City.
Late each weeknight, after the last commuter train runs, the dirt train pulls away from a spur next to a marsh-in-the-making in the woods here and heads south for 23 miles through Montclair, Glen Ridge and other sleeping towns with new earth for the barren and long-undeveloped interior of the state park.


Pastor's Removal Fuels Tension Among Factions at a Church
The bickering inside the First United Methodist Church of Jamaica has reached such a peak in the last year that political leaflets are passed out on Sunday mornings, accusations are made during services, and a committee established to reconcile the warring groups concluded, perhaps charitably, that it could not be of service.
But the Bishop's recent decision to remove the church's pastor in an effort to heal the rift seems only to have made matters worse, leading some Filipino members to charge racism and threaten to leave the church.


Helicopter Doesn't Fly
With its simulated helicopter tour of Maui, the Hyatt Regency Maui offers a quieter, if stationary, alternative to noisy choppers.
The 30-minute "tour" takes place on a flight simulator in the lobby, where guests are briefed, buckled into seats and handed headphones.
The "ride" costs $29.95, $24.95 for children aged 12 and under.
For information, call (808) 661-0092.
TERRY TRUCCO


Hook, Line and Sunk
CLENCHING A KNIFE IN HIS TEETH, FINGERS BLOODIED from a long night wrestling squid and a new net that cuts to the bone, Tony Demelo finishes up his chores in the port where Herman Melville learned how to swear.
The morning light has chased away the prostitutes and drug dealers who roam the cobbled streets of New Bedford's waterfront district, bartering in Portuguese.
Nearby, commuter traffic carries workers with soft hands and clean clothes to office towers in Providence and Boston.
For more than a week Demelo has bounced atop the Atlantic at its most convulsive, sleeping on a bunk in a cabin smaller than a prison cell.
His 55-foot boat reeks of blood, fish slime and rust -- a hybrid scent that has enveloped this harbor since it was a British colony.


Showtime! The Once and Future Dream Palace
THEY HAD FACADES THEN.
IN legendary styles: Egyptian, Moorish, Mayan, Chinese.
And grand staircases, soaring lobbies, double-tiered balconies, murals, mirrors, chandeliers, statues, armies of uniformed ushers, not to mention acrobats and comedy acts taking turns between the movies.
The movies are still big.
It's the movie theaters that got small.
But now, playing at the corner of 68th and Broadway in New York, is the long-gone attraction you've been waiting for.
The movie palace is back, and Sony's got it.
Sony's new Lincoln Square theater complex is a movie palace for the multiplex age.
Except for one "premiere" auditorium and the colossal 3-D Imax theater on the top floor, the new Sony Theaters are regulation mall size.
There's no stage show at Lincoln Square, just a chorus line of Hollywood ghosts.
Each of Sony's 12 theaters (only 6 have opened so far) is named for some vanished dream palace of Hollywood's golden age.
Avalon.
Valencia.
Capitol.
Majestic.
And they have the ornamental motifs to go with all the memories those names summon up.
The entrance to each auditorium is framed with a miniature version of a movie-palace facade.
There are sphinxes.
Palm trees with golden trunks and feathery black fronds.
Mayan temple arches.
Neo-classical festoons.
Pagodas.
Spanish baroque wrought iron grilles.
Miles of Art Deco carpeting.


Little Boxes, All Decked Out And Ready to Play
Boxed sets have become an annual holiday ritual for fans and record companies alike.
And if all the gold- and platinum-selling sets are any indication, record companies have figured out how to please both first-time listeners and dedicated collectors.
Here are 26 choices our critics found noteworthy.
Prices are suggested retail.
The Band: 'Across the Great Divide'  Capitol; three CDs ($50)


Connecticut Q&amp;A: George F. Cloutier; Pines, Pure Water and Lots of Wildlife
THIS is the time of year when everyone is fixated on trees, particularly the Christmas products of Connecticut's tree farms.
And among tree farmers, George F. Cloutier of Ballamahack Road in Windham, the state's Tree Farmer of the Year, is considered one of the best.
Mr.
Cloutier, 72 years old, is a 1949 graduate of the forestry program at the University of Connecticut.
A forest fire spotter in Idaho, he later joined the International Paper Company in Maine and New Hampshire before returning to Connecticut to take various forestry jobs and retiring in 1978 as acting state forester.


Against Androgyny
A TALE OUT OF SCHOOL.
The summer had been miserable.
We had moved and renovated.
We were broke, spent and at each other's throats.
One night the master bedroom filled with storm clouds; I was sitting on the edge of the chaise, aimlessly browsing a book, when they broke.
I don't remember what was said, but the next thing I knew, she had knocked the book from my hand and was pummeling me.
She yelled, I yelled, we bickered, back and forth, for hours.
Later we withdrew to the far perimeters of the bed, alone and bitter and as far apart as we've been.
And then, suddenly, I understood: even in our most intimate moments, we were aliens, not for want of tenderness or appetite, not for lack of understanding or a will to be one, but because she was a woman and I was a man, and nothing -- not 22 years of taking each other's measure, not even our boys, our unassailable alliance of blood -- could bridge that biological gap.


Leighanne Lake, Edward Kubec
Leighanne Lake, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Francis E. Lake Jr. of Short Hills, N.J., was married yesterday to Edward Michael Kubec, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
E.
O.
Kubec of Manhasset, L.I.
The Rev.
John A. Boehning performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at the Church of St.
Thomas More in New York.
The bride, 28, graduated from Boston College.
She and her husband received law degrees from Fordham University.
She is an associate at Fogel, Feldman, Ostrov, Ringler &amp; Klevens, a law firm in Santa Monica, Calif.
Her father is a partner in Putney, Twombly, Hall &amp; Hirson, a New York law firm.


New/Old Entry for the Queens Museum; Once Again, Face to Face With the Unisphere
The Queens Museum of Art has changed direction and returned to the past -- sort of.
The museum, which reopened last month, has as part of its three-year, $15 million reconstruction re-established its building's main entrance on the eastern facade, facing Flushing Meadows Corona Park and the Unisphere, the large globe built by United States Steel that was the symbol of the 1964 New York World's Fair.


Little Boxes, All Decked Out And Ready to Play
Boxed sets have become an annual holiday ritual for fans and record companies alike.
And if all the gold- and platinum-selling sets are any indication, record companies have figured out how to please both first-time listeners and dedicated collectors.
Here are 26 choices our critics found noteworthy.
Prices are suggested retail. 'Louis Armstrong: Portrait of the Artist as a Young Man' Columbia; four CDs ($59.98)


Profile; He's Back! The Amazing Human Selling Machine!
STROLL through the housewares department at Bloomingdale's this holiday season and you'll find all the top brands: Kitchenaid, Cuisinart, Popeil.
Popeil? As in Pocket Fisherman?


President of Ford Foundation Plans to Step Down in 1996
Franklin A. Thomas, the president of the Ford Foundation for the last 15 years, will step down in 1996 and be succeeded by Susan V. Berresford, a vice president at the organization.
The change was announced on Friday by the foundation's board.
Mr.
Thomas, 60, the organization's first black president, was appointed in January 1979 to succeed McGeorge Bundy, the former national security adviser for Presidents John F. Kennedy and Lyndon B. Johnson.


At Its Best, Music Warms the Heart, Not the Brain
IT WAS NICE TO OPEN THE newspapers last week and see Aretha Franklin standing next to Morton Gould.
The Kennedy Center Honors, given every year in Washington, is a still smarmy if somewhat classier version of those amoe bically multiplying award shows on television.
Its studied democracy of taste is not without value.
And then there is the White House reception afterward, which beats the Rainbow Room anytime.
People are used to having their cultures more segregated: class-, color- and dress-coded to make sure that the spiritually cleansed and the unwashed know which door to go through.
High culture is the best culture, we are often told.
Aretha Franklin is fine, but remember that something nobler awaits upstairs.


Who'll Stop the Rain? Once Again, Not the Jets
Forget ancient history; the current history is bad enough.
The Jets today couldn't overcome the emotional slide that began only two and a half games ago, when they led the Dolphins by 24-6 in the third quarter -- and lost.
And lost again last weekend at New England.
And lost today to the Lions, 18-7, virtually ending their playoff chances.


Charity Is No Excuse for Bribery
To the Editor:
Rachel Ehrenfeld's well-intentioned proposal that American corporations contribute to charity on behalf of corrupt foreign officials instead of paying demanded bribes is misguided.
A bribe is a bribe.
An official who requests additional compensation to perform his legitimate functions, whether or not he receives it directly, is still getting a benefit.
BRIAN F. QUINN  Springfield, Va., Nov. 17


At Christmas, Life Can Be Wonderful For Robbers Too
Cobb  Tommy Lee Jones, Robert Wuhl, Lolita Davidovich Directed by Ron Shelton R 130 minutes


Ann F. Walker, Byron Marchant
Ann Fairfax Walker, a special assistant to the President in Washington, was married there yesterday to Byron Frank Marchant, a senior vice president and the general counsel at Telecommunications Systems Inc., an engineering company in Annapolis, Md.
The Rev.
Barbara Duncan performed the Episcopal ceremony at the Metropolitan Memorial National Methodist Church.
Mrs.
Marchant is also the director of communications research at the White House.
She graduated from Sarah Lawrence College.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
George H. Walker 3d of Washington.
The bride's father is the president of Opportunity Systems, a computer consulting firm in Washington.
Her mother, Clarice Dibble Walker, is the Commissioner of Social Services for the District of Columbia and is an associate professor of social work at Howard University, in Washington.


Trimming the Nation's Fat
Obesity has reached epidemic proportions in the U.S. and nobody knows quite what to do about it.
But last week two prominent medical authorities -- former Surgeon General C. Everett Koop and the Institute of Medicine, a unit of the prestigious National Academy of Sciences -- issued timely recommendations that make a start toward pulling in the expanding national paunch.
Health authorities were shocked by a huge increase in obesity over the last decade or so -- from 25 percent of the public in a 1976-80 survey to 33 percent in 1988-91.
The reasons for the gain -- obesity means 20 percent or more above desirable weight -- are not understood.
Despite the recent discovery of an obesity gene and the well-recognized fact that genes play a role in predisposing people to obesity, there has been no major change in the national gene pool over the short span of a decade.


Mildred Hilson Is Dead at 96; Fund-Raiser and Arts Patron
Mildred Hilson, a grande dame of New York's charity circuit who entertained royalty and heads of state in her suite at the Waldorf Towers, died yesterday morning at home.
She was 96.
She had been in poor health for five years, her granddaughter, Wendy Levey, said.


Looking South In the East Village
BABY JAKE'S ++ (212) 254-2229; 14 First Avenue, at First Street; $; American Express
Checkerboard linoleum tile floors, Southern road signs, Formica-topped diner tables, a jukebox playing in the corner and New Orleans-style fare contribute to a relaxed Cajun feel here.
While the food is quite good, the kitchen's occasional tendency to oversauce is something to watch out for.
Current starters include fried calamari with a roasted tomato and basil dipping sauce; fried cornmeal-coated oysters with corn salsa and smoked chile sauce, and grilled shrimp and andouille sausage with a creole honey-mustard sauce.
Among main courses are grilled chicken with chipotle mayonnaise and roasted peppers; fettucine combined with shrimp and crawfish, tomatoes and roasted garlic; blackened catfish with a bourbon pecan butter sauce, and grilled sirloin with a wild mushroom and red wine sauce. ($25 and Under: 1/21/94)


European Union to Open Talks on Expanding East
Leaders of the 12 European Union nations agreed today to begin open-ended discussions next month about membership for six Eastern European countries without setting a timetable for any of them to join.
Top officials from all six Eastern European countries that now have association agreements with the European Union -- Poland, the Czech Republic, Slovakia, Romania, Bulgaria and Hungary -- met with the leaders at the Villa Hugel, a sprawling 19th-century hilltop palace.


364 Days of Obscurity, 15 Minutes of Fame
IT happens once a year: six municipal employees get their 15 minutes.
They receive the Sloan Public Service Award, a check for $5,000 and a round of applause.
It is a moment of celebration for a class of people who, more than at any other time in the award's 23-year history, are under siege from public opinion and critics who think of them as superfluous soldiers in a slovenly army.


Miami's Cuban-Americans Rally for Solidarity Against Castro
Thousands of Cuban-Americans marched through the streets of Little Havana to the Orange Bowl today for a rally against Fidel Castro.
But while President Clinton and 33 Latin American leaders were here for a regional summit meeting, Mr.
Castro wasn't -- he wasn't invited.
The demonstration, one of the largest staged by Miami's Cubans, was intended to draw the attention of leaders who are sympathetic to Mr.
Castro and who favor lifting the United States' economic embargo of Cuba.
Organizers said it was the first time that they could address the hemisphere's leaders directly to ask for support.


Movable Fleas: Now, Avenue C
WHEN East Village club dwellers stumble home at daybreak on Sundays, Russell Bassarath is already at work, spreading flattened cardboard boxes on the sidewalk along Avenue C to stake out his spot in what has become one of the most popular flea markets around.
The market runs on both sides of the avenue from Seventh to 10th streets.
Merchandise is crammed onto any free scrap of pavement, so long as it doesn't interfere with the narrow walkway that is set aside for buyers.


Craig S. Kaufman, Dianne B. Smolen
Dianne Barbara Smolen, the daughter of Judge and Mrs.
Herbert Smolen of Philadelphia, was married last evening to Craig Stuart Kaufman, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Henry Kaufman of New York.
Rabbi Elliot Holin performed the ceremony at the Warwick Hotel in Philadelphia.
Mrs.
Kaufman, 31, is the foreign sales director of Video Age International Publications in New York.
She graduated from George Washington University.
Her father is an administrative law judge of the Pennsylvania Public Utilities Commission in Philadelphia.


Marie Cavosora, M. T. Woolhouse
Ann Marie Pronove Cavosora, an account executive at BBDO New York, the advertising agency, was married yesterday to Michael Thomas Woolhouse, a financial analyst at Salomon Brothers in New York.
The Rev.
Timothy Moore performed the nondenominational ceremony at Calvary Baptist Church in Torrington, Conn.
Mrs.
Woolhouse, 24, is known as Marie.
She graduated magna cum laude from Mount Holyoke College, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa.
The bride is a daughter of Col.
Feliberto B. Cavosora of Manila and Aida P. Cavosora of San Francisco.


Immigrants Are American Taxpayers Too
To the Editor:
Re "Anti-Alien Sentiment Spreading in Wake of California's Measure" (front page, Dec. 4):


WHAT'S NEW YORK THE CAPITAL OF NOW?
I think of New York City as a capital vacation!
It's a destination for people all over the world.
NANCY WEBSTER Miami


G.O.P. Freshmen Enter, Ready for Their Exits
Forgive the new Republicans in Congress if they have an identity crisis.
On the one hand, they are being heralded as conquering heros, even before they are sworn in.
Newt Gingrich, their new rajah, blesses them as "the moment in history." Jack Kemp, a longtime leader in the conservative movement, calls them "the most important people in Washington," their election even more far-reaching than Ronald Reagan's.


Storm Wins, Just for Fun
In scheduling an early-season exhibition against Marathon Oil -- a team made up of former professional and college players -- St.
John's sought to hone its skills and chemistry without suffering any damage to its record.
Last night, the Red Storm fullfilled those intentions through balanced scoring, beating the talented squad of retreads, 100-90, at Alumni Hall in Queens.


Letters
To the Editor:
Sylvia Nasar's article is a great contribution to the understanding of schizophrenia.
In disclosing the details of John Nash's tragedy, she provided a powerful, focused view of the emergence and impact of schizophrenia as it affects the victim, his family and others in his world.


What to Wear? Silly Question
The uniform for many holiday shoppers, a sweater with a greeting card motif, could be seen in full force during the recent stretch of mild weather.
Coats were left at home as tourists and shoppers filled Fifth Avenue and children headed for skating rinks.
Most of the sweaters are the knitted variety with reindeer, Santa, trees, gift boxes and ornaments across the front.
A less expensive version is the sweatshirt with printed designs.
The sweaters, even when half hidden in the cold, add their own festive decoration to the city's holiday scene.


Stephanie Seminara, Brian Labow
Dr.
Stephanie Beth Seminara, a daughter of Drs.
Gloria and Robert Seminara of Todt Hill, S.I., was married in Brooklyn last evening to Dr.
Brian Ian Labow, a son of Drs.
Rosalind and Stanley Labow of Ottawa.
Rabbi A. Allen Block officiated at the Brooklyn Botanic Garden.
The Rev.
John MacInnis, a Roman Catholic priest, took part in the ceremony.
The bride, 28, graduated from Harvard University, from which she and her husband received their medical degrees.
She is a fellow in endocrinology, with a specialty in the reproductive sciences, at Massachusetts General Hospital in Boston.


Lesson for Mr. Gingrich
To the Editor:
"Gingrich Is Urging a Tougher Policy on Bosnia's Serbs" (front page, Dec. 5) correctly reports remarks by Newt Gingrich, the incoming House Speaker, on "Meet the Press" Dec. 4.
He did advocate serving an ultimatum on the Serbs, threatening to use air power to "paralyze your capacity to function as a society."


NEWS SUMMARY
"When you leave Washington, you may miss Washington, but Washington will not miss you." TOM BARRETT, a family counselor, speaking at an orientation for Republican freshman.  [ 34:1. ]


College Game Is Limited By Lack of Pro League
College soccer has taken some giant strides in popularity and in becoming a home-grown sport, but circumstances, external and internal, are preventing it from gaining a wider base.
The absence of a top-notch professional league is considered one of the biggest handicaps for college soccer.
The better players have no place to go after graduating.


The Nanny Tax: Who Wins, Who Loses?
To the Editor:
In their scholarly analysis, the writers missed the point when they disparaged the notion that domestic workers might prefer not to pay Social Security taxes.
Such workers care little about Social Security.
They prefer that no one pay Social Security taxes because doing so reveals taxable income.
In the real world, it is not the poor who are paying while the rich profit; it is the "rich" who pay income taxes to compensate for the loss of Government income from nonpayment of income taxes by the "poor" who hide their income by choosing to operate outside of the Social Security system.
MURRAY BERDICK  Branford, Conn., Nov. 13


Amanda Seymann, Andrew Megibow
Amanda Jane Seymann, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Gilbert M. Seymann of Englewood Cliffs, N.J., was married last evening to Andrew Craig Megibow, the son of David Megibow of New Milford, N.J., and Joan Megibow of Englewood, N.J.
Rabbi Meir Berger performed the ceremony at the Penn Club in New York.
Mrs.
Megibow, 22, is to begin work in January as a consultant at Andersen Consulting in New York.
She received B.S. and B.A. degrees from the University of Pennsylvania.
Her father is a senior vice president of the Block Drug Company, a manufacturer in Jersey City.


At 70, a Female Composer Sharpens Work and Words
THE composer Ruth Schonthal is known for effortless improvisations -- a talent that extends to thoughts as well as melodies.
"I'm much too famous for my own good, but not famous enough to do me any good," she says.
Ask her about creativity in the elderly, the path of 20th-century music or the lot of female composers, and she weaves equally memorable riffs.
She made the remark about fame in her home here as she considered the implications of her recent 70th birthday.
Ms.
Schonthal shares the fate of many American composers and conductors, in particular, who are better known in Europe than in their own country.
The composer of more than 100 works, Ms.
Schonthal was honored this fall with concerts in her native Germany.
She also received the 1994 Heidelberg International Composition Prize for Women Composers and is the subject of a new German biography, "Ruth Schonthal: A Compositional Development in Exile," by Martina Helmig and published by Georg Olms.


WHAT'S NEW YORK THE CAPITAL OF NOW?
I was pleased to see my favorite city both tooting its own horn and settling down to some wry self-examination.
But I was disappointed by your choice of featured talent.
In the rush to capture the Next Big Thing, you bypassed an entire generation of New York artists.


Prophecy
To the Editor:
Just a week before your article on the new movie about Ty Cobb  [ "Ty Cobb Was Never Mr. Nice Guy," Nov. 27 ] , I bought at auction a letter that Cobb wrote to a friend in 1951.
It contains this passage:


In America; Racism 101
You'd like to think of it as a skit.
Play-acting.
Theater of the absurd.
The professor, in his African costume, stands before his student-followers and plays the buffoon.
Energized by the spotlight, the professor loudly proclaims that white people are nefarious, pigment-challenged "ice people" -- cold, egotistical and exploitive.
Black people, on the other hand, are warm and friendly, unfailingly humanistic and spiritual, the "sun people."


Susan J. Agin, Walter J. Stack Jr.
Susan Joy Agin, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Jack Agin of Massapequa Park, L.I., was married last evening to Walter Joseph Stack Jr., the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Stack of Levittown, L.I.
The Rev.
James Riehle, a Roman Catholic priest, officiated at the Sands at Lido Beach in Lido Beach, L.I.
Cantor David Benedict took part in the ceremony.
The bride, 30, graduated cum laude from the University of Massachusetts at Amherst.
She is the benefits manager for Lazard Freres &amp; Company, the investment bank in New York.
Her father is an internist in Hicksville, L.I.


The Nation: Time Warp; Republicans Like Both Previews and Reruns
A FEW days before Thanksgiving, the Republican Governors Association met in Williamsburg, Va., to celebrate the glorious election of 1994.
One of the main speakers was Alvin Toffler, the pop futurist author and lecturer.
After Mr.
Toffler finished his bromides about creating a third-wave civilization in which fundamentally different political institutions would serve a radically changed world, he was joined on stage for the question period by his wife and co-author, Heidi.
One of the first questions came from Gov.
Kirk Fordice of Mississippi.
Somewhat scornfully, he said he thought the point of the election was not that voters longed for a complicated cybercultural world like the one the Tofflers envision but rather that they yearned for the calmer life of the 1950's.


Michigan Pulls Off a 24-0 Run, But Duke Pulls Out the Game
Duke 69, Michigan 59
Duke won the battle of streaks against Michigan tonight and, with it, the game in Durham, N.C.


STEVE GUNDERSON
Representative Steve Gunderson was correct in countering Newt Gingrich's invidious comparison of homosexuality to alcoholism with the more apt analogy of gayness to left-handedness (Letters, Nov. 20).
As a left-handed tyke, I found the average pair of scissors less well tailored to my hand than I would have liked.
My grandmother urged my parents to force me to favor my right hand, in deference to nature's clear (to her) intention.
My parents, who did not view left-handedness to be in conflict with the natural order of things, encouraged me to find my own way of dealing with scissors, crayons and adversity.
Thanks to them I grew up understanding that -- at least in one regard -- being different need not be a curse.


LIFTOFF
Regarding the last sentence of "Liftoff," there is no need to worry about the young.
Our children introduced many of us to computers, and they are jetting off on the Internet ahead of us.
The rest of Frankel's essay is wonderfully, umm, uplifting.
JEAN PORTELL Brooklyn


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
NUTCRACKER ORIGINAL
The Stamford City Ballet is the only dance company in New England and one of only three companies across the country permitted to perform George Balanchine's original choreography for "The Nutcracker," and it will do so in seven performances beginning on Saturday at the Palace Theater, 61 Atlantic Street in downtown Stamford.
Staged by David Richardson, the production stars Darci Kistler and Damian Woetzel of the New York City Ballet, and Allegra Kent, former principal dancer of the New York City Ballet and current artistic adviser to the Stamford City Ballet.


'Blond Ghost'
To the Editor:
I much appreciated Joseph Finder's review of my book "Blond Ghost: Ted Shackley and the C.I.A.'s Crusades" (Oct. 23) -- especially Mr.
Finder's observation that this biography of a notorious Central Intelligence Agency officer helps explain current problems besieging the spy service.
But Mr.
Finder reprimanded me for committing three factual errors.
Allow me to respond.


Amtrak's Empty Promises
To the Editor:
Regarding "Fiat Hopes to Put a Tilt Into Amtrak's Trains" (Technology, Nov. 13), the idea of introducing tilting trains, which should reduce travel time between New York and Boston to less than three hours, has been around for some time.
I have lost track, however, of how long I have been reading about improved service in this corridor.
What I find amusing is that before Amtrak, there was excellent service from Grand Central Terminal to Bostonon the Advance Merchants Limited, which made the trip in 3 hours and 55 minutes.
When Amtrak moved all Boston departures to Pennsylvania Station to connect with arrivals from Washington and the South, it added an hour to the trip because of the circuitous route through Queens that trains must take to get under way.
Is this progress?
EGON PARKS  Manhattan, Nov. 13


The Artistic Merit Of an Estate
Re: West Orange Journal, "Town and Company at Odds Over an Estate," Nov. 20:
I am the chairman of the West Orange Historic Preservation Commission.
In the article, it is implied that the Pleasantdale Farms estate house and gardens are of little artistic or architectural merit.
While this is certainly the position that the property owner, Allied Signal, is taking now, the majority of architectural experts who have examined the property, including most of those examining it on behalf of Allied Signal, concluded that the property was of great artistic merit.


Macy's Now Just One Float in Megastore Parade
Tanya Lugo, a receptionist, loves visiting the new Bradlees on Union Square.
On her three visits last week to go Christmas shopping, she bought a jogging suit for her grandfather, a quilt for her mother, lingerie for her sister and earrings for herself.
"It's like being in a shopping mall," she said.
"They have all the selections and low prices. I love it."


Lights Out for Times Square News Sign?
Is it lights out for the zipper?
The zipper is the moving illuminated bulletin board that began carrying headlines around the triangular building at 42d Street and Broadway on Nov. 6, 1928.


Navy Yard: New Concerns
Over the years, a patchwork of toxic contamination has riddled the Brooklyn Navy Yard.
Decades of shipbuilding and painting with lead-based products fouled the area, and they were followed by years of waste backup from the nearby Newtown Creek Sewage Treatment Plant.
Last week, for the first time, a comprehensive picture of the hazardous wastes emerged, in a study commissioned by the New York Public Interest Research Group.
Using Government databases to map toxic wastes, the researchers found, among other things, 192,000 pounds of PCB-contaminated waste that has been spilled or stored, hazardous waste generators and a chemical storage area.


The Keys Fight to Put New Life in Florida Bay
He has no fancy scientific titles, but Jimmy Lozar has been fishing off the Florida Keys for years and says he knows dead water when he sees it.
"If I come up on a flat and I see sharks and rays and bait fish hopping up, you know it's alive," said Mr.
Lozar, a guide to the shallow fishing waters known as the flats.
"When you see nothing, you know something drastic has happened."


A Season Of Exotic Horror
JOANNE AKALAITIS is a quirky director and "Suddenly Last Summer" is a spooky play.
The match was made in a Dadaistic burst of visionary hell.
From the din preceding (and accompanying) the production at Hartford Stage (gulls screech and croak, wings taking off in raucous flight) it's clear to theatergoers that there's a jungle in here.
Marina Draghici's setting corresponds to Bruce Odland's sound design, with its tropical abstractions, sculpture and vulture in visual metaphor, crowned by a crystal chandelier that confirms a visiting doctor's impression: "It's like a well-groomed jungle."


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: December 11, 1994
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
30
INTERVIEW WITH THE VAMPIRE, by Anne Rice. (Ballantine, $6.99.) The 1976 novel that began "The Vampire Chronicles."
2
13
DISCLOSURE, by Michael Crichton. (Ballantine, $6.99.) An executive who rejected his boss is accused by her of sexual harassment.
3
11
THE VAMPIRE LESTAT, by Anne Rice. (Ballantine, $6.99.) Eerie carryings-on in a tale ranging from ancient Egypt to the 20th century.
4
3
A DANGEROUS FORTUNE, by Ken Follett. (Island/Dell, $6.99.) A young student's mysterious drowning in Victorian England.
5
6
MR. MURDER, by Dean Koontz. (Berkley, $6.99.) A mystery writer vs. a madman.
6
26
THE SHIPPING NEWS, by E. Annie Proulx. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $12.) A man mourns his adulterous wife in Newfoundland.
7
4
BAD LOVE, by Jonathan Kellerman. (Bantam, $6.50.) Tracking a series of violent deaths.
8
4
YOU BELONG TO ME, by Johanna Lindsey. (Avon, $6.50.) Romance in 19th-century Russia.
9
15
SMILLA'S SENSE OF SNOW, by Peter Hoeg. (Dell, $6.50.) A woman looks into a child's death.
10
11
VANISHED, by Danielle Steel. (Dell, $6.99.) The abduction of a young boy creates a crisis.
11*
2
SLOW WALTZ IN CEDAR BEND, by Robert James Waller. (Warner, $4.99.) The romance of a professor and a colleague's wife.
12
12
THE DOOR TO DECEMBER, by Dean Koontz. (Signet, $6.99.) A young girl disappears.
13
1
MCNALLY'S CAPER, by Lawrence Sanders. (Berkley, $6.50.) Archy McNally on the trail of a malefactor at large in a Palm Beach mansion.
14*
24
WITHOUT REMORSE, by Tom Clancy. (Berkley, $6.99.) John Kelly in North Vietnam.
15
15
LIKE WATER FOR CHOCOLATE, by Laura Esquivel. (Anchor/Doubleday, $5.99.) Love and hope -- plus recipes -- on a Mexican ranch.
16*
20
FORREST GUMP, by Winston Groom. (Pocket, $5.50.) The life of a slow-witted man.
17*
7
A HOLIDAY OF LOVE, by Judith McNaught, Jude Deveraux, Arnette Lamb and Jill Barnett. (Pocket, $5.99.) Four romantic stories.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
NonFiction
1
12
EMBRACED BY THE LIGHT, by Betty J. Eadie with Curtis Taylor. (Bantam, $5.99.) A woman's near-death experience.
2
11
HAVING OUR SAY, by Sarah L. Delany and A. Elizabeth Delany with Amy Hill Hearth. (Dell, $5.99.) Two black sisters reflect on their lives.
3*
48
CARE OF THE SOUL, by Thomas Moore. (Harper Perennial, $12.) A psychotherapist discusses spirituality and everyday life.
4
7
WOULDN'T TAKE NOTHING FOR MY JOURNEY NOW, by Maya Angelou. (Bantam, $5.50.) Essays on life and death, good and evil.
5
579
THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $10.95.) Inspiration.
6
15
A HISTORY OF GOD, by Karen Armstrong. (Ballantine, $14.) The development of monotheism over the past 4,000 years.
7
5
ARMORED CAV, by Tom Clancy. (Berkley, $15.) A tour of an armored cavalry regiment.
8
7
SEE, I TOLD YOU SO, by Rush Limbaugh. (Pocket, $6.99.) More comments on politics.
9
5
A MARRIAGE MADE IN HEAVEN ...
OR TOO TIRED FOR AN AFFAIR, by Erma Bombeck. (Harper Paperbacks, $5.99.) Thoughts on 44 years of marriage.
10*
46
WHERE ANGELS WALK, by Joan Wester Anderson. (Ballantine, $10.) Stories about angelic intervention in human affairs.
11*
7
FURTHER ALONG THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $12.) A discussion of spiritual growth.
12
13
PRIVATE PARTS, by Howard Stern. (Pocket, $6.99.) The memoirs of the radio personality.
13
11
DAKOTA, by Kathleen Norris. (Houghton Mifflin, $9.95.) A celebration of the changing life and terrain of the Great Plains.
14*
30
MAMA MAKES UP HER MIND, by Bailey White. (Vintage, $10.) Life in a Georgia town.
15*
95
I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS, by Maya Angelou. (Bantam, $4.99.) The poet's depiction of her childhood and adolescence.
16*
3
VAMPS &amp; TRAMPS, by Camille Paglia. (Vintage, $15.) Essays on subjects ranging from the Clintons to D.H.
Lawrence.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Advice, How-To and Miscellaneous
1
10
HOMICIDAL PSYCHO JUNGLE CAT, by Bill Watterson. (Andrews &amp; McMeel, $12.95.) A collection of "Calvin and Hobbes" cartoons.
2
11
CHICKEN SOUP FOR THE SOUL, compiled by Jack Canfield and Mark Victor Hansen. (Health Communications, $12.) Stories meant to "open the heart and rekindle the spirit."
3
1
ENSUCKLOPEDIA, by Sam Johnson, Chris Marcil, et al. (MTV/Pocket, $10.) Cartoon humor featuring the television characters Beavis and Butt-head.
4
2
THE CURSE OF MADAME "C," by Gary Larson. (Andrews &amp; McMeel, $8.95.) A collection of "Far Side" cartoons.
Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending Nov. 26, at 3,050 bookstores plus wholesalers serving 38,000 other retailers, statistically weighted to represent sales in all such outlets nationwide.
An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.


Alternative Religion Classes
ON Saturday, 9-year-old Justin Cherman was helping his mother mend the legs of two broken wooden reindeer, which are a part of the family's yearly Christmas display on their front lawn.
The next day, he was reciting a Hebrew prayer as a menorah was lighted, later dining on latkes and applesauce at a Hanukkah party.
Like those of many children in the county, Justin's parents, Karen and Sandy Cherman, are of different religious faiths.
And like many, they celebrate both Christian and Jewish traditions.
The Chermans' three sons not only get Easter baskets and sing carols around the Christmas tree but also have a Passover seder and light candles on the menorah.


For Holiday Crowds, Buffet Can Be Ideal
As the calendar runs down, thoughts inevitably turn to holiday parties.
The buffet supper is not only one of the easiets ways to entertain a crowd, it can be one of the most enjoyably relaxed for both guests and hosts.
But a buffet table calls for some pragmatic planning.
The array of food should look bountiful and inviting.
It must involve dishes that can be prepared in advance and will not be damaged by sitting out for an hour or so.


With Goals Far From Realized, 3 Leaders Accept Nobel Peace Prize


Corrections
An article on Oct. 30 about living in Florham Park, N.J., misidentified a restaurant.
It is the Capo Vaticano, not Cappa Vaticano.
The restaurant phoned the editors to correct the error last week.


A 'Jewish Yuletide' Can Never Lead to Spiritual Fulfillment; No Seasonal Dismay
To the Editor:
Re "Jewish Yuletide" (column, Dec. 1): There are co-religionists of Frank Rich for whom Hanukkah is not an afterthought to Thanksgiving, his conclusion to that effect notwithstanding.
We Orthodox suffer none of the seasonal dismay that seems to have muddled Mr.
Rich's mind-set at this time of year.


Just Part Of the Story
To the Editor:
I have a quarrel with the scriptwriter and director.
"Mrs. Parker and the Vicious Circle" tells about part of Dorothy Parker's life but not all.
I knew her a bit, very late in her life when all was not pretty or good.
In fact, the opposite was true; it was a dark time for her and not too pleasant to be in her company.
Even so, she was capable of generous actions, giving young writers references and so forth.


Editorial Notebook: Russian Amnesia; A New Order Scorns 2 Who Undid the Old
Mikhail Gorbachev and Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn may be the most ridiculed public figures in Russia today.
That is a strange case of selective memory among a people that has long preserved its history and honored its literature, even when the state tried to obliterate both.
In democratic Russia there is little patience for the past, or concern for the future.
Instead, there is a restless, almost reckless, pursuit of the present.
New millionaires are the envy of Moscow, cruising around the dilapidated capital in their Mercedeses and BMW's, dispensing crisp $100 bills like Monopoly money, dropping $50 here for a quart of Johnnie Walker Black Label, $5,000 there for a Sony home entertainment center.
They conspicuously evade taxes (like everyone else here), hand out bribes, play for huge stakes at Moscow's casinos, snap up expensive real estate in London and Paris, and stash millions in Malta and Cyprus, the favored safe havens for fleeing Russian capital.


O'Neal and Magic Continue to Shred League
Magic 109, Hawks 98
Shaquille O'Neal dominated at both ends of the floor last night, scoring 33 points and grabbing 13 rebounds to lead the league's hottest team, the Orlando Magic, to a 109-98 triumph over the visiting Atlanta Hawks.


Bragging Rights Unclaimed: Gambling Is in Bay Ridge
To the Editor:
In the interests of accuracy, I am sending you my own copy of this fine map of Bay Ridge, Bensonhurst, Sunset Park and Dyker Heights.
You'll notice that the three Bensonhurst addresses referred to in your Nov. 20 article, "Gambling Crackdown Intercepts a Cash Flow to Organized Crime," are, in fact, Bay Ridge locations.


Community Complains About Hotel


Little Boxes, All Decked Out And Ready to Play
Boxed sets have become an annual holiday ritual for fans and record companies alike.
And if all the gold- and platinum-selling sets are any indication, record companies have figured out how to please both first-time listeners and dedicated collectors.
Here are 26 choices our critics found noteworthy.
Prices are suggested retail. 'The Music Behind the Magic: The Musical Artistry of Alan Menken, Howard Ashman and Tim Rice'  Walt Disney Records; three CDs ($44.98) or cassettes ($34.98) with bonus recording


NEW JERSEY GUIDE
HOLIDAY CELEBRATIONS
The holidays are one of the best times to visit friends or make new friends at festive parties in familiar places.
The American Labor Museum/ Botto House National Landmark in Haledon will welcome visitors to "Buon Natale 1994" from 1 to 4 o'clock this afternoon.
Music and homemade Italian delicacies will enhance the gathering in the turn-of-the-century Victorian house, which is adorned with traditional decorations.


The Selling of Everything
WHERE THE SUCKERS MOON An Advertising Story.
By Randall Rothenberg. 478 pp.
New York: Alfred A. Knopf. $25.
FABLES OF ABUNDANCE  A Cultural History of Advertising in America.
By Jackson Lears.
Illustrated. 492 pp.
New York:  Basic Books. $30.


Precisionism And a Few Of Its Friends
PRECISIONISM MAY BE THE forgotten bandwagon of 20th-century American art.
Today, the hard-edged style and many of the artists it attracted remain overshadowed by Abstract Expressionism, which definitively put American art on the international map in the early 1950's.
But in the late 1920's and early 1930's, when modern machines and architecture held the promise of a bright, streamlined future, Precisionism seemed like an art movement whose time had come and a sure sign of American art's international stature.
As Gail Stavitsky notes in the catalogue to "Precisionism in America 1915-1941: Reordering Reality," at the Montclair Art Museum in New Jersey, its arrival was predicted by no less a cultural commentator than Lewis Mumford.
And it was repeatedly welcomed by art critics in search of a new esthetic commensurate with America's booming industrial prowess.
Alfred H. Barr Jr., director of the Museum of Modern Art, saw its chief practitioners -- Charles Demuth, Charles Sheeler, Georgia O'Keeffe, Preston Dickinson and Niles Spencer -- as part of an international tendency that he called the New Objectivity.
The machine esthetic also attracted poets like William Carlos Williams, who became the subject of the painting that may be the style's greatest, and maybe only, masterpiece.


Entering Tuna, Pop. 2; Characters Uncountable
WHEN JOE SEARS AND Jaston Williams were growing up in Bartlesville, Okla., and Crosbyton, Tex., they never thought they'd find fame, much less middling fortune, creating and playing 22 denizens of the fictional town of Tuna, Tex. -- nearly half of them women.
It just turned out that way.
"It's controlled schizophrenia, that's what it is," says Mr.
Sears, a gentle jelly doughnut, whose evocations of Inita Goodwin, a hot-to-trot waitress, and Aunt Pearl Burras, a dog-hating doyenne, seem equally real.


Foreign Policy Splits G.O.P. In Congress
While Republican lawmakers map plans to attack President Clinton's foreign policy, he can take heart that his worst nightmare is not being realized: Jesse Helms of North Carolina, the new chairman of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, will not singlehandedly determine his party's agenda.
Instead, the mix will include several moderate voices, including Senator Bob Dole of Kansas, the incoming majority leader, Senator John McCain of Arizona, a leading Republican strategist on national security matters, and Benjamin A. Gilman of New York, the incoming chairman of the newly renamed House International Relations Committee.


Manager's Profile
C.
W.
Shirley  Fund: USAA GNMA Trust; $260 million in assets.
Manager since 1991 inception. (Sponsor: USAA Investment Management Company, San Antonio.)


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
FROTH &amp; SCUM Truth, Beauty, Goodness,  and the Ax Murder in America's  First Mass Medium.
By Andie Tucher.
University of North Carolina, cloth, $34.95; paper, $13.95.


At Work; Harvesting a New Crop of Advice
SOMETIMES empathy fails and you just can't put yourself in the other person's shoes.
What possessed Hillary Rodham Clinton to wear an inverted-salad-bowl hat to her husband's inauguration?
During rehearsals of the Rob Lowe-Snow White duet at the 1989 Academy Awards show, didn't anyone stop and say, hey, do we really want to do this?
And what exactly was going through the mind of Miami Dolphin kicker Garo Yepremian when he grabbed the ball after one of his kicks was blocked during the 1973 Super Bowl and threw it -- right into the arms of a Redskins defender?
These inexplicabilities pale beside the mystery of why people spend months, even years, of their lives writing books about management, which have about as much chance of nailing the best seller list as the average schoolboy basketball player has of jumping from his mean streets to the N.B.A.
Hoops, books, everybody needs a dream.
Enough make it to keep hope alive.
These are among the management book dreams of recent months:


Reporter's Notebook; At the Zion Trial, or In Re Lawyers on Parade
While four doctors, a hospital and a tradition of medical education are on trial in the Libby Zion malpractice case, the legal profession has certainly been on display.
Almost every day, the courtroom has been packed with lawyer-spectators.
For in the rarefied world of medical malpractice litigation, the Zion trial, now entering its fifth week, has caused a stir not only because of the top-flight reputation of the lawyers in the case, but also because of a rivalry between two of them.


Corrections
An article on page 42 of the Arts and Leisure section today about Sony's Lincoln Square theaters omits the name of the firm that designed them.
It is Gensler &amp; Associates Architects.


This Week's Numbers
Last
Consensus
Period
Estimates
(I.D.E.A. INC.)
Tues.
Producer prices, Nov., pct. chg.
-0.5
0.4
Retail sales, Nov., pct. change
1.1
0.4
Wed.
Consumer prices, Nov., pct. chg.
0.1
0.3
Industrial production, Nov., pct. chg.
0.6
0.4
Capacity utilization, Nov., percent
84.6
84.7
Thur.
Weekly jobless claims, thousands
322
325
Fri.
Housing starts, Nov., mils., ann. rate
1.43
1.41
*4*This Week's Developments
Tues.
Atlanta Fed November business outlook survey
Wed.
Two- and 5-year Treasury note auction announcement
Thur.
Philadelphia Fed December business outlook survey


Man Pleads Guilty in Plot to Kidnap Jewish Youth
A 21-year-old Hasidic Jew pleaded guilty yesterday to conspiring to kidnap Shai Fhima Reuven, a Jewish teen-ager who disappeared for two years before resurfacing in Rockland County, N.Y.
Mordechai Weisz, a Brooklyn resident, entered the plea in State Supreme Court in Brooklyn under an arrangement in which he is expected to be sentenced to five years' probation and fined $10,000.
The money is to be given to charities selected by the Brooklyn District Attorney's office.


Nobody Knew Her
To the Editor:
As co-screenwriter of Alan Rudolph's "Mrs. Parker and the Vicious Circle," I'm not surprised that Richard Bernstein, in his article "When It Comes to Film Biography, Everyone's a Critic"  [ Nov. 20 ] , mentions several people who knew Dorothy Parker and question the film's interpretation of her.
After all, one of Parker's most salient personal characteristics was that few could agree on her most salient personal characteristics.


Where Malcolm Fell, a New West End
Generations of Columbia University students have known the West End Cafe on Broadway at 114th Street as their local campus watering hole.
In the last six months, the bar -- which was reopened as the West End Gate four years ago -- has also become a popular gathering spot for immigrants from the Dominican Republic who live in Washington Heights.
Now, the connection has grown so strong that, at the invitation of the university, which is their landlord, the owners plan to open a second restaurant next year at 166th Street and Broadway.


Bologna the Fat Still Earns Its Nickname
IN the Po Valley, about halfway between Florence and Venice, Bologna lies in a sort of buffer zone between the olive oil country and the butter culture where animal fat reigns supreme and the pig is king.
This is a hard act to keep going nowadays.
Traditional recipes are being rediscovered all over Italy, yes, but they are being rehabilitated, too.
Extra-virgin oil has replaced lard, and pesante (heavy) is the worst name you can call a food.
So where does this leave Bologna the Fat (the city's best-known epithet), which has waddled its way into gastronomic history with the plumpest sausage, the richest meat sauce and the heftiest repertory of stuffed pastas on the entire peninsula?
The answer seems to be: a bit out of favor but still setting standards for foods and ingredients that Italians will never give up entirely.
On a recent weekend trying restaurants in Bologna's medieval center, we aimed first to sample the most famous traditional dishes at the source, but also to explore something of the alternatives.
Ristorante Diana
It is generally agreed that if you can't wangle an invitation to someone's house, this is the place to taste the classic dishes.
We joined about 150 hungry Bolognesi and a few assorted foreigners for lunch on a rainy Sunday to do just that.
The restaurant's two large rooms were closely packed, and the cloakroom perilously close to the trays leaving the adjacent kitchen at high speed.
Bustling doesn't even begin to describe the atmosphere, but hectic would be unfair.
The menu has two parts: traditional dishes and daily specials.
The latter included some seasonal offerings (funghi porcini), but also a great deal of what seemed designed to provide a little relief to family members accompanying conservative older relatives.
For example, strozzapreti, a regional pasta, with salmon -- not traditional, and, until the last few years, not even Italian.
The traditional menu is short -- the Bolognese repertory is dense, not extensive, and stronger in the primi piatti, or first courses, than in meats and vegetables.
Our surprisingly delicious appetizer of spuma di mortadella was decidedly not the usual bologna.
It was a pate made of mortadella sausage, the true bologna, and served with dainty white toast.
We sampled lasagne verdi (my favorite food on earth), tagliatelle with ragu (the authentic, and only, Bolognese meat sauce) and the lighter but no less traditional passatelli in brodo, short, fat strings of a paste of bread crumbs, Parmesan and nutmeg cooked in broth.
All were worthy specimens, the lasagne juicy and tender, with a ragu-bechamel ratio distinctly in favor of the meat sauce.
Our main courses were served generously from a trolley, one for bollito misto, the other for roasts.
Desserts included excellent homemade ice cream with hot chocolate sauce and a very nice torta di riso (a slice of dense, not overly sweet rice cake).
Our wine was Sangiovese, a local red, chosen from the limited list.
Pappagallo
As a graduate student in the early 1970's, I discovered early on that some of the best restaurants in Italy were conveniently situated near important archeological museums.
And so it was that I had an excuse for a pilgrimage to this restaurant, justifiably considered to offer the finest cuisine in the queen city of food.
But soon after, a series of changes in management and reputed decline began, and I did not go back until recently, when a Bolognese friend convinced me that it was time to try it again.
The restaurant is in the same beautiful place, a medieval building on a small, historic piazza, and the parrot (pappagallo) on the sign is the same.
Inside, however, the rather cold results of a 1980's renovation -- higher ceilings, brighter lighting -- have forever done away with the happy coziness that tempered Pappagallo's elegance.
In addition to a bar, there are two spacious dining rooms, one hung with rows of showbiz photographs, in which we recognized no one.
What we found was good food in an attractive restaurant, but the little extra touches in both ambiance and cuisine that might have brought back the former greatness were largely missing.
The menu is varied: In addition to the (not exhaustive) list of classics, there is fish as well as other modern, low-calorie offerings (smoked swordfish, veal fillets with capers and balsamic vinegar).
But on our first evening in Bologna we wanted tortellini in brodo and lasagne verdi, which the waiter divided into half-portions so we could share with dignity. (Tortellini, small meat-stuffed rings of pasta, are properly served only in broth; practically an object of cult worship to some people, they are eaten all over Italy on Christmas day.) We gave both dishes high marks, but they turned out not to be the best we tasted in Bologna.
My companion then tackled a satisfying fritto misto al Pappagallo.
Despite the proprietary name, this was pretty much what is called fritto misto all'italiana everywhere else, a local standby consisting of deep-fried vegetables, including a small mountain of julienne-sliced zucchini, and a small amount of meat, as well as some sweet pieces -- chunks of fruit and custard.
My filetto di tacchino (breast of turkey with prosciutto and cheese) was good but heavy (that word), and its garnish of out-of-season peas was a touch of so-called international cuisine we could have done without.
Again, we chose the local Sangiovese wine, but this time from a more extensive list.
I'd advise skipping the unexciting antipasti to leave room for the desserts.
We loved the crema liquida con biscottini -- liquid custard with little cookies -- and sorbetto (more of a slush) of lemon and vodka.
Trattoria da Gianni
This archetypal trattoria makes no attempt to provide lighter alternatives, and to judge by the happy faces of the many local patrons who fill it, nobody cares.
Neither did we; we loved it.
Even the musician who came in off the street was delightful -- a young woman who played Renaissance and Baroque music on, respectively, tenor and alto recorders.
We began with a voluptuous slice of polenta dripping with melted squacquerone, a very soft, very fresh white cheese, and then tried two of the same dishes we'd had at Pappagallo -- tortellini in brodo and fritto misto all'italiana -- giving them rather higher marks.
The tortellini were more succulent, the fritto misto more exciting (and slightly larger -- we shared it), with even more components, such as tiny deep-fried skewers (on toothpicks) of fresh ham and also a chunk of brains (a canonical ingredient).
We also tried the inspired tortelli (large, square ravioli) stuffed with a chestnut puree and sauced with butter, transparent little rings of leek and lots of Parmesan -- which the chef, Loredana Brusori, grated exuberantly directly onto the plate and everything else in sight.
Many of the other diners were tucking into the bollito misto, and the offerings also included a slab of baked ham and lepre (hare) alla cacciatora.
Only the desserts were disappointing.
We chose what seemed the most unusual option, apple souffle (not made to order), but its crown of several inches of meringue was rubbery.
We should probably have stuck with homemade creme caramel.
We never saw a wine list -- the choice seemed to be Sangiovese or Lambrusco, the region's other famous red, lighter and slightly sparkling.
We took the Lambrusco.
Torre de' Galluzzi
The most interesting meal of our weekend, in the most beautiful setting, was here, in a 13th-century tower that belonged to one of the medieval city's great families, but now is the least typically Bolognese of the restaurants we tried.
The ambiance is elegant but not forbidding.
The main dining room, dominated by a magnificent fireplace, is large, and there are two attractive private rooms.
The eclectic choices include tasting menus: vegetarian, traditional (but not overwhelmingly), fish and fiorentina alla Toscana (the celebrated Tuscan steak).
Since we were accompanied by our local friends without whom we would never have discovered this gem, we ordered a la carte and shared.
All the dishes used fresh, subtly flavored ingredients, skillfully handled and light, until we reached dessert.
From the fish menu we sampled steamed cannocchie (mantis shrimp), green ravioli stuffed with scorfano (scorpion fish), scampi (langoustines) with julienne artichokes, and turbot filets in a tart lemon sauce.
Vegetarian choices included an exceptional zuppa di farro (spelt), orecchiette con cime di rapa (a quintessentially Puglian pasta, reflecting the owner-chef's origins) and a marvelous main dish of simply grilled vegetables and cheese.
Ravioli stuffed with potato (yes!) with a light sauce of tomato, sausage and diced eggplant came from the traditional menu, while scaloppine of calf liver with pine nuts and raisins was unclassified.
Our Bolognese friend, who has written a book on matching foods with the right wine, chose a white Sardinian Vermentino from the excellent list.
The splendid desserts included a grape tart with lemon gelato, an individual carrot cake, an exciting apple mille foglie (millefeuille) with Calvados, and a crepe filled with melted taleggio cheese and sliced pears, drenched in Marsala sauce, about which I am still having unseemly dreams.
Osteria del Sole
Fat is not Bologna's only epithet.
The city is also called the Learned and the Red (for both its politics and its buildings), and this tiny wine shop, founded in 1468 and practically unchanged since, is a favorite haunt of underfed leftist intellectuals from the even older University of Bologna.
They are kept company by wine enthusiasts of various girths and credos, with or without academic credentials.
The Fat does not apply since the only food consumed is from the patrons' own brown bags at centuries-old communal wooden tables.
Seriously, since it is physically impossible to eat more than one Bolognese meal a day, a place to go at noon and evening to observe a very typical local scene in a historic setting -- but not eat -- is a useful thing to know.
But if you're feeling hungry, there are a number of hedonistic food shops within a stone's throw where you can buy prepared dishes or cold cuts to carry in and eat with the glass or bottle of fine wine or even Champagne that you have ordered at the Osteria.
WHAT IT COSTS
Prices are for full meals for two with a moderately priced bottle of wine, calculated at a rate of 1,500 lire to the dollar.
With the exception of the Osteria del Sole, all the establishments accept credit cards.
Torre de' Galluzzi, 5A Corte de' Galluzzi; (051) 267638.
Closed Sunday.
A la carte for two, about $100.
Tasting menus for one, with wine, coffee and tip, $32 to $48 (for fish).
Trattoria Da Gianni, 18 Via Clavature; (051) 229434. Closed Monday.  About $60.
Ristorante Diana, 24 Via Indipendenza; (051) 231302. Closed Monday. About $90.
Pappagallo, 3 Piazza della Mercanzia; (051) 232807. Closed Sunday.About $133.
Osteria del Sole, 1 Vicolo Ranocchi; no phone.
Closed Sunday.
Open 8 A.M. to 2 P.M., 6 to 8:45 P.M.
Glass of sparkling wine, $1.65.


Pittsburgh Uses a Defensive Blitz That Feeds on Pressure
Steelers linebacker Kevin Greene likes to be mysterious when he talks about how Pittsburgh's defense has been able to pressure opposing quarterbacks.
Greene leads the National Football League in sacks with 14 and needs one against the Eagles this afternoon to get the 100th of his career.
The team has 50 sacks and needs three more to break a club record set in 1974 by the fabled Steel Curtain defense, anchored by Mean Joe Greene, L. C. Greenwood, Ernie Holmes and Dwight White.


From Ship to Chef: 4-Star Fishing in the City
On Aug. 11, 1819, the paddle-wheeler Bellona, under the command of the youthful and not-yet-famous Cornelius Vanderbilt, advertised a trip that would leave from the Whitehall dock in Lower Manhattan at 10 A.M. the following Sunday.
It promised "a few hours of healthful pleasure" at a spot, about 10 miles east of Sandy Hook, known as the Fishing Banks.
With this announcement, according to William Zeisel, a New York angling historian, the first party boat in New York waters inaugurated a low-cost and bountiful fishery that has offered sport to generations of local anglers.
The party boats are still around today, most notably in the shrinking but still active fleet of day boats that moor along the quay fronting on Emmons Avenue in Sheepshead Bay.


Nurse Radio: Out of the Medical Wilderness
WHILE pushing a needle into me recently, Renee Trambert ordered me to listen to her radio program.
I was in no position to argue.
She told me that it was on WBAI-FM (99.5) every Friday at 1 P.M. for an hour, and that it reflected the sensibility of the nursing community -- precise and honest, yet compassionate.
And so I became a fan of "Healthstyles," even if it meant missing a lunch rich in fats and empty calories.
It's the least I can do.
These are embattled times for nurses.
While female healers are no longer burned at the stake, they are subjected to the modern equivalent, being dismissed and replaced with billing clerks.
In the city alone, the State Health Department predicts, more than 3,000 hospital-based registered nurses are expected to lose their jobs in the next three years.
I imagine that one of them may very well be the person who doesn't respond when I press my call button in the middle of a hospital night.


AUNT RUTHIE SHOWS THE WAY
It was eerie to meet a former Morrisite in Patricia Volk's essay.
Not only did her Auth Ruthie and I attend the same Latin classes, but we both graduated from Morris High School in 1923.


The Nanny Tax: Who Wins, Who Loses?
To the Editor:
It is no wonder that domestic workers are missing out on Social Security benefits when writers like Marc Linder and Larry Norton ("Nanny Tax Lets Poor Pay, Rich Profit," Viewpoints, Nov. 13) are equally unaware of how such workers can insure access to these benefits.
Your article implies that the only way domestic workers can be enrolled in Social Security is through payments by the households where they work.


Little Boxes, All Decked Out And Ready to Play
Boxed sets have become an annual holiday ritual for fans and record companies alike.
And if all the gold- and platinum-selling sets are any indication, record companies have figured out how to please both first-time listeners and dedicated collectors.
Here are 26 choices our critics found noteworthy.
Prices are suggested retail.
Various Artists: 'Duende'  Ellipsis Arts; three CDs ($44.95) or cassettes ($29.95), 20 Lumber Road, Roslyn, N.Y. 11576 (800-788-6670)


Flights Canceled After Commuter Planes Are Banned
The order by the Federal Aviation Administration banning two types of propeller-driven planes threw commuter airlines into disarray yesterday as hundreds of flights were canceled and, in some cases, entire routes were permanently dropped.
On Friday, the aviation agency banned ATR-72 and ATR-42 turboprops from flying in icing conditions.


A Struggle For the Sake Of the Children
Nearly 40 percent of New York City's children live in poverty, and organizations supported by The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund are striving to provide a variety of services for them.
In addition to emergency food and clothing, the charities provide health care, counseling, educational programs and services to prevent child abuse.
The Children's Aid Society provides assistance to more than 100,000 children a year.
Among other things, the society provides transitional housing for homeless families, classes to teach single mothers how to be better parents and health clinics for children.


On Sunday; A Star's Creed: Look for Work And Then Die
THE Roy Cohn character is slowly peeling away as a finished accomplishment, and F. Murray Abraham is restless at the molting.
The actor is left merely to teach arrogance lately to his class of acting students and no longer to enact its personification, with all the serpentine glisten that he brought to the Cohn role, now that "Angels in America" has closed on Broadway.
"Closing a show is like the death of someone," Mr.
Abraham said, mindful of the death of his theater friend, Raul Julia, and marking him lovingly in the fantasy world they worked in.
"Raul directed me twice in Chekhov."


Ill-Fated Fund's Manager: Mr. Main St., Not Wall St.
The Santa Ana Elks Club is not the sort of place where financial moguls, whose decisions can shake far-off Wall Street to its foundations, usually dine.
The decor is heavy on Formica, Naugahyde and Styrofoam.
On the tables, the only centerpieces are Keno coupons and bottles of Heinz Ketchup and McIlhenny's Tabasco sauce.
The fare is cheap -- unlimited soup and salad for $4.50 -- and basic.
But three times each week until the last few days, between moving around billions of dollars belonging to a dizzying array of cities, authorities and administrative districts throughout Orange County, Robert L. Citron came here like clockwork.
It was but one routine in a life of them; hopping in the Chrysler he bought every 18 months or so since 1940, he arrived at 10 past 12 and left at 10 to 1, off to juggle billions more.
Always, he picked up his own check.


China's Hidden Army of Workers Strives to Adapt
Fearing nuclear attack from either the United States or the Soviet Union, China in the mid-1960's undertook what was perhaps the largest industrial relocation in history to protect its strategic factories.
Now, more than 20 years after World War III failed to occur as Mao Zedong had predicted, some of the country's top scientists and engineers are still trickling down from production lines in remote mountains and caves to gleaming cities like this one in south-central China.


Informers Find Israel Cold Haven
The Mayor of this Israeli-Arab town northeast of Tel Aviv is a worried man.
In recent months, the Israeli Government has resettled Palestinian informers from the West Bank who were driven out of their homes during the uprising against Israel.
The arrival of these outcasts, who helped Israel's Shin Bet security service, has caused an uproar here.


Clinton Says Orphanages Can't Replace Strong Parents
President Clinton opened fire today at Representative Newt Gingrich, saying that those who advocated putting children in orphanages as an alternative to welfare were "dead wrong."
Mr.
Clinton's statement in his weekly radio address was the first time he had criticized the proposal by Mr.
Gingrich, who is expected to be the House Speaker, and it came as the President continued his quest to define differences as well as common ground with the Republicans who will control both houses of Congress.


Arrest Made in Beating Of Off-Duty Police Officer
The search for the suspects in the Dec. 2 beating of a police officer in Greenwich Village began with a little black book that took the search by police detectives from Manhattan to Guyana to Brooklyn.
Yesterday, it led to the arrest of Jack M. Dupuy of 21 St.
Paul's Court, in Flatbush, Brooklyn.
Mr.
Dupuy, 23, was charged with second-degree assault in the beating of the officer, Gregory Chieu.


From an Executive to a Picture Framer
ABOUT a year ago, Mickey Smith bought a framing franchise and in doing so joined the fastest-growing segment of the work force: new entrepreneurs who were once corporate executives.
Mr.
Smith, an art director, spent 22 years with American Machine and Foundry.
When that company moved to White Plains in the 70's, he was manager of the company's graphic design department.


The Gizmo May Die, But Its Spirit Babbles On
IF they pause to think about it, people can identify phrases that are in common use but derived from objects that are nearly forgotten.
Muskets are gone but flash in the pan and going off half-cocked are still with us.
Few people sail, but many get four sheets to the wind. (Or was it three?)
Think a little harder and most adults will realize that the process is speeding up, and that much of their language is based on knowledge that is unknown to young people.
Children will still learn to type but may never see a typewriter.
They dial on telephones that don't have one.
Technological change has littered the language with anachronisms.


Politics As Usual


Shadow Government in Southern Mexico


Little Boxes, All Decked Out And Ready to Play
Boxed sets have become an annual holiday ritual for fans and record companies alike.
And if all the gold- and platinum-selling sets are any indication, record companies have figured out how to please both first-time listeners and dedicated collectors.
Here are 26 choices our critics found noteworthy.
Prices are suggested retail. 'The Complete Solid State Recordings of the Thad Jones/Mel Lewis Orchestra'  Mosaic; five CDs ($79), 35 Melrose Place, Stamford, Conn. 06902


The Stuff of Legends
TO fill in "the hole of history," in the words of the playwright Suzan-Lori Parks, many authors have unearthed new forms and old facts in acknowledgment of cultures traditionally overlooked or undermined.
In Ed Schmidt's "Mr. Rickey Calls a Meeting," at the George Street Playhouse, Mr.
Schmidt does not go in for that sort of revisionism.
Instead, the playwright holds to light a milestone moment, reinforcing its magnitude and contemplating its making.
And speculating upon what really went on behind the scenes when Branch Rickey broke the news that Jackie Robinson would be the first black ballplayer to be let into the major leagues.


LIFTOFF
In "Liftoff" (Word &amp; Image, Nov. 13), Max Frankel concludes by encouraging readers to prepare young people to ride the Internet.
Participating in this electronic exchange can certainly open resources, but I feel the young already respond intensely to the world behind a cathode-ray tube, a world that shapes their tastes and appetites.


DEC. 4-10: Flip Side of Ames; She Took On C.I.A.: That's Why the Lady Ain't a Tramp
The Central Intelligence Agency will pay $410,000 to settle a suit by a top woman spy whose reputation was destroyed by fellow C.I.A. officers who smeared her as a drunken seductress.
Janine M. Brookner was the reverse image of Aldrich H. Ames, the mole for Moscow inside the C.I.A.
No one blew the whistle on Mr.
Ames, a slothful, vodka-swilling spook.
When Ms.
Brookner blew the whistle on subordinates, her career came to a screeching halt.


UNHAND ME, YOU CAD!
Misrepresenting oneself and one's intentions to unwitting victims is not mere social folly (About Men: "Unhand Me, You Cad!," by William Grimes, Nov. 13).
Perhaps the more modern expression for a cad is "one who suffers from narcissistic personality disorder." An underlying rage is what usually fuels them.
Men as well as women become objects to be manipulated.
Carefully, they pick their victims, who may be childlike, trusting or particularly vulnerable at that moment in their life.


Chopin and a Tuba
MUSIC schools are rushing toward their Christmas breaks but not before student and faculty artists get one more chance in the pre-holiday spotlight.
At the Hartt School there are two concerts today in Millard Auditorium: Watson Morrison celebrates his 40 professorial years with an all-Chopin recital at 3, and Gene Young conducts the Connecticut Youth Symphony at 8.
The latter program has music for and by young players, with "Tubby the Tuba" squeezed in between works of Beethoven and Ippolitov-Ivanov.


Bill, Meet Chet
President Clinton is now wounded enough that two-thirds of Democrats want other candidates to challenge his renomination in 1996, a new nationwide poll found last week.
But it has been a long time since any such challenger won.
Not since Chester Alan Arthur, the Vice President who took office on James A. Garfield's assassination, has a sitting President been denied nomination.
Arthur, a Republican from New York, who as port collector there had required Custom House employees to contribute to the party, made a midterm conversion to reform, supporting creation of the modern civil service.
That alienated his conservative base, while failing to win over liberals, and he lost the 1884 nomination to James G. Blaine, who lost the election to Grover Cleveland.


Corrections
An article on Friday about hidden earthquake damage to buildings in West Los Angeles and the San Fernando Valley misstated the year of the Northridge quake in some editions, and a correction in this space yesterday repeated the error in some copies.
The earthquake was this year.


Retailers Reject a New Market Wholesale
Enter the Korea Town Plaza.
The site of the old Flushing post office on 39th Avenue is now a huge $10 million market.
It is a place where Korean men holding flags direct crowds of customers into the proper parking spaces so they can go buy almost any type of Korean, Chinese and Japanese food product imaginable for less than half the usual supermarket price.
On opening day, Saturday, Dec. 3, more than 6,000 customers showed up -- housewives pushing baby carriages, families doing their weekly shopping.
But, the problem is that the market is only permitted by the city to be a wholesale warehouse.
And unless customers are part of a food business with a valid tax identification number, they are not supposed to be allowed to shop.


Letters
To the Editor:
John Nash is not the first Nobel prize winner who "lost years" before his accomplishments were publicly recognized.
Henri Dunant of Switzerland, who founded the International Red Cross in 1863 and was the primary force behind the Geneva Convention, was subsequently eased out of the organization, and the "founder" mantel was appropriated by Gustave Moynier.
Dunant consequently went into an exile of poverty and isolation, where he was overcome with shame and plagued by nightmares of his misfortunes until the end of his life.
When Dunant was finally vindicated and his name reinstated as the founder of the Red Cross, he could not appreciate winning the first Nobel Peace Prize in 1901, which he shared with Frederic Passy, founder of the International League for Permanent Peace.
LOTTI S. TOBLER  Manhattan, Nov. 17  The writer is on the editorial board of The Swiss-American Review.


Lori A. Lehrer, Barry A. Glickman
Lori Alyson Lehrer, a daughter of Ellen J. and Robert Z. Lehrer of New York, is to be married today to Barry Allen Glickman, the son of Raymond Glickman of San Francisco and Eleanor Portner of Lafayette, Calif.
Rabbi Barry H. Greene is to officiate at the Governors Club in West Palm Beach, Fla.
The bride, 26, graduated from Vassar College and received a master's degree in education from Harvard University and a master's degree in social work from the University of Pennsylvania.
She is a child and family psychotherapist and until recently was an intern at the Pineland Learning Center in Carmel, N.J.


A Year in New York
THE SOUND OF WATER TRICKLING from the courtyard fountain; a patch of sunlight stretched lazily across the stone kitchen floor.
These are images that belong to a picture-postcard view of the Mediterranean, not the Sturm und Drang of loft living in Manhattan.
And yet it was exactly that sort of dissonance that Laurence Kriegel sought to create when she and her family took up residence around the corner from her new home furnishings store, Interieurs, on Wooster Street in SoHo.
Drawing on fond memories of a childhood spent in France, Kriegel and her architects, Ed ward Asfour and Peter Guzy, provided the former chocolate factory with all the rudiments of a French country home: thick plaster walls, pine plank floors and 11-foot beamed ceilings.
A country kitchen, off a small skylit courtyard, has a huge farm table and a La Cornue stove.
The roof was ripped off to reconfigure the second-floor into bedrooms and a master bath, now tucked under the bracing of an old water tower.


A Time Share For Church And Synagogue?
Leaders of the Church of St.
Paul and St.
Andrew, who have fought long and vainly for the right to raze their crumbling landmark church at West End Avenue and 86th Street, are preparing to try again.
And this time, they hope not only to solve the financial problems of their diminished Christian congregation -- at 250 members, they are unable to fill even a third of the fraying sanctuary's seats -- but to give a permanent home to the Upper West Side's wandering Jews, the conservative, left-leaning temple of B'nai Jeshurun.


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
Pets With Holiday Cheer
THE big question for Santa Claus was not whether those waiting to have their picture taken with him were naughty or nice, but whether they had eaten.
Skull hadn't.
Skull is a boa constrictor owned by Monica Russell and Rob Annunziata of Bay Shore.
When the couple learned that the Walt Whitman Mall in Huntington Station was having a pet-photo session called "Claus and Paws" they decided to take Skull, even if he didn't have any paws, or legs.


Data Bank/December 11, 1994
Data Bank/December 11, 1994
New-Home Sales
Oct.
Sept.
Aug.
Monthly percent change
1.3
5.6
7.8
Consumer Borrowing
Annual rate of change
15.8
14.3
21.3
U.S. Productivity
III Q'94
II Q'94
I Q'94
Percent change
2.9
-2.1
2.9
Gold
Dec. 9
Dec. 2
Nov. 25
Friday A.M. London fix, per ounce
$376.50
$379.00
$384.95
Municipal Bonds
Yield in percent
7.04
6.99
7.27
3-Month Treasury Bills
Rate in percent
5.64
5.61
5.27
6-Month Treasury Bills
Rate in percent
6.16
6.10
5.73
Weekly Jobless Claims
Dec. 2
Nov. 25
Nov. 18
In thousands
322
316
328


Lugging Her Family's Baggage
TRAVEL habits, like many instincts, are bred in families.
I realized this over lunch recently on the terrace of a resort hotel with a view of the Pacific, a setting that reminded me less of Greece than of my mother, whose modest travel appetites began with a honeymoon in Bermuda and topped out 40 years later with lunches at nice hotels.
Like most romantics, she was big on the idea of exotic locales but short on execution.
It was an attitude that would come to shape my life as a traveler.
I took my first real trip the summer I turned 9.
My newly single mother drove me to Union Station in Chicago to board the Pere Marquette for Detroit, where I was to spend a month visiting my father, who had stayed in Michigan after my parents' divorce.
Whatever excitement I may have felt about the silvery train quivering on the tracks and the six-hour journey around the tip of Lake Michigan was lost in the long shadow of a divided and unhappy family.
I remember the sight of my mother in her thin summer dress bravely waving as I was pulled from the station.
In that moment, travel became a forced march, my style of travel for years to come.


Hartford Business Misses Its Hockey
ABOUT 100 people were lined up outside Coach's Bar and Grille, waiting to get in before a recent Friday night basketball game between the University of Connecticut and Yale at the Hartford Civic Center.
After the game, business was even brisker at the establishment on Allyn Street near the Civic Center.
Two nights later, business was considerably lighter at the restaurant and bar of which Jim Calhoun, the Connecticut men's basketball coach, is a part owner.
Had the Hartford Whalers scheduled game against the Boston Bruins been played on that Sunday night a week ago, "we would have been packed," said Mike Moreau, another of the four owners of the establishment that opened last March.


Valerae O. Lewis, Michael O'Reilly
Dr.
Valerae Olive Lewis, a resident in orthopedics in the Harvard Combined Orthopedic Program in Boston, was married yesterday to Dr.
Michael Scott O'Reilly, a physician researcher at Boston Children's Hospital.
The Rev.
Cecily P. Broderick y Guerra, an Episcopal priest, officiated at St.
James the Less Church in Scarsdale, N.Y.
The Rev.
Joachim Lally, a Roman Catholic priest, took part in the ceremony.
Dr.
Lewis, 28, is keeping her name.
She graduated from Yale University and received her medical degree from Harvard University.
She is a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Carl N. Lewis of White Plains.
Her father is an internist in the Bronx.


2,055 Reasons Why Salaam Is the Winner
The variations on the conversation take place each week in the fall, anywhere someone young and strong can offer a hint of things to come.
Rick Woods, the coach at La Jolla Country Day, a private school outside San Diego, had the conversation with Rashaan Salaam three years ago.
A teammate of Salaam's, Eric Abrams, a kicker with a range beyond 50 yards, had been named national high school player of the year.
Salaam's credentials as a major-college running back had been challenged because the 8-man team had just 22 players on the varsity.


Letters
To the Editor:
Your story was profoundly moving.
"Sonnet to a Nobel Prize, Awarded After 30 Years of Schizophrenia" is my response:
Death's-head spiders drop along invisible


Mt. Vernon Moves on Detectors for School
ON Oct. 24, Shebuel Jackson, a 17-year-old baseball star, lay dying from stab wounds in a crowded hallway of this large city high school.
The police said the killing followed a dispute, but that the senior classman -- a promising college-bound student -- may have been an innocent bystander.
It was the first death under violent circumstances at a Westchester County school, and officials said the killing was part of an alarming national trend of increasing lawlessness among teen-agers.


Little Boxes, All Decked Out And Ready to Play
Boxed sets have become an annual holiday ritual for fans and record companies alike.
And if all the gold- and platinum-selling sets are any indication, record companies have figured out how to please both first-time listeners and dedicated collectors.
Here are 26 choices our critics found noteworthy.
Prices are suggested retail.
Merle Travis: 'Guitar Rags and a Too Fast Past'  Bear Family; five CDs ($110), available from Roots and Rhythm, P. O. Box 837, El Cerrito, Calif. 94530 (510-525-1494)


Cruising
To the Editor: With interest, we read Mildred Eisenberg's letter (Letters, Aug. 21) about her unpleasant experience with Regency Cruise Lines.
But we were even more interested in the reply of the Regency spokesperson, D. Ann Burguieres, who indicated that Ms.
Eisenburg's experience was "unusual . . . not indicative of the caliber of service we try to provide."
Our spring experience with Regency lends substance to Ms.
Eisenberg's account.
We, along with friends, booked the seven-day Regency Mayan Cruise on the Regent Sea for an April departure.
On boarding we were advised that the port in Guatemala, a major Mayan ruin stop, was canceled two weeks before, and the air-conditioning was not working properly.


Little Boxes, All Decked Out And Ready to Play
Boxed sets have become an annual holiday ritual for fans and record companies alike.
And if all the gold- and platinum-selling sets are any indication, record companies have figured out how to please both first-time listeners and dedicated collectors.
Here are 26 choices our critics found noteworthy.
Prices are suggested retail.
Peggy Lee: 'Black Coffee and Other Delights -- The Decca Anthology'  Decca; two CDs ($19.98)


Stowe
Stowe, Vt., began its life as a resort after the Civil War, when railroad passengers came in the summer to take the mountain air.
Once the tourists started coming, they never stopped, and today Stowe -- which celebrated its bicentennial this year -- is one of Vermont's most popular year-round resorts.
In winter, it is a mecca for skiers and shoppers, a magnet for out-of-staters, and the town where Vermonters take antsy house guests, assured that there will be plenty to do.
From the heart of the still-picturesque village, the Mountain Road, as Route 108 is called, forms a seven-mile-long corridor of shops, restaurants, bars, motels and inns leading to the slopes of the state's tallest mountain, the 4,393-foot Mount Mansfield.
The Stowe Area Association, Post Office Box 1320, Stowe, Vt. 05672, (800) 247-8693, has an office in the center of the village.
Its phone number also serves as the central reservations and information service, which books rooms for more than 65 places to stay and packages for downhill and cross-country skiers.
Rates often increase during the holiday weeks and, later in the season, Presidents Week, times when rooms fill up well in advance.
Winter Sports
The Stowe Mountain Resort (802) 253-3000, with its 46 trails (including the well-known Front Four double-diamond trails for experts), 11 lifts, and eight-passenger gondola, offers a variety of single, multiday and night-skiing tickets.
Lodging at the resort is available by calling (800) 253-4754.
Although lift lines are generally short, they can run 20 to 45 minutes during the holiday weeks.
A one-day lift ticket is $43, with discounts on multiday tickets.
For snow conditions, call (802) 253-3600.


SUNDAY, December 11, 1994; Even More Harleys
Riding a Hog just isn't cool anymore.
The motorcycle mavens are trying way too hard.
Witness the recent gala opening in SoHo of American Dream Machine, a "full-service and retail American motorcycle shop."
The store is decorated with the requisite staples of Americana: old gas station signs, an old Coca-Cola cooler and scattered bales of hay. (Are Harleys particularly big in farm country?)


Little Boxes, All Decked Out And Ready to Play
Boxed sets have become an annual holiday ritual for fans and record companies alike.
And if all the gold- and platinum-selling sets are any indication, record companies have figured out how to please both first-time listeners and dedicated collectors.
Here are 26 choices our critics found noteworthy.
Prices are suggested retail. 'The R&amp;B Box: 30 Years of Rhythm-and-Blues'  Rhino; six CDs ($74.98)


A Patrician for the C.I.A.
GENTLEMAN SPY The Life of Allen Dulles.
By Peter Grose.
Illustrated. 641 pp.
Boston: A Richard Todd Book/Houghton Mifflin Company. $30.


Prologue to Rape
ALBION'S STORY By Kate Grenville. 375 pp.
New York: Harcourt Brace &amp; Company. $21.95.


What's the Big Deal About 'Cab Forward' Cars?
In 1992, when Chrysler showed the world its strikingly different Chrysler Concorde, Dodge Intrepid and Eagle Vision sedans, it introduced a new term -- "cab-forward design" -- to the automotive lexicon.
Expect to hear the term a lot more.
Although cab-forward was pioneered by Chrysler, which now uses it as a basis for most of its passenger cars, other manufacturers are adopting the principle.
And cab-forward is far more than a marketing gimmick; it has brought about a pronounced shift in auto design, with the entire vehicle designed around its primary function: hauling people and their possessions.


Pilot Killed in Crash


NEW YORKERS &amp; CO.
A New Manhattan Bar, With Brewery Attached
As part of what seems to be yet another case of New York finally catching up with a West Coast trend, one more microbrewery has opened in Manhattan.


Bridget Fitzgerald, Michael P. Subak
Bridget Anne Fitzgerald, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas J. Fitzgerald of Marblehead, Mass., was married yesterday to Michael Paul Subak, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
John T. Subak of Haverford, Pa.
The Rev Dennis J. Burns performed the ceremony at Our Lady Star of the Sea Roman Catholic Church in Marblehead.
Mrs.
Subak, 27, graduated from Middlebury College, as did her husband.
She was until recently a buyer for Bergdorf Goodman in New York.
Later this month, she is to become the manager of Asta de Blue, a women's apparel store in Philadelphia.
Her father is a senior vice president in Boston for Smith Barney Inc.


WHAT'S NEW YORK THE CAPITAL OF NOW?
The answer to your question "What's New York the Capital of Now?" is, obviously, good intentions.
They have always made excellent paving blocks for the potholed streets so that the fools who live here can continue progressing down to their ultimate and, who knows, even desired destination.
J.
M.
CARTER New York


Death Penalty Can't Affirm the Value of Life; Punishment Speaks
To the Editor:
When capital punishment is defined in terms of deterrent effect, as it is in the Week in Review's lead article ("The Rage to Kill Those Who Kill," Dec. 4), it is reduced to an undecidable contest of soft probabilities, even as both sides appeal to facts and statistics.
Who can say what any criminal would have done -- or would do -- under different laws or systems of enforcement?


Jami Rubin, Eric B. Reiff
Jamilu Eirinberg Rubin, a vice president and pharmaceutical industry analyst for Kidder, Peabody &amp; Company in New York, is to be married today to Eric Buchanan Reiff, a consultant in the New York office of the Monitor Company, a management consulting concern in Cambridge, Mass.
Rabbi Rachel Cowan is to officiate at the Puck Building in New York.
The bride, who is 31 and is known as Jami, is keeping her name.
She graduated from Vassar College.
She is the daughter of Gary S. and Judith E. Rubin of Des Moines.
Her father is a sales executive in the Des Moines office of Gaylord Container, a paper products company.


Acknowledging Mistakes, Con Ed Takes Steps to Mend Its Ways
Nine Consolidated Edison workers stood a bit awkwardly around a dented 55-gallon drum with a gash on its side that had spilled a puddle of what looked a lot like maple syrup.
In fact, it was maple syrup, but today it represented PCB's.
The barrel had supposedly fallen from a truck in Queens, and the drill was to train the workers in how to handle the environmental challenge, the kind of test that the utility has faced often in the last few years, and which, according to Federal prosecutors and state environmental officials, it has often failed.


China Now Allowing Limited Visa-Free Trips
Starting this month, travelers in groups of three or more can make trips of 72 hours or less from Hong Kong to Shenzhen and Shekou -- two of the so-called Special Economic Zones in southern China -- without obtaining visas.
This limited visa-free travel, administered by China Travel Service, has flexibility along with its restrictions.
Any three people traveling together can qualify as a group.
And while each group must be on a tour, it can be a customized tour put together by the service.


From Scraps of Prison Cloth A Miniature World Grows
RAYMOND MATERSON embroiders tiny pictures of sports heroes, news events, drug buys and provocative personalities, each image smaller than a baseball card.
Mr.
Materson, a 40-year-old recovering alcohol and drug abuser, stitches his exquisitely detailed works at the Carl Robinson Correctional Institution here, where he is serving a 15-year sentence for kidnapping and armed robbery.
"I may be the only male embroiderer in the prison system," Mr.
Materson said, chuckling quietly as he filled in the background of a Reggie Jackson portrait.
"I put a thin-brimmed sports cap on one of the spectators watching Jackson, and suddenly he became my Uncle Ed -- my late Uncle Ed." The blue cap, no bigger than a peppercorn, is the sort of detail Mr.
Materson's fans delight in finding, magnifying glass in hand.
Each picture takes up to 50 hours to complete and measures just 2 1/4 inches wide by 2 3/4 inches high.


Pina Bausch, but Not So Sure This Time
PINA BAUSCH DECIDED TO lighten up a little on her fifth visit in 10 years to the Brooklyn Academy of Music.
"Two Cigarettes in the Dark," the 1985 piece presented by her company Tanztheater Wuppertaler, does not have the scope of her apocalyptic works or the insidious aura of her comedy of manners.
Its images are so disconnected, in fact, that the work as a whole lacks the sureness of tone common to Ms.
Bausch's use of collage structures.
"Two Cigarettes" has all the earmarks of its workshop origins.
In his book, "Pina Bausch," Raimund Hoghe, one of Ms.
Bausch's associates, has described how the German choreographer was still working on the piece's vignettes the day before its premiere.
These episodes, drawn from tasks and questions that Ms.
Bausch had given the dancers over six weeks, were especially disparate.
The title was added several months after the premiere.


Letters
To the Editor:
Your article on John Nash ("The Lost Years of a Nobel Laureate, Nov. 13) was beautifully done. A five-minute conversation with Professor Nash leaves a person feeling smarter and with enough to think about for the next two weeks. JAMES MANGANARO  Princeton, Nov. 18  The writer was one of Mr. Nash's students at M.I.T. in the late 1950's.


Second Half Is Good Half for the Jaspers
Manhattan 66, Monmouth 59
Freshman Heshimu Evans scored 16 points and grabbed 7 rebounds to lead the visiting Manhattan Jaspers to a 66-59 victory over the Monmouth Hawks last night in the Northeast Conference.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-29  AMERICAS FREE-TRADE ZONE  President Clinton and Latin American leaders agreed at their summit meeting to create a free-trade zone, and officials said the only possible sticking point would be opposition from groups in the U.S. 1  SERBS BLOCK FUEL CONVOYS  United Nations officials said that Serbs in Bosnia had been blocking fuel convoys, virtually paralyzing United Nations peacekeepers in many areas. 1


Commuting at the Edge of the Exurb Belt
THE sky is coal-black, dawn still a time zone to the east, when Mona Clausen boards the 5:35 bus to Manhattan in front of the Old Tyme Pharmacy in this quaint village in the hilly northeastern reaches of the Poconos not far from the point where the borders of New York, New Jersey and Pennsylvania fit like pieces of a jigsaw puzzle.
Mrs.
Clausen's trip to her office at a midtown Manhattan bank takes two hours door-to-door; she won't see daybreak this time of year until the bus nears Newark.
She commutes this way four or five times a week.


Choices Abound for the Holiday Shopper
IN the hectic last-minute search to find the perfect holiday gift, craft galleries and shops offer an alternative to crowded malls.
Craft store owners and their assistants know the intricacies of the varied media and often know the artists themselves.
A craft gift can be very personal, whether it is a ceramic coffee mug in an eccentric shape, a shawl woven with soft yarns of glowing colors or a practical wooden bowl.
Jewelry in almost all the shops comes in a broad variety of styles and materials.


Business Diary: December 4-9
THE ECONOMY No, Orange County Is Not Exactly an Island  So, is the nation weeping for Orange County, or for itself?
Or put it this way: if you don't live there, or somehow invest in the county, do you care that it just declared bankruptcy and defaulted on a bond issue after its treasurer, now departed, lost $1.5 billion betting at the derivatives track?
Well, yes, you do -- to a certain extent.
For one thing, even if there's no logical impact on financial markets, investors thought there was -- and those jitters became real losses.
But there's concrete damage on one front: the $1 trillion municipal bond market had a safe, squeaky-clean image, but that's gotten quite a blow.
So even if your county stayed clear of derivatives, it might now find it costlier to borrow -- and that cost may somehow get passed right along to you.
The moral: treasurers, being human, may sometimes try to get something for nothing.


Ideas &amp; Trends: Understanding the Universe (Cont.); Score a Point for Symmetry, Hobgoblin of Big Minds
WHEN an explosion is confined in a small enclosure the reverberations are that much more intense.
Such was the effect of the recent discovery by the theorists Nathan Seiberg and Ed Witten of a powerful mathematical tool for use in the small domain of particle physics.
Within this segment of society, the discovery of a new way to plumb the depths of a theory called supersymmetry was a far bigger deal than landing a man on the moon.
For those on the outside looking in, this might all sound very esoteric.
But what Dr.
Witten and Dr.
Seiberg have wrought may be an important milestone on the road to a grand unification theory -- physics' ambitious plan to wrap up creation with a single elegantly knotted bow.
The need to unify seems to be hard-wired into the human brain.
Faced with the munificence of creation, people feel compelled to reduce it to a single essence, some all-inclusive whole.
Thales declared that all was water.
No, Heraclitus said, everything is made of fire.
But the universe inevitably turns out to be more complicated than our maps.
Aristotle chopped up the world into four essences: earth, air, fire and water.
The heavens, he said, were made of a mysterious fifth element, the quintessence, called ether.
Mankind Keeps Striving
Driven by the urge to simplify, mankind unified earth, air and water into a single substance.
All were different forms of matter -- solid, liquid and gas.
Fire too was made of matter -- gases and carbon particles.
But it also manifested something very different -- energy.
Ether was later shown to be nothing more than empty space, leaving us with two phenomena that make up creation: matter and energy.
But just when everything starts to seem simple, science comes along and messes it up again.
To explain the behavior of matter, chemists were forced to replace Aristotle's four elements with the 93 elements in Mendeleyev's periodic table.
Order reigned again when it turned out that all these different atoms were made of just three kinds of particles: protons, neutrons and electrons.
Then physicists in the 20th century discovered there were not just three but hundreds of subatomic particles.
A degree of simplicity was restored when it was found that the particles could be divided into two classes.
The first, called hadrons, consisted of those heavier particles like neutrons, protons and mesons that are made of still tinier particles called quarks.
The second class was the leptons: light particles like the electron and neutrino that are not made from quarks.
In the meantime it was found that energy too can be thought of as particles.
A fire radiates photons of light.
The strong and weak nuclear forces are carried by other particles.
And it is assumed that gravity is carried by something called gravitons.
Loosely speaking, then, we live in a world of matter particles and energy particles.
More precisely, scientists speak of fermions (the parts of atoms) and bosons (the carriers of forces).
But still creation seems too cluttered for our symmetry-seeking minds.
Light (or more generally, electromagnetism) and the weak nuclear force have been shown to be shadows cast by a single underlying "electroweak" force -- a step toward unity has been achieved.
The next milestone would be to unify the electroweak force with the strong nuclear force (some progress has been made here) and then to rope in gravity.
And to truly satisy the craving for simplicity, the all-inclusive one, the fermions (the matter particles) and the bosons (the energy particles) would have to be united.
The goal of supersymmetry is to forge a mathematical lens through which fermions and bosons appear the same.
Hold a cylinder upright so that it casts a shadow against a wall.
Rotate it along its axis and its silhouette remains the same.
But rotate the cylinder in the other two dimensions and its shadow changes.
Since the cylinder is only symmetrical to a rotation along a single dimension, this is called N=1 symmetry.
Or think instead of a sphere.
It can be rotated in three dimensions and maintain its appearance.
This is a symmetry of N=3.
Physicists seek symmetries in imaginary mathematical spaces.
This is not that mysterious.
Draw a graph in which age is plotted on one axis and weight on the other.
You have created a two-dimensional space whose dimensions are measured in pounds and years.
In supersymmetry, particle physicists are studying spaces in which a fermion could be rotated along one dimension and turn into a boson.
An electron would turn into a hypothetical particle called a selectron.
A photon could be rotated to become something called a photino.
Both the particle and its so-called sparticle would be different shadows cast by the same mathematical object hidden behind the scenes.
Or maybe the symmetry is of a higher dimension.
In an N=2 symmetry, a particle could be rotated along either of two dimensions and turn into one of its supersymmetric counterparts.
A Basis (Gulp) in Reality?
Why are the particles and their corresponding sparticles not identical, like the shadows of the cylinder or the sphere?
Because, in the language of physics, the symmetries are broken.
Once upon a time, in the instants after the big bang, particles and sparticles were one.
But the identity was shattered in giving birth to the world.
Or so the legend goes.
Before the breakthrough made by Dr.
Witten and Dr.
Seiberg, the equations describing supersymmetry were intractable.
Now they can be solved, allowing physicists to better understand the theory and how it might hook up to the real world.
But good mathematical tools are not enough.
Scientists need the proper physical tools as well.
So far, experimenters have been unable to create sparticles in their accelerators.
Either the machines are not powerful enough or supersymmetry is wrong.
With the Superconducting Supercollider project abandoned, the only hope is the less powerful accelerator, the Large Hadron Collider, being built in Geneva.
Even if supersymmetry finally tells us nothing about our world, mathematicians will admire its beauty, a perfection that exists in the land of numbers.
Now if only they could find it here on earth.


Little Boxes, All Decked Out And Ready to Play
Boxed sets have become an annual holiday ritual for fans and record companies alike.
And if all the gold- and platinum-selling sets are any indication, record companies have figured out how to please both first-time listeners and dedicated collectors.
Here are 26 choices our critics found noteworthy.
Prices are suggested retail.
Carole King: 'A Natural Woman: The Ode Collection, 1968-1976'  Legacy/Epic; two CDs ($29.98) or cassettes ($24.98)


The Nation; When Government Plays Entrepreneur
INTERRUPTING the nation's latest embrace of big business as being more efficient than big government, the bankruptcy of Orange County in California reminded Americans last week of what's at stake when inventive public officials blithely emulate private entrepreneurs -- and lose.
"In the private sector, it's only money," said Vladimir Stadnyk, Standard &amp; Poor's executive managing director of public finance.
"In the public sector, it's the salaries of teachers, cops and firemen."


Juries Back Police in Cases Like S.I. Death, Experts Say
The refusal by a grand jury to indict police officers in the death of Ernest Sayon reflects the difficulty of prosecuting officers in cases involving split-second judgments, even in a climate in which citizens are increasingly skeptical of the police, defense lawyers and civil-liberties experts say.
Over the years in New York City and across the country, legal experts say, jurors and judges have displayed a willingness to give officers the benefit of the doubt when their actions could have meant the difference between life and death.


Human Rights Organization Urges Stronger Action by the U.N.
A leading human rights organization is calling on the United Nations to reconsider its policy of neutrality and to act more forcefully against those who carry out atrocities in the new rash of small conflicts around the world.
"Faced with genocide and mass slaughter, neutrality should not be the ultimate value," the group, Human Rights Watch, said in a report published on Friday.
It calls the United Nations "unique in its capacity to legitimize force in the most extreme circumstance to uphold human rights."


Reporter's Notebook; An Epidemic Averted: Foot-in-Mouth Disease
After the narrow victory in Congress on the North American Free Trade Agreement last year, the Clinton Administration's trade strategy was clear: drop the "N" in NAFTA and create an American free-trade zone that stretches from the cold tundra of northern Canada to the frigid southern tip of Tierra del Fuego.
Every draft agreement faxed around the hemisphere until a few days ago referred almost absent-mindedly to AFTA.
Until the Brazilians spoke up.
AFTA might roll off the tongue, they pointed out, but in Portuguese it means an open sore in the mouth, a less-than-auspicious acronym for what could become the world's largest free trade zone.


On Preservation: Another View
Your Nov. 27 article was right on the mark except for Jack Shannahan's usual modesty over his role in preserving Milford's original high school.
I have been involved in its preservation efforts for many years and can firmly state that Jack's efforts saved the building within days of its demolition.


Yeltsin Orders A Sealing-Off Of Rebel State
Racheting up the likelihood of war in the Caucasus and political division at home, President Boris N. Yeltsin today ordered troops to seal the borders and air space of the secessionist republic of Chechnya.
While Russian bombers pummeled the outskirts of the republic's capital, Grozny, columns of tanks and thousands of Russian troops were sent to the mostly Muslim region, which has been trying to wrench itself from Russia for more than three years.


A Year Later, 'Model' Market Called a Failure
The city's crackdown on illegal street peddling is taking a new twist in Washington Heights, where a vendors market seems to have failed, amid charges that the area was robbed of enforcement by the city's focus on 125th Street.
The 175th Street market, between Broadway and Wadsworth Avenues, was established in February to keep vendors off 181st Street, where they have long been prohibited.


Habitats/272 Alexander Avenue; Bronx Homesteading: It's Grueling, but Rewarding
FRED NEHRING first visited New York City in the 70's as a sailor in uniform, and he remembers how well the city treated him: free tickets to Yankee Stadium, free tickets to the U.S.O. dances and a bunk at the Soldiers, Sailors and Airmen's Club on Lexington Avenue for $3 a night.
When he moved to the city, he liked to take the subway to places "outside the beaten tourist track," scouting for places he'd like to live.
He said he began to seek out neighborhoods full of abandoned properties.


Did Harpo Cavort?
To the Editor:
Mr.
Bernstein asks: "Did Harpo Marx cavort on the lawn at parties as if he were a character in one of his own movies? There seem to be no reminiscences of the period indicating that he did."


Charitable Giving Lags In Chill Mood of the 90's
Even after he was evicted from his Upper West Side apartment, Glenn A. refused to believe he was a few steps from homelessness.
He had lost his job in January, but he could not bring himself to apply for public assistance.
The shame, he said, immobilized him.
Later, as he slept in church shelters and asked for food on the street, he met with constant suspicion and contempt.
"If you're homeless, the assumption is that you're a drug abuser, an alcoholic, someone who's not motivated to work," said Mr.
A., 55.
"You get a lot of hostility and not much trust."


Doing Good, And Doing Well, Too
STAN HERMAN, the president of the Council of Fashion Designers of America, had only one goal when he arrived at a reception for the Names Project AIDS Memorial Quilt last month at the Guggenheim Museum SoHo: to talk with David Feld, the chief executive of the Today's Man off-price clothing stores, whose company sponsored the exhibition.
"I'm here to ask him to support my benefit for Hetrick-Martin," Mr.
Herman said, referring to a gay and lesbian youth center in Greenwich Village.


Dusting Off the Song Books of the New World
TEN years ago, Joel Cohen started investigating song books that were published for use by itinerant musicians as early as the 18th century.
He found that old European folk ballads and religious choral traditions had been transplanted and revitalized as Europeans moved to the New World and made cultural contact with Africans and American Indians.


Service Society Gets Out Vote Among the Poor
Concerned by a poor election turnout in low-income neighborhoods, the Community Service Society of New York has worked for 10 years to register voters and educate them about local issues.
The society's 10-year-old Voter Participation Project has registered more than 140,000 voters in the Bronx, Brooklyn and Manhattan, including 21,000 in the last two years.
The project works with community organizations in each borough, training residents in get-out-the-vote techniques and providing workshops in grass-roots lobbying.
In election years, the project also sponsors candidates forums in poor neighborhoods.


An M.V.P. (Most Valuable Product) Who Created the Age of Plaid
The Athletes' Revolt, which lost its ideology in the 1970's en route to the bank, has finally come back to golf, where the movement took off in 1959 when Arnold Palmer and Mark McCormack, founder of the International Management Group, began the packaging and marketing of individual athletes beyond mere performance or endorsement.
Along the way, Palmer sold golf to America beyond anything Babe Ruth did for baseball or Michael Jordan for basketball.


SUNDAY, December 11, 1994; Planning for the End
David Petersen was the first person in the country to advise an AIDS patient how to sell a life insurance policy for ready cash.
It was bought by a company that then waited to collect on the seller's death.
He did this in 1989, the year after he himself found out he had AIDS.
Since then his specialty, financial planning for the seriously ill, has become a booming business.
Viatical sales (from the Latin viaticum, for payments to Roman officials made before long journeys to outposts of the empire) of insurance policies -- for 60 to 80 percent of face value -- amount to $300 million a year or more.
Banks and big insurance companies are moving into the market.
And regulators are taking a closer look at the business and the controversy it has provoked.


As Magellan Makes Big Bets, The Risks Rise
THERE is an old Wall Street tale of a customer who buys a thinly traded stock, sees it rise and buys some more.
The more he buys, the higher the price goes, until finally he decides it is time to take some profits.
"Sell," he tells his broker.


Ruling Party Loses Ground In India Votes
India's national Government was in turmoil today after crushing defeats for the governing Congress Party in three state elections.
The losses, and an uncertain outcome in a fourth state, raised doubts about Prime Minister P. V. Narasimha Rao's ability to lead the party to victory in the next general election.
The setbacks, particularly the loss of a Congress government in Mr.
Rao's home state, Andhra Pradesh, in southern India, have also encouraged opponents of the market economic reforms introduced by Mr.
Rao after he became Prime Minister in 1991.
Congress Party insiders believe the drive to open up India's hitherto socialist economy may now be stalled at least until the next national election, which must be held within 18 months.


Of Orchids, Warm to Cool and In Between
ORCHIDS are like potato chips.
You can't grow just one.
Although the plants themselves are often just a bunch of ugly leaves, when the orchid finally blooms, the enchantment is indescribable.
And their amazing variety causes hobbyists to try one species after another.
The plants will reward patient growers about once a year, with blooms ranging in size from those you have to peer at with a hand lens to those that fill the hands.
Orchids may have spots, stripes, frills, tails, fringes and amazing colors.
Some are even deliciously fragrant.


A Taste of the South on Atlantic Ave.
George Huston says he has about 99 family members, and they all take some part in selling sweet potatoes, smoked turkey necks and cane syrup off the back of a truck along Atlantic Avenue in Bedford-Stuyvesant.
Mr.
Huston's various family members take turns driving the 15 tractor- trailers they own down to North and South Carolina, Georgia and Florida, where they buy produce from local farmer's markets and other speciality items indigenous to the area, then haul them back up to Atlantic Avenue, where they hawk the goods to anyone who pulls over.


William P. Luce, 70, News Editor of The Times in the Late 1980's
William P. Luce, a former news editor of The New York Times, died Friday night at Baptist Medical Center in Jacksonville, Fla., where he was vacationing.
He was 70 and lived in Englewood, N.J.
The cause was an aneurysm, his family said.


Tannenbaum Alert


Ranchers Balk at U.S. Plans To Return Wolf to the West
After more than a century of policy flip-flops that saw the gray wolf go from the most loathsome animal in America to the celebrated subject of perhaps the most extensive environmental impact statement ever done, the mythic predator is a single court hearing away from a formal return to the West.
That it has taken two decades, 120 public hearings, directives from six Presidents, dozens of Congressional committees and $12 million worth of studies to get to a point where wolves could soon run through Yellowstone National Park tells much about the heavy load of significance that has been saddled on the wolf.


Adventures In Cyberspace
FOR a growing number of travelers who have access to the global Internet, a journey of 10,000 miles can begin with a single click.
By connecting a home computer to the Internet or one of the popular online information services, including Compuserve, Prodigy and America Online, a modern traveler can, among other things:
* Make hotel, airline and car reservations.


Dirty Laundry
WASHED IN GOLD The Story Behind the Biggest Money-Laundering Investigation in U.S.
History.
By Ann Woolner.
Illustrated. 391 pp.
New York:  American Lawyer Books/ Simon &amp; Schuster. $25.


Little Boxes, All Decked Out And Ready to Play
Boxed sets have become an annual holiday ritual for fans and record companies alike.
And if all the gold- and platinum-selling sets are any indication, record companies have figured out how to please both first-time listeners and dedicated collectors.
Here are 26 choices our critics found noteworthy.
Prices are suggested retail. 'Loretta Lynn: Honky Tonk Girl'  MCA; three CDs ($23.40) or cassettes ($17.40)


Marlo in Midlife: 'That Girl' Seems Gone for Good
Marlo Thomas is surrounded by the deadly serious.
In "Reunion," a television movie to be shown tonight at 9 on CBS, she plays a mother who has to cope with her 5-year-old son's sudden death and the knowledge that she was to blame.
And in the current revival of "The Shadow Box" at the Circle in the Square Theater, she plays a spinster at the mercy of her terminally ill mother.
The somber themes are coincidence, says Ms.
Thomas, not some desperate attempt to wipe out the public's memories of Ann Marie, the eternally perky, eternally aspiring actress she made famous in her sitcom "That Girl" almost three decades ago. (She started doing dramatic roles long ago, and although she may never turn into Meryl Streep, she has clearly proved she can act.)


Jumpers vs. Reefers
Sometimes, as a former editor, I read the front pages of The Times -- or The Washington Post or The Los Angeles Times -- the way editors have designed them to be read.
Quite an exercise.


Little Boxes, All Decked Out And Ready to Play
Boxed sets have become an annual holiday ritual for fans and record companies alike.
And if all the gold- and platinum-selling sets are any indication, record companies have figured out how to please both first-time listeners and dedicated collectors.
Here are 26 choices our critics found noteworthy.
Prices are suggested retail.
Various Artists: 'Black Box'  TVT; three CD's ($45.98; limited edition, $69.98)


And Then Music Met Electronics
WHEN MODERN AUDIO evolved from wartime advances in electronics, it was called high fidelity.
The term is no longer used much, which is regrettable, because it pointed straight at the crux of the new technology.
The word fidelity implied that there was something to be faithful to: music itself.
Music, after all, is the basic material of audio -- the stuff that enters the microphone, flows through the circuits and finally pours from the loudspeaker.
The equipment itself is but a mute assemblage of metal and plastic whose meaning emerges only with the realization of music.


Little Boxes, All Decked Out And Ready to Play
Boxed sets have become an annual holiday ritual for fans and record companies alike.
And if all the gold- and platinum-selling sets are any indication, record companies have figured out how to please both first-time listeners and dedicated collectors.
Here are 26 choices our critics found noteworthy.
Prices are suggested retail. 'Frank Sinatra: The V-Disks'
Columbia Legacy; two CDs ($29.98)


Rocky Road Lies Ahead for Wellcome
WHEN it comes to publicity, positive or adverse, Wellcome P.L.C.'s biggest product is AZT, the drug it developed to fight the AIDS virus.
But when it comes to the bottom line, the British pharmaceutical company relies far more on Zovirax, another product that treats herpes and cold sores and accounts for 37 percent of Wellcome's sales and probably close to half its operating profits.


Gulf Air and Korean Air Begin New U.S. Routes
Two international airlines have recently established new routes to the United States.
Gulf Air, (800) 553-2824, the national carrier of Abu Dhabi, Bahrain, Oman and Qatar, has introduced twice-weekly nonstop service between New York City and Cyprus.
The flights, which began in late October, depart Kennedy International Airport at 9 P.M. on Tuesday and Friday, arriving at Larnaca, Cyprus, at 2:25 P.M. the following day, with continuing service to Abu Dhabi.
Westbound flights depart Larnaca Thursday and Sunday at 2:45 A.M. and arrive in New York at 8:20 A.M.
Until Jan. 13, the round-trip, 14-day advance purchase fare is $830.


Next: Action by Roman Numerals
Short of an unexpected reversal in their thinking and strategic planning, and the players' new proposal notwithstanding, the owners will meet Thursday in Chicago and invoke Impasse/Implementation I. And the reason this week's action will require a Roman numeral is because it will trigger Impasse/Implementation II.
The sequence will be as follows: Once the owners declare an impasse and implement their Nov. 17 salary cap proposal, negotiation will turn to litigation, the players will continue their strike and the owners will intensify their plans to open spring camps and play the season with replacement players.


Court Allows Holding of Patients Who Are Dangerous Only if Free
A state appeals court in Manhattan has ruled that a hospitalized mental patient who is on medication and is currently not dangerous can still be confined against his will if that patient is very likely to abandon his medication and revert to dangerous behavior on drugs and alcohol.
The ruling last month was similar to a decision by a state appellate court in Brooklyn in 1993 in the case of Larry Hogue, the mental patient who was accused of menacing people on the Upper West Side of Manhattan after his release.


Howard Lutnick, Allison Lambert
Allison Lambert, a senior associate at Wilson, Elser, Moskowitz, Edelman &amp; Dicker, a New York law firm, was married last evening to Howard William Lutnick, the president and chief executive of Cantor Fitzgerald L.P., a securities brokerage firm, also in New York.
Cantor David Benedict performed the ceremony at the Plaza in New York.
Mrs.
Lutnick, 31, graduated from the University of Maryland and received her law degree from Yeshiva University.
She is the daughter of Geri and Joel Lambert of Fort Lee, N.J.
Her father is the president of Lambert Concepts, gift-ware importers in Fort Lee.
Her mother is a buyer for the Celeste Shops, a pair of women's apparel stores in Englewood, N.J., and Jamaica Estates, Queens.


Players Present Plan To the Team Owners
In an effort to begin the end of their four-month-old strike, major league baseball players presented a new proposal to the owners today, calling for a tax of about 5 percent on club payrolls, a contribution of at least $30 million of their money to an industry growth fund and input in crucial matters like television and expansion.
The owners did not reject the proposal immediately, but they left little doubt that they would reject it.


A Campaign for New York's Children
With nearly 40 percent of New York City's children living in poverty, their need for services is great.
Agencies supported by The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund strive to provide food and clothing, health care, counseling and programs to help people be better parents.
But these efforts are complicated by a decline in charitable giving.
Articles, page 33.


WHAT'S NEW YORK THE CAPITAL OF NOW?
I am a 23-year-old who had lived my entire life in and around New York City before my recent move to San Francisco.
To me, the word "city" has always conjured up images of New York, in all of its glory, energy, enormity and, yes, filth.
I had always taken for granted that these qualities were components of all major American cities.
Only recently, in my travels, have I come to realize that New York is unique.
The cities that have recently been labeled "most livable" -- Seattle, Phoenix and Pittsburgh, for instance -- tend to be more like dense suburbs.
Chicago and Atlanta are more like financial centers.
Washington has neighborhoods but is a city with a one-track mind.
Though my new home city has diversity and culture, it lacks scale.


Cruising
To the Editor: For 40 years, I have spent most of my vacation time on cruises.
I estimate I have enjoyed 70 cruises throughout the world.
With the exception of "no tipping" policies, part of a cruise is the custom of tipping.
Considering that in most cases dining and stateroom services are in general efficient and friendly, it is a joy for me.
Usually, the recommended guidelines are minimal; therefore, in most instances, it is my choice to be a bit more generous.


Corrections
A map last Sunday with an article about the stampede that killed four people in a nightclub in Elizabeth, N.J., mislabeled the body of water between Elizabeth and Staten Island.
It is the Arthur Kill, not the Hudson River.


Letters
To the Editor:
Although the Nobel economics laureate John Nash almost never talked about his schizophrenia publicly and though he declined to be interviewed for your article, many of his friends, relatives and associates quite freely told you personal stories about him.
Did any of these people check with Professor Nash to see whether he was willing to be have them discuss personal information he had chosen not to reveal?
Or did they think that was beside the point?
FELECIA ACKERMAN  Providence, R.I., Nov. 14  The writer is a philosophy professor at Brown University.


Family Members Going Home Again
WHEN Joan Goodwin walks through the halls of the Hastings Middle School, where she teaches, some of her colleagues are her former teachers.
She and her family live in the house in which her husband was raised; her daughters receive religious instruction at the same church in which Mrs.
Goodwin was reared (one of her child's teachers was, in fact, Mrs. Goodwin's Brownie troop leader), and her social circle revolves around many of her high school friends.
"The longer I was away at college, the more I realized how nice it was here in Hastings," said Mrs.
Goodwin, who was raised in Hastings-on-Hudson from the age of 10.
"My parents were still here when I moved back, and my mother-in-law lives five minutes away. We like the area. It really is a nice place to live and raise a family. I see more and more people come back. If they don't live in Hastings, they live in Dobbs Ferry or Ardsley or Tarrytown. This is a small town. Anywhere else you are a Social Security number. Here people know you by your face and your name."


LET 'EM HAVE NUKES
In Doug Bandow's article "Let 'Em Have Nukes" (Nov. 13), some nuclear proliferators are more equal than others: Washington should simply determine which nations have "nonthreatening reasons for desiring atomic weapons." It is this type of archaic distinction that reinforces the notion that nuclear weapons are a privilege.
Unfortunately, history has shown that calling a nuclear arsenal "defensive" does not reduce its threat to humanity.
ANNABEL HERTZ New York


DEC. 4-10: Royal Gush; The Queen's a Wildcat -- For Oil, That Is
It's like a British royal version of "The Beverly Hillbillies." Out there in back where no one expected -- under the grounds of Windsor Castle -- sits a field that could contain as much as 100 million barrels of oil, enough to make one very rich, if one were not already so.
Informed of the potential gusher, Queen Elizabeth II gave permission to a Canadian company to drill an exploratory well.
But since it would not do to have a derrick blighting the castle, the well will be sunk 600 yards away, discreetly behind the seventh green of the Queen's golf course.


Corrections
A report in the Business Diary column last Sunday about job cutbacks at the Chemical Banking Corporation misstated the movement of the company's stock on Dec. 1, the day of the announcement.
It rose 25 cents, to $36.625; it did not fall 87.5 cents.


At Christmas, Life Can Be Wonderful For Robbers Too
Trapped in Paradise  Nicolas Cage, Jon Lovitz, Dana Carvey Directed by George Gallo PG-13 111 minutes


Death Penalty Can't Affirm the Value of Life; Electric Chair Cruelty
To the Editor:
The photo of a woman in the electric chair that accompanies your article on recent advocacy of capital punishment ("The Rage to Kill Those Who Kill," Week in Review, Dec. 4) is harrowing in its similarity to depictions of torture.
This impression is not far from the mark.


Commercial Property/The McGovern Family; This Time, Father and Son Get to Build on the Name
IT is hard to believe they are related.
Eugene McGovern, 52, is big, brawny, blustery.
His head is shaved, his speech peppered with slang and salty phrases, a cigar firmly ensconced in his mouth.
His is the middle name of Lehrer McGovern Bovis, the huge construction management company that he co-founded.
His 33-year-old son, Eric, is also big, but conventionally clothed and coifed, quick-witted in the most correct English, and, his civil engineering degree notwithstanding, looking like Hollywood's idea of a businessman.
Not many people remember MI Construction Consulting, the short-lived company he started in 1992.


Little Boxes, All Decked Out And Ready to Play
Boxed sets have become an annual holiday ritual for fans and record companies alike.
And if all the gold- and platinum-selling sets are any indication, record companies have figured out how to please both first-time listeners and dedicated collectors.
Here are 26 choices our critics found noteworthy.
Prices are suggested retail. 'The Everly Brothers: Heartaches and Harmonies'  Rhino; 4 CDs ($59.98)


Still Lifes With Bulk Produce
Wander near Houston Street or along Fifth Avenue, and you can almost trip over art.
But "Artists of the Women's Caucus for Art," an exhibition featuring the works of 18 contemporary women artists, opened two weeks ago at a more improbable locale: the executive office of Krasdale Foods, a distributor in Hunts Point.


Elsie C. Nelson And Cap Lesesne
Elsie Cecilia Nelson, a paralegal, was married on Monday to Dr.
Carroll Lesesne, a plastic surgeon.
The Rev.
John Andrew performed the ceremony at St.
Thomas Episcopal Church in New York.
Mrs.
Lesesne, 39, works in the matrimonial department of Morrison Cohen Singer &amp; Weinstein, a New York law firm.
She is a daughter of Mrs.
George A. Nelson Jr. of Southampton, L.I., and the late Mr.
Nelson.


Planned Parenthood Pushes for Abortion Clinic in Smithtown
PLANNED PARENTHOOD officials say they will continue to seek approval for an abortion clinic in Smithtown despite protests by an anti-abortion group.
"Suffolk County at the present time has no abortion clinic that provides Medicaid," the executive director of Planned Parenthood of Suffolk County, Rose Brown, said.
"This situation leaves the poor woman without the needs that they require."


Little Boxes, All Decked Out And Ready to Play
Boxed sets have become an annual holiday ritual for fans and record companies alike.
And if all the gold- and platinum-selling sets are any indication, record companies have figured out how to please both first-time listeners and dedicated collectors.
Here are 26 choices our critics found noteworthy.
Prices are suggested retail.
Astor Piazzolla: 'Tangamente 1968-1973'  Justin Time Records; three CDs ($35.99)  Astor Piazzolla, the renegade Argentine composer who died in 1992, saw tango not as a tradition but as a sponge.
"Tangamente" documents some of Mr.
Piazzolla's midcareer music, when he had become adept at reconciling his desire to transform the tango music of his youth with his classical studies and his love of jazz.
The set includes the fruits of Mr.
Piazzolla's songwriting collaborations with Horacio Ferrer, music written for but not used in the film "Last Tango in Paris," the avant-garde mini-opera "Maria de Buenos Aires" and plenty of Mr.
Piazzolla's incomparable playing on the accordion-like bandoneon.
N.
S.


Little Boxes, All Decked Out And Ready to Play
Boxed sets have become an annual holiday ritual for fans and record companies alike.
And if all the gold- and platinum-selling sets are any indication, record companies have figured out how to please both first-time listeners and dedicated collectors.
Here are 26 choices our critics found noteworthy.
Prices are suggested retail.
Various Artists: 'The Specialty Story'  Specialty/Fantasy; five CDs ($75)


Little Boxes, All Decked Out And Ready to Play
Boxed sets have become an annual holiday ritual for fans and record companies alike.
And if all the gold- and platinum-selling sets are any indication, record companies have figured out how to please both first-time listeners and dedicated collectors.
Here are 26 choices our critics found noteworthy.
Prices are suggested retail.
The Temptations: 'Emperors of Soul'  Motown; five CDs ($69.99)


Brooklyn Bureau Faces Cutbacks
City budget cuts are forcing the Brooklyn Bureau of Community Service to eliminate a program for formerly homeless families, the only service of its kind in the borough.
Donna A. Santarsiero, the executive director, said the program will end in June unless the Brooklyn Bureau receives enough private donations to keep it going.


SERBIAN BLOCKADE HINDERING THE U.N.
A fuel shortage resulting from blockades by nationalist Serbs has virtually paralyzed United Nations military and aid operations in the most vulnerable areas of this war-torn country, United Nations officials said today.
Although the Bosnian Serbs have sporadically permitted food to enter some encircled Muslim enclaves in recent days, they are barring trucks carrying aviation or diesel fuel, said a spokesman for the United Nations peacekeeping force here, Lieut.
Col.
Jan-Dirk von Merveldt.


STEVE GUNDERSON
Newt Gingrich claims that being gay "is an orientation in the way that alcoholism is an orientation." In "Bennington Means Business" (Oct. 23), Mark Edmundson asserts that a faculty member at Bennington College "is open about his drinking problem and homosexuality." With this sly coupling repeatedly entering public discourse, it is imperative to recall that alcoholism is a disease, difficult to treat but treatable.
To link a sexual orientation with an illness defies both logic and experience and only perpetuates superstitions some of us hoped were part of a less enlightened day.
RICHARD MALLETTE Lake Forest, Ill.


Residential Resales
In the following reports, the "listed at" price is the asking price when negotiations began that ended in the sale.
Time on market is from most recent listing to contract.
MANHATTAN
GRAMERCY PARK AREA  $325,000
235 East 22d Street  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,400-sq.-ft. prewar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, eat-in kitchen, fireplace, roof garden, south exposure; maintenance $1,363, 52% tax-deductible, listed at $349,000, 10 weeks on market (Brokers: Douglas Elliman; Bellmarc Realty)


Doctors Alter Their Position On Coverage
Disillusioned with the policies of President Clinton and his wife, Hillary, leaders of the American Medical Association say they have dropped their support for ambitious plans to guarantee health insurance for all Americans and now favor incremental steps to increase access to care.
The change in policy came this week at a meeting of the organization in Honolulu, where Dr.
Robert E. McAfee, president of the association, lampooned the Clintons and Ira C. Magaziner, chief architect of their health plan.
Dr.
McAfee referred to them as King Will, Queen Hillary and "Ira of the Unruly Hair."


On Preservation: It Depends
The answer to the headline "Should Historical Buildings Yield to Square Glass Boxes?" (Nov. 27) is: It depends.
In any event, the Laurel Street School in Branford was a poor choice to illustrate the question.
For one thing, it was not yielding to a glass box, but to a badly needed new municipal building (police headquarters and central communications center).


Tales From the Corner Office
IN "DISCLOSURE," THE NEW film about a woman who sexually harasses her male employee, one line floats through like a mantra: "Sexual harassment isn't about sex. It's about power." The first person who says this is the no-nonsense, ordinary-looking female lawyer defending Tom Sanders (Michael Douglas) against his movie-star-glamorous harasser, Meredith Johnson (Demi Moore).
The lawyer is the movie's official voice, making the irrefutable case that harassment is a gender-neutral offense.
But when her little lesson is echoed by Tom himself, it becomes a cri de coeur, exposing the dirty secrets that make the film so effective as a button pusher.
Angry that his wife thinks he allowed the harassment to happen -- why was he having an intimate glass of wine with his sexy boss, anyway? -- Tom explodes.
"Why don't I just be that guy, that evil white guy you're always complaining about?" he shouts.
"Sexual harassment is about power. When did I have the power? When?"


For Holiday Crowds, Buffet Can Be Ideal
As the calendar runs down, thoughts inevitably turn to holiday parties.
The buffet supper is not only one of the easiets ways to entertain a crowd, it can be one of the most enjoyably relaxed for both guests and hosts.
But a buffet table calls for some pragmatic planning.
The array of food should look bountiful and inviting.
It must involve dishes that can be prepared in advance and will not be damaged by sitting out for an hour or so.


Unmitigated Hogwash
To the Editor:
Your review of "The Abortionist," by Rickie Solinger (Nov. 6), contained at least one piece of unmitigated hogwash.
First, you note that Ruth Barnett performed approximately 40,000 successful abortions between 1918 and 1968.
During much of that era, modern antibiotics were unavailable.
Yet, you pridefully add, "Ruth Barnett . . . never lost a patient." This is a gargantuan improbability.
Ask any medical practitioner: you could not perform 40,000 pedicures without losing a patient.
Surgical instruments and flesh, brought together, cause blood letting.
Bleeding courts infection.
Infection presents the risk of death.


Ms. Martico-Greenfield, Mr. Edelstein
Theresa Lynn Martico-Greenfield, a daughter of Carol and Joseph Martico of St.
Petersburg, Fla., is to be married today to Philip Howard Edelstein, the son of Anita Edelstein of Highland Park, N.J., and the late Alfred Edelstein.
Rabbi Helene Ferris is to officiate at Frankie and Johnnie's on the Waterfront, a restaurant in Hoboken, N.J.
The bride, 35, is the associate administrator of the Jewish Home and Hospital for the Aged in New York.
She graduated from Georgetown University and received a master's degree in public health from Columbia University.
Her father is a general contractor.
Her mother is a legal secretary at the law firm of Blaisingame, Forizs &amp; Smiljanich.
Both work in St.
Petersburg.


The Perfect Companion
Someone who stays by your side, who says only what you want to hear, who always laughs at your jokes.
Three designers and their sidekicks sit for their portrait by the artist Laurie Simmons.


SUNDAY, December 11, 1994; Lost Meals Found
There are books to help you cook like a mafia don and to dine like the folks on "Northern Exposure." Now you can dip into "Found Meals of the Lost Generation," by Suzanne Rodriguez-Hunter (Faber and Faber).
Among the many recipes culled from real and fictitious gatherings: Ernest Hemingway's sausages, James Joyce's hot cocoa and Zelda Fitzgerald's bouillabaisse.
There is also a recipe for jugged hare with red currant jelly wine sauce served with boiled potatoes, a dish favored by Gertrude Stein and Alice B. Toklas.
During World War I, the two once enjoyed this meal made with a rabbit accidentally hit by a friend's automobile.
A hare is a hare is a hare, even when it's road kill.


F.Y.I.
No Parking? Why Not?
Q.
A No Parking Anytime sign has just gone up in front of my apartment building.
The same thing happened several years ago, and I recall that petitions to some city agency resulted in the removal of the sign.
How do I get a review of this matter or otherwise get rid of it?


Coming In From the Cold: A Fur Lovers' Backlash
FOUR years ago, a New York record company executive who lives with two cats adopted from the North Shore Animal League bought herself a full-length female ranch mink coat.
Shortly after that, she witnessed an antifur protest in front of Fred the Furrier, a Fifth Avenue shop that has since gone out of business, and she began to feel less and less comfortable about wearing her coat on the street.
Eventually, fearing verbal assaults, paint splattering, egg hurling or some other form of antifur harassment, she put her fur into storage, where it remained until last December, when she began wearing it again.
And two weeks ago, she ordered it out of storage again in preparation for winter.


Protestant Agencies Shield Tenants
A record number of New Yorkers sought help from the Federation of Protestant Welfare Agencies last year to prevent being evicted from their homes.
Through its individual assistance, the federation provided more than $100,000 to 129 people who needed help meeting daily expenses when emergencies arose.
But hundreds of others who asked for assistance had to be referred elsewhere.
"We can't even begin to keep up with the demand for eviction prevention," said Megan E. McLaughlin, executive director of the federation.
She said the number would probably continue to grow next year because of government budget cuts to social service agencies.


The Executive Computer; The Industry Cognoscenti Take a Stab at the Vision Thing
AMONG personal computer industry confabs, where the digerati assemble to recharge their intellects and egos, some gatherings are known for the vision thing, some for great after-hours jam sessions, and some for the lavish resorts at which they are held.
But Richard Shaffer's annual Technologic Partners Personal Computer Outlook, held in a utilitarian hotel near the San Francisco Airport last week, has always been known for being all business.


Duck Sauce: Rarely Put on Duck, and a Lot Is Made in Jersey
IN the beginning was the kitchen of Nelson Yeung's restaurant in Patchogue, L.I., and it was hot.
"One hundred and ten degrees in that kitchen," Mr.
Yeung recalled recently.
"You don't need 110 degrees. We figured out restaurant working is too hard."


Sound Bytes; A Pioneer of Simulation
WILL WRIGHT, cofounder and chief designer of Maxis Software in Orinda, Calif., is fascinated by the way things work.
He loves to take things apart and put them back together in new and interesting ways.
He has designed robots as a hobby.
He studied urban planning because he wanted to know how cities worked.
His obsession with "understanding process" led him to develop a computer software game that allows its users to design and manage a simulated city.


School Volunteers Offset Budget Cuts
AFTER answering an advertisement in a "pennysaver" newsletter, Elizabeth Kroppy of Huntington, a retired New York City teacher, volunteered to help out in a nearby elementary school.
She now spends two days a week in a first-grade classroom, helping the children with the alphabet and answering questions.
"While the teacher is working with other groups," Mrs.
Kroppy said, "the children don't have to interrupt her but can come to me with their questions. With 23 children in the class someone always needs something."


Tale of a Trashed Apartment And the Elusive Eviction
Marisol Lasanta has not paid a cent in rent in two years.
Neighbors have complained of loud noise and drunkenness.
Inside her two-bedroom apartment, on the fifth floor of 381 East 151st Street, visitors must follow a trail that snakes through clothes and garbage piled eye-deep.
The landlord, Mike Persaud, says he has spent $2,000 in Housing Court trying to evict the tenant.
Although Ms.
Lasanta has been absent from the building for about two months, she does not want to give up the apartment, says George Alvarez, the lawyer appointed to her through Bronx Legal Services.


Streetscapes/6 Macdougal Alley; Studio, Once a Decrepit Stable, That Drew Artists to a Mews
NINETY years ago, the sculptor Frederick Triebel returned from Italy, stumbled across a decrepit stable at 6 Macdougal Alley and transformed it and its entire deadend court into a sculptor's paradise.
Now Macdougal Alley is just short of a million-dollar address, although 6 Macdougal Alley's most notable feature is a wooden covering where a giant studio window had once been.
But the former stable has found another rescuer -- a doctor from Connecticut.
Most of the stables on Macdougal Alley were built as rear structures for large town houses facing Washington Square North or Eighth Street.
According to research by the Landmarks Preservation Commission, James DePeyster Ogden built the house and stable in 1839 at 26 Washington Square North/6 Macdougal Alley.


DEC. 4-10: Bentsen Bows; A Youthful White House Loses Its Gray Eminence
For two years the complaint about the Clinton White House has been that there are too few experienced political hands running the show.
Now there are fewer.
Last week Treasury Secretary Lloyd Bentsen announced that he would quit while he and the economy are ahead.
"I believe you rust out before you wear out," he said.
The 73-year-old Texan plans to re-enter business in Houston, where he has made millions in the insurance business.


Burmese Rulers Face Expiration of Dissident's Detention
The Burmese generals who run Myanmar face a momentous decision in the next few weeks: whether to release the country's Nobel Prize-winning dissident leader when the detention order expires next month, more than five years after she was placed under house arrest, or to face a new round of international condemnation by continuing to hold her.
Foreign diplomats in Myanmar, formerly Burma, say there are signs to suggest that the dissident leader, Daw Aung San Suu Kyi, is negotiating a deal with the military that would result in freedom for her and for many imprisoned supporters.


Practicing The Gospel In the Village
The Rev.
George Kuhn arrived at St.
Brigid's Roman Catholic Church in 1986.
His term as pastor expires next month, and Father George, as he is known, leaves behind two images: that of the admirable defender of the underclass and that of an ideologue who cares more about the homeless than the area's residents.
"I don't consider myself an activist," Father Kuhn said during a recent conversation in St.
Brigid's, which sits in the heart of the East Village, at Eighth Street and Avenue B. "My mission is practicing the gospel of Jesus. If Jesus says to feed the poor, and the political climate is anti-poor, then the gospel has political implications."


The World: Bhopal's Tragedy Revisited; 10 Years After the Gas, No End to Tears
ON the night of Dec. 2, 1984, as thousands of impoverished Indians slept in huts they had built on open land in the shadow of a sophisticated Union Carbide chemical plant in Bhopal, India, an explosion of deadly methyl isocyanate sent out clouds of lethal gas.
The poison rolled over them faster than they could run to escape it.
In that one night of terror, breathlessness, vomiting and searing pain, up to 4,000 people died, and in the next few days another 3,000 fell victim, according to Indian estimates.
The world's worst industrial disaster struck India as it was recovering from the assassination of Prime Minister Indira Gandhi a little more than a month earlier.
As pictures of the dead and dying in Bhopal circulated, the immediate reaction was outrage, much of it against Union Carbide, although the American company's Bhopal plant was run entirely by an Indian subsidiary, and although Indian officials had not prevented many of the victims from moving too close to the plant.


Where the Action Is
WHENEVER winter decides to arrive, it helps to know indoor spots to swim, skate or play tennis.
Here is a sampling.
CITY CENTERS


Crime
Forget about English country houses -- there is no more insular setting for a mystery than an Israeli kibbutz.
Inspector Michael Ohayon, the reflective detective who puzzles out Batya Gur's intellectually challenging mysteries, feels the waves of suspicion and hostility in MURDER ON A KIBBUTZ (HarperCollins, $20) when he invades one of these closed societies to investigate the death of its administrative secretary.
"You're wasting your time," one elder says dismissively.
"It's impossible to understand from the outside."
As far as the murder mystery goes, that's not true.
There are some obvious suspects in the poisoning death of Osnat Harel, whose progressive views about letting children sleep in their parents' homes and setting up separate quarters for the elderly sowed a great deal of dissension in this very old, very traditional commune.
But the deeper mysteries of how life is lived on a kibbutz do, indeed, seem almost impenetrable to an outsider.
Which is why Ms.
Gur, speaking through Dalya Bilu's lucid translation from the Hebrew, can grab her readers with dry discussions of "egalitarian elitism" and fussy deliberations over who picks the peaches and who cuts the dress patterns -- seemingly simple housekeeping matters that actually reflect earthshaking political and ideological changes transforming kibbutz society.


Of Orchids, Warm to Cool and In Between
ORCHIDS are like potato chips.
You can't grow just one.
Although the plants themselves are often just a bunch of ugly leaves, when the orchid finally blooms, the enchantment is indescribable.
And their amazing variety causes hobbyists to try one species after another.
The plants will reward patient growers about once a year, with blooms ranging in size from those you have to peer at with a hand lens to those that fill the hands.
Orchids may have spots, stripes, frills, tails, fringes and amazing colors.
Some are even deliciously fragrant.


Digging Out Schliemann's Treasure at the Pushkin
EVER SINCE THE END OF World War II, a single curator at the Pushkin Museum of Fine Arts had a special and entirely secret task: to monitor and maintain the artistic and archeological bounty known as Priam's Treasure, which had been looted from Nazi Germany by the Red Army.
Officially, all was silence.
The Soviet Government denied any knowledge of the 4,500-year-old treasures, which had been unearthed on the site of ancient Troy between 1873 and 1890 by the German amateur archeologist, merchant and showman Heinrich Schliemann, whose finds astonished the world.


Viewpoints; U.S. Decline? Not in Golf Balls, Mister!
I KNOW, I know: America doesn't make baseballs any more, no VCR's or fax machines; steelworkers and farmers are endangered species; the balance of trade has completely lost its equilibrium, and our top companies have lost a third of their jobs to places like Mexico at 10 cents on the dollar.
But to those who lament the post-industrial economy's going to hell in a handbasket, let me say a few inspiring words.
Monster trucks, aerosol hair, fingernail technology, Elvis impersonators and, yes, used golf balls.


Arda Nazerian, Stephen Haratunian
ARDA NAZERIAN, 30, the director of Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo's New York City press office, and Stephen Haratunian, 31, an investment banker at the Bankers Trust Company in Manhattan, were old buddies for years until their relationship changed as much as the city does after a snowfall.
Both are of Armenian descent and had met often at parties, basketball games and political meetings within New York's tightknit Armenian community.
They had worked together on relief efforts for sick children from Armenia and had attended Armenian dances, where it's common to see 500 people doing a line dance.


Correction
An article on Nov. 20 about women who are underground cartoonists credited the editorship of the anthology "Twisted Sisters" incorrectly.
Although the book was conceived by Diane Noomin and Aline Kominsky-Crumb, it was edited by Ms.
Noomin alone.


Letters
To the Editor:
Your article perpetuates a dangerous equation of psychosis with schizophrenia, reflecting assumptions that contribute to erroneous diagnoses of schizophrenia in manic-depressive cases.


Two from Sunken Cargo Ship Rescued in Atlantic Storm
Two survivors of a Ukrainian cargo ship that sank Friday in a North Atlantic storm were found and rescued by a helicopter and a merchant vessel yesterday as a wide sea-and-air search continued 1,200 miles off the New Jersey coast for 29 other members of the ship's company.
The Coast Guard reported late yesterday that merchant ships in the search area had recovered the bodies of seven of the missing men.
If the ships' reports were accurate, 22 crew members still had not been accounted for last night.


Little Boxes, All Decked Out And Ready to Play
Boxed sets have become an annual holiday ritual for fans and record companies alike.
And if all the gold- and platinum-selling sets are any indication, record companies have figured out how to please both first-time listeners and dedicated collectors.
Here are 26 choices our critics found noteworthy.
Prices are suggested retail.
Various Artists: 'Sam Cooke's SAR Records Story'  ABKCO Records; two CDs ($35.98)


The World: Ivan in Berlin; The Long Shadow Of the Russian Mob
ON an otherwise placid day last August, police in Frankfurt were called to a luxurious villa which served as a high-class bordello, catering to wealthy professionals, diplomats and guests at the city's many international fairs.
Such establishments, which are tolerated by German law, normally operate with great discretion and almost never attract police attention.
Detectives found a grisly scene the like of which which is rarely seen in this country.
The bodies of the Hungarian-born bordello owner and his wife, together with those of four Russian prostitutes aged 18 to 28, were found in the carpeted bar, the sauna, and upstairs bedrooms.


A Luxurious Walk Into the Italian Past
RESTAURANTS have not been left out of the trend to moving away from the excesses of the 1980's.
No group has embraced reducing prices more than Italian restaurants, with their emphasis on low-cost pastas, pizzas and family dining.
Now comes Bardi, an opulent Italian restaurant in Great Neck that offers a luxurious walk into the past and very fine food, as well.


In Elementary Schools Security Is Tightened
NO one is talking about metal detectors at Mohansic Elementary School, a school for kindergarten through third grade set among modest single-family houses in this rural northern Westchester community.
But the 603-student school has made security a prime focus, locking all but the front door and asking visitors to sign in and wear buttons.


Opposition to Military Rule in Nigeria Is Widening
When Nigeria's military leaders crushed a strike in August aimed at forcing them to respect the results of nullified national elections, many people braced for another long chapter of stern rule by an army that has controlled power for most of the country's 34 years of independence.
In its latest attempt to tighten control, the military last week suspended habeas corpus.


Little Boxes, All Decked Out And Ready to Play
Boxed sets have become an annual holiday ritual for fans and record companies alike.
And if all the gold- and platinum-selling sets are any indication, record companies have figured out how to please both first-time listeners and dedicated collectors.
Here are 26 choices our critics found noteworthy.
Prices are suggested retail. 'Judy Garland: The Complete Decca Masters (Plus)'  MCA; four CDs ($39.98)


Do We Feed Defense Instead of the Poor?
To the Editor:
I sit on the board of directors of Part of the Solution, a Bronx soup kitchen and shelter.
On Nov. 30 we voted, with intense anguish but out of fiscal necessity, to close the shelter component of POTS.
That means 12 more people will be out on the streets and the 500 on our waiting list have seen their hopes of shelter dwindle even further.


At Christmas, Life Can Be Wonderful For Robbers Too
Into the Deep and The Last Buffalo  Two films featuring Imax 3-D images No rating 30 minutes each


The Irish Church: Under Strain but Still Strong
Every day in this overwhelmingly Roman Catholic country, the faithful are called to prayer by Angelus bells on national radio and television.
Every year, tens of thousands of Irish Catholics make pilgrimages to shrines to honor the Virgin Mary, or to live for days on soup and to walk barefoot in penance.
Every Sunday the Catholic churches are full.
With 95 percent of the population of 3.5 million considering themselves Catholics, the Church of Rome may be stronger here than anywhere else in the world.
And as the church in Ireland braces itself for public debates on issues like abortion and divorce, it seems generally to have the support of the majority of Catholics, ready to take on the liberals who want to make Irish law less restrictive and bring it closer to countries like France, Spain and even Italy.


Little Boxes, All Decked Out And Ready to Play
Boxed sets have become an annual holiday ritual for fans and record companies alike.
And if all the gold- and platinum-selling sets are any indication, record companies have figured out how to please both first-time listeners and dedicated collectors.
Here are 26 choices our critics found noteworthy.
Prices are suggested retail. 'The Sun Records Collection'  Rhino; three CDs ($39.99)


In the Battle Of the Big Guys, One's a Turkey
THANKSGIVING'S WORST stomach trouble was experienced by "Junior," Ivan Reitman's comedy about a pregnant Arnold Schwarzenegger.
"Junior" emerged as an instant disappointment, taking in only $13 million over the holiday weekend, with business likely to go downhill from there.
Meanwhile, "The Santa Clause," the other new film about a man with a paunch, drew bigger crowds for its third weekend ($27 million) than it had on its first ($19 million) and emerged as the surprise hit of the season.
When these two comedies went belly to belly, why was the shoo-in overshadowed by the sleeper?
After all, "Junior" started out with a clear advantage, since the Reitman-Schwarzenegger combination ("Twins," "Kindergarten Cop") is a proven commercial winner.
And "Junior" had a cute premise just right for high-concept poster art, which is sometimes half the game.
All "The Santa Clause" had was one more television star (albeit with a hit show) trying to break into movies.
And a Christmasy premise during a season crammed with Christmasy family films.


What Humans Want
Minutes of the November Meeting:
Twenty-five people were in attendance.
Contributions were collected for refreshments and members were asked to please keep up to date on their dues.
Plans were discussed for the December coffee group at Wendy's house.
The topic will be forced mating with aliens, and there will be a presentation by Jonathan on "The Collection of Human Eggs and Sperm: Why No Anesthesia?"


Vietnam Strains to Meet The Demands of Tourism
IT is the first time in 1,000 years of history that the Vietnamese have welcomed foreign invaders.
And they are pouring in, travelers who want to experience Vietnam, one of the last great adventure destinations in Southeast Asia.
The problem for the Vietnamese is that this is also one of the poorest and least-developed nations on earth, and the nation's tourism industry is struggling to keep up with the sudden crush.


Report of Tainted Fresh Cider Angers Makers
Drinking apple cider in New England is as common as drinking water, and when widespread news reports last month suggested consumers should boil their fresh cider before taking a sip, cider producers erupted.
"We're furious," Frank Carlson, president of the Massachusetts Cider Guild, said recently.
"Those reports went all over the country -- especially all over in New England -- and they turned out to be 100 percent false."


In Poultry, Very Fresh Is Popular; Cackle Is Something To Check Before Buying
When Audrey Squire was growing up in Ghana, her family bought live chickens at the market and slaughtered them for dinner.
Now she lives in New York City, where everything seems different.
Except buying chickens.
One day last week, she went to Saroop &amp; Sons Live Poultry Market, a storefront in the Bronx full of squawking birds and men in butcher's smocks, sandwiched between a Great Bear muffler shop and a car radio store.
After she selected four lively brown chickens, a worker took them to a back room, sliced their throats, drained their blood and dressed and wrapped them for the ride to their final resting place in Ms.
Squire's soup kettle.


Now It Can Be Told: All About Squirrels and Nuts
I WATCHED a squirrel bury a chestnut the other day in a little park near my home in Brooklyn.
He was holding the big nut in his long-fingered hands when he saw me out of the corner of his eye.
He froze, as if considering whether or not to abandon his plan -- to bury the nut, I suppose -- or to ignore me and continue.
It was almost insulting how this city squirrel, far tamer than the ones I'd grown up with, apparently decided I was of no consequence and got on with the job (which was nice for me because I'd never seen such a thing before in my life).


WHAT'S NEW YORK THE CAPITAL OF NOW?
Congratulations on your special issue "What's New York the Capital of Now?" (Nov. 20).
Instead of the usual hand-wringing and angst over all of the social ills that plague New York (and they do), it is wonderfully refreshing to have a significant voice like your magazine celebrate the city's strengths and joys.


The Women's Game Just Got a Bit Bigger
Chamique Holdsclaw sat in a deserted hotel restaurant here late Thursday evening, savoring what had been an incredible season debut.
Two hours earlier, Holdsclaw, the 6-foot-2-inch, two-time all-America forward, and her Christ the King teammates had sent a sobering message to Altoona High School in the first game of the Great Chevy Shootout.


Ad Executive Killed by Bomb Mailed to House In New Jersey
A top executive with one of the nation's largest advertising firms was killed yesterday when a letter or parcel mailed to his home in North Caldwell, N.J., exploded as he opened it, law-enforcement officials said.
The executive, Thomas J. Mosser, 50, who had been promoted last Monday to the position of general manager at Young &amp; Rubicam in Manhattan, was in his kitchen when the explosion occurred, said Clifford J. Minor, the Essex County Prosecutor.


Corrections
An article on Nov. 27 about executives who are poets misstated the title and publisher of a 1978 book of poetry by Donald Everett Axinn.
It is "Sliding Down the Wind" (Swallow Press).


AUNT RUTHIE SHOWS THE WAY
The name Ruth is not the only similarity between Patricia Volk's Auth Ruthie and my Auth Ruth.
Volk's beautifully written Hers column ("Aunt Ruthie Shows the Way," Nov. 20) is right on target regarding the lives and expressions of this gracious generation.
My aunt, age 86, is one of my dearest friends and being in her company is always an uplifting experience laced with more than a small share of humor.
Her advice to me over the years, "Always wake up with your shoes pointing to the door," has kept me going on many days.
JUDY DORROS Scarsdale, N.Y.


Claudia A. Posner, David M. Distler
Claudia Alin Posner, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Alan H. Posner of New York, is to be married today to David Murray Distler, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Walter G. Distler of Bedford, N.Y.
Rabbi Joel Goor is to officiate at the Essex House in New York.
The bride, 29, is the director of international sports at the American Horse Shows Association in New York.
She graduated cum laude from Yale University.


Monk Makes Anti-Celebration Rule Superfluous
Art Monk, the Jets' wide receiver, has always been a dignified man who keeps his emotions under tight control.
So today, when he caught three passes against the Detroit Lions and became the National Football League's leader with receptions in 178 consecutive games, there was little indication that anything extraordinary had happened.
Sure, Steve Largent, who had held the record of 177, was there to watch and congratulate.
And teammates patted Monk and said nice things to him.
But even if the Jets had shown a little life on offense instead of playing listlessly and losing, 18-7, Monk would certainly not have been demonstrative.


Pastors and Police at Odds Over Partnership Against Drugs
In April, representatives of 10 Harlem churches handed Police Commissioner William J. Bratton a list of 160 suspected drug-dealing locations and secured a promise from him to try to shut them down.
The list, the police say, has helped them make 536 drug arrests and execute 34 search warrants.
It would seem to be a model instance of law-enforcement agencies and communities working together.


The Giants' Quiet Man Plays a Loud H-Back
For someone who is 6 feet 5 inches and 250 pounds, Aaron Pierce sure is hard to find in the Giants' locker room.
Well, not exactly hard to find, just hard to notice.
He is quiet.
Extremely quiet.
Other players in the locker room may play practical jokes, play cards or talk about the Republican resurgence in Congress.
Pierce will mostly keep to himself.
That is not to say he is a loner.
Pierce is friendly, just quiet.
He will do interviews.
But his voice is at the level of a whisper, and it's sometimes hard to hear him.
He is athletic, of course, and handsome, too, and almost has the look of a GQ model.
You could easily picture Aaron Pierce changing professions and doing one of those soda commercials, wearing a hard hat at a construction site as women interrupt their lunch to look at him from their offices seven stories up.


DEC. 4-10: Hubbell Pleads Guilty; Whitewater Casualty and, Maybe, Prosecution Witness
A big shoe finally dropped in the expanding Whitewater investigation last week when Webster L. Hubbell, the man President Clinton had described as his closest friend, pleaded guilty to two felony counts and confessed that he had stolen at least $394,000 from his law partners and clients.
When he was governor of Arkansas, Mr.
Clinton had appointed Mr.
Hubbell to be Chief Justice of the Arkansas Supreme Court briefly in the 1980's and, when he became President, to be Associate Attorney General at the Justice Department.
He also helped Mr.
Clinton draft an Arkansas ethics law.


Giving The Gift Of Time
The holidays are a time of giving.
And the gift of time can be very precious.
The following is a list of some organizations around the five boroughs that can use help this holiday season and beyond.
THE MAYOR'S VOLUNTARY ACTION CENTER 61 Chambers Street, Manhattan.
The center is a volunteer clearinghouse, which uses a database that lists more than 2,000 volunteer jobs in the five boroughs to match people with agencies that could most use their help.
Call Monday through Friday, 9 A.M. to 5 P.M., for an appointment. (212) 788-7550.


It's Only a Movie: Looking Around Brooklyn, and Seeing Saigon
A walk through Brooklyn Heights conjures many times and places -- colonial America, gothic Europe, the antebellum South -- but perhaps only Roger French has looked at the neighborhood through the lens of a camera and seen Saigon.
Mr.
French, who is 31 years old, is shooting his first feature film, "Soul Vietnam," the story of a family of Amerasian children who come to live with their father in Brooklyn.
While most of the story takes place in modern-day East Flatbush, where he will begin shooting the first of the year, he chose Brooklyn Heights for his opening montage of postwar Vietnam.


Big Apple Greeter Denies Competing With Guides
To the Editor:
As a volunteer with Big Apple Greeter, I must disagree with the letter from Eileen Aubi, a licensed tour guide ("Volunteers Are Just Fine, But Not if They Take Jobs," Dec. 4).
I believe that she is mistaken in her perception of what the greeters do.
We do not pretend to have the knowledge and training of a professional guide, nor do we compete with them.
Rather, we share with the visitors some of our favorite places, as we would if we were showing our own friends around the city.


Informal American Classics Prepared by a Pedigreed Crew
PARK PLACE in Lynbrook looks familiar, with its Tiffany lamps, paneling, booths and television set in the dining room.
It could be a chain operation.
In fact, Bob's Big Boy previously occupied the building along franchise alley, at 900 Sunrise Highway (599-0701).
The menu too is a bit of fast-food deja vu, with its brick-oven pizza, hamburgers, pasta, chicken, seafood and steak.
But all thoughts of fast-food franchises disappear as soon as dinner arrives.


Little Boxes, All Decked Out And Ready to Play
Boxed sets have become an annual holiday ritual for fans and record companies alike.
And if all the gold- and platinum-selling sets are any indication, record companies have figured out how to please both first-time listeners and dedicated collectors.
Here are 26 choices our critics found noteworthy.
Prices are suggested retail.
Bud Powell: 'The Complete Bud Powell on Verve' and 'The Complete Blue Note and Roost Recordings'  Verve; five CDs ($70) and Blue Note; four CDs ($55.99)


The Greatest Gift of All
FOR ME, CHRISTMAS isn't complete until I've visited the tree at Rockefeller Center and followed it up with a new holiday tradition.
First, I go home and reread O. Henry's wonderful bit of fiction from 1905, "The Gift of the Magi." Then, misty eyed, I sit back and fondly remember a more recent New York story, one that I think of as "The Theft of the Magi."
O.
Henry's Christmas story, you may remember, is about an impoverished young wife who sells her beautiful knee-length hair to buy a platinum chain for her husband's cherished watch, only to discover that he has sold the watch to buy what she craved in a Broadway shop window -- a set of jeweled combs to wear in her hair.
"The Theft of the Magi" may not immediately seem as touching, but it, too, is about a treasured possession -- and it happens to be true.


Accessible Broadway: The Cheap Seats
Tickets to Broadway shows may cost more than $65 apiece these days, but reduced-price tickets for many shows are available at the two TKTS booths -- the main one in Duffy Square at 47th Street and Broadway, and the satellite booth at 2 World Trade Center.
Tickets for selected shows are sold, beginning at 3 P.M. on the day of performance for evening shows and at 10 A.M. for Wednesday and Saturday matinees, noon for matinees on Sunday.
Tickets cost either 50 percent or 75 percent of box-office prices, determined by the producers, plus a $2.50 service charge per ticket.
Only cash and traveler's checks are accepted.
Information: (212) 768-1818.


'Hansel and Gretel' In Varied Versions
THE pre-Christmas concert rush is on as groups all over the county squeeze in their final programs of the year.
Today at 11:15 A.M. the Philharmonia Virtuosi offers Humperdinck's "Hansel and Gretel" at the first of two Cushion Concerts at the Hoff-Barthelson School in Scarsdale.
The second concert takes place at 1 P.M. today.
The abridged version of the opera -- with costumes, scenery and piano accompaniment -- will be presented again next Sunday at 11:15 A.M. and 1 P.M. in the County Center.
For more details, call 693-5595.


CURRENCY
Last
Prior
Year
Week
Week
Ago
Japanese Yen
100.10
100.64
109.20
per Dollar
German Mark
1.5757
1.5798
1.6973
per Dollar
Canadian Dollar
1.3839
1.3706
1.3293
per U.S. Dollar
British Pound
1.5600
1.5610
1.4945
U.S. Dollar per British Pound
Gold
$377.40
$376.50
$383.00
Republic National Bank
Currency: Friday NY Close


Susan Saltzstein, Steve Fallek
Susan Leslie Saltzstein, an associate at the New York law firm of Skadden, Arps, Slate, Meagher &amp; Flom, is to be married this evening to Dr.
Steve Robert Fallek, a surgical resident at the University of Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey in Newark.
Rabbi Norman Kahan is to officiate at the Shelter Rock Jewish Center in Roslyn, L.I.
The bride, 29, graduated magna cum laude from the University of Pennsylvania and received her law degree from Columbia University.
She is the daughter of Robert M. and Judith M. Saltzstein of East Rockaway, L.I.
Her father is a partner in Payne, Wood &amp; LittleJohn, a law firm in Melville, L.I.
Her mother is a travel agent with Yellowbird Travel in East Meadow, L.I.


Death Penalty Can't Affirm the Value of Life
To the Editor:
"The Rage to Kill Those Who Kill" (The Week in Review, Dec. 4) suggests that retribution, and not deterrence, is the real reason society is so enamored of the death penalty.
The implication of your article, and of most discussion of this issue, is that deterrence is the only reasonable justification for the death penalty.


Willann Stone And David Fel
Willann Stone, a daughter of Dr.
Cynthia S. Klinman and Dr.
Jerome J. Klinman of New York, is to be married today to David Fel, the son of Dr.
Leah Tsofef of Jerusalem and the late Tsadek Fel.
Rabbi Joel Kenny is to perform the ceremony at the St.
Regis in New York.
The bride, 24, was named for her maternal grandfather, William Stone.
She and the bridegroom, 36, are candidates for Ph.D. degrees in clinical psychology at the New School for Social Research.
The bride graduated from Swarthmore College, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa.
She is a psychology intern at the New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center in White Plains.
Her father is a psychiatrist and her mother is a psychoanalyst, both in New York.


Q and A
Europe by Train and Bike Q.  I am a college student planning to travel in Western Europe in the spring for about two months, primarily by train.
Does it provide for people who have a bicycle? -- Sean Stamper, Sag Harbor L.I.


Fifth Ave. Regains Luster, and Even the Ginza Blinks
For decades, Fifth Avenue from 49th to 57th Streets ranked as the premiere shopping venue in the world -- until the last five years, when recession pushed it into a slump.
As Fifth languished, its rental prices were surpassed by those in Tokyo's Ginza, Hong Kong's Nathan Road and even an intersecting neighbor, East 57th Street.
But now Fifth is back on top again, says the Hirschfeld Group, a Manhattan-based national consulting firm specializing in retail space.
Its annual survey shows that the avenue is commanding an average of $375 a square foot in annual rent in 1994, edging the Ginza and 57th Street.
Just last year, Fifth Avenue lagged $95 behind the Ginza.


Letters
To the Editor:
What is a bit unusual about John Nash's experience was the level and quality of social support he received over the first 20 years of his schizophrenia.
His family in Roanoke, Va., provided Mr.
Nash with protection, privacy and refuge when he wanted it.
More extraordinary was the devotion of his wife, Alicia, who, despite the break-up of the marriage, permitted Mr.
Nash to live in her house in Princeton, N.J., while she supported their son and her ex-husband with some financial help from family, friends and colleagues.


For Holiday Crowds, Buffet Can Be Ideal
As the calendar runs down, thoughts inevitably turn to holiday parties.
The buffet supper is not only one of the easiets ways to entertain a crowd, it can be one of the most enjoyably relaxed for both guests and hosts.
But a buffet table calls for some pragmatic planning.
The array of food should look bountiful and inviting.
It must involve dishes that can be prepared in advance and will not be damaged by sitting out for an hour or so.


Victory Stamp Returned to Sender
It may be true that the winners get to write the history, but these days they don't always get to print the stamps -- at least not when the subject is as sensitive as the atomic bomb and World War II.
Last week, at the request of the White House, the Postal Service abandoned its plan for a commemorative picturing a mushroom cloud to mark the 50th anniversary of the war's end next year.
The design had greatly offended Japanese sensibilities, and even some American veterans, and its terse, newsreel caption "Atomic bombs hasten war's end," reopened old arguments (among other stamps in the series: the flag-raising on Iwo Jima).


In Greenwich, a Changing of the Guard
RECENT experiences at Bella Luna in Greenwich brought to mind a phrase from an old song: "the thrill is gone." In the case of this once exciting Italian restaurant, it's a lot more than the thrill that has departed; the original chef has left to open his own restaurant, Kathleen's in Stamford.
When Bella Luna opened in 1991, we found it Excellent, with so many innovative touches it was a joy to visit and to write about.
Many dishes really sparkled, and there were many welcoming touches such as a large bottle of San Pellegrino water on each table, along with a cruet of Tuscan extra-virgin olive oil with a rosemary sprig.
Service was as efficient as the kitchen.


STEVE GUNDERSON
As a proud left-hander, I was offended by your letter writer's referring to left-handedness as "an awkward physical characteristic." I refer him to Leonardo da Vinci as an example of a typical left-hander.
We tend to be creative and do quite well with our other hand.
PAMELA MALONE Leonia, N.J.


IT'S NOT THE ONLY ALIEN INVADER
Hawaii is, indeed, the capital of ecosystem destruction caused by invasive alien species ("It's Not the Only Alien Invader," by Alan Burdick, Nov. 13).
But New Yorkers do not have to travel to distant locales to witness the effects of some introduced species.
All across the state, from Long Island to Lake Erie, purple loosestrife has replaced native cattails and other species valuable to wildlife in wetlands and along streams.
The American elm is nearly gone, felled by the introduced Dutch elm blight (which actually originated in Asia).
The American chestnut has been similarly eradicated by chestnut blight -- first discovered infecting trees in the Bronx Zoo.
The Canadian hemlock is dying, under the attack of the hemlock woolly adelgid, an introduced aphid.


U.S. and 33 Hemisphere Nations Agree to Create Free-Trade Zone
Determined to sweep aside trade barriers from Alaska to Argentina, President Clinton and 33 other leaders of Western Hemisphere countries agreed today to create a free-trade zone in the Americas.
Talks are to start next month, and the leaders agreed to have a treaty in place and start carrying it out by 2005.
"There will be real progress by the end of the century," vowed Mr.
Clinton, the host for the first regional summit meeting in 27 years.


Song, Dance And Words Of Thanks
Parties honoring individuals and promoting culture and the arts, and a concert aiding the Fresh Air Fund.


RESULTS PLUS
WOMEN'S BASKETBALL Lobo Leads UConn  Rebecca Lobo scored 24 points as No. 2 Connecticut defeated North Carolina State, 98-75, yesterday, in Raleigh, N.C.
Lobo hit 8 of 11 shots, grabbed 7 rebounds and had a team-high 6 assists.
UConn (5-0) hit 19 of its 26 shots, included 7 for 9 effort from 3-point range, in the second half against North Carolina State (3-2). (AP) TENNIS Sampras Gains Final Pete Sampras needed almost three and a half hours to defeat Goran Ivanisevic, 5-7, 6-3, 6-4, 6-7 (5-7), 10-8, yesterday in the semifinals of the Compaq Grand Slam Cup in Munich, Germany.
Sampras survived 41 aces by Ivanisevic.
Today, he will face Magnus Larsson, who defeated Todd Martin, 6-4, 6-1, 6-1, to earn a shot at the winner's prize of $1.5 million.
Sampras wasted two set points before allowing Ivanisevic to rally in the first set, and he wasted 4 match points before Ivanisevic hit a volley long to end the match.
Sampras's coach, Tim Gullikson, is in a Munich hospital, where it was discovered that he had a blood clot on his brain.
He was expected to be discharged soon. (AP) CROSS-COUNTRY Stamps, Downin Win Julia Stamps of Santa Rosa, Calif., ran by herself, while Matt Downin of Hampstead, N.H., ran with his best friend to win national titles yesterday in the Food Locker High School Cross-Country Championships in San Diego.
Stamps, an undefeated 16-year-old sophomore at Santa Rosa High School, raced to the front, steadily pulled away from the 31 other runners and went on to triumph by 150 yards in 16 minutes 42 seconds for the 5,000-meter event.
Sally Glynn of Rockville, Md., rallied in the homestretch to place second in 17:13.
Mary Cobb of Pittsfield, Mass., the Northeast regional winner two weeks ago, was third in 17:17.
The defending national champion, Erin Davis, a sophomore at Saratoga Springs (N.Y.) High School was fourth in 17:19.
Downin, a senior at Pinkerton Academy, and with John Mortimer, a senior at Londonderry High in New Hampshire, broke away from a bunched field at 2 1/2 miles.
They ran shoulder to shoulder until the final 150 meters, where Downin sprinted ahead to win by 30 meters in 14:59.
Mortimer took second in 15:04.
This was their sixth race against one another this season, and Downin evened the score at 3-3.
ALPINE SKIING Lindh Wins Downhill  Hilary Lindh won her second World Cup downhill of the season yesterday in Lake Louise, Alberta.
Lindh, a 25-year-old from Juneau, Alaska, covered the 2,639-meter (2,886-yard) course in 1 minute 39.90 seconds.
Florence Masnada of France was second in 1:40.08, and Heidi Zeller-Baehler of Switzerland finished third in 1:40.40.
In addition to her second World Cup victory in eight days, Lindh placed second in the downhill won by teammate Picabo Street on Friday. (AP) GOLF Nicklaus-Palmer Gain The team of Jack Nicklaus and Arnold Palmer defeated Chi Chi Rodriguez and Jim Dent, 4 and 3, yesterday to move into the finals of the Diners Cup Matches in La Quinta, Calif.
Paired for the first time since they were beaten in a Ryder Cup match in 1973, Nicklaus and Palmer will face Raymond Floyd and Dave Eichelberger for the Senior team title.
Nicklaus made three birdies to win holes, and Palmer won two holes with birdies and another with a par.
Floyd and Eichelberger defeated Gibby Gilbert and Larry Gilbert, 3 and 2, in the other Seniors semifinal.
In the PGA final, Rocco Mediate and Lee Janzen will face Jim McGovern and Jeff Maggert.
In the L.P.G.A. showdown, Juli Inkster and Dottie Mochrie will go against Tammie Green and Kelly Robbins. (AP) BOXING De La Hoya Wins Oscar De La Hoya defended his World Boxing Organization lightweight title yesterday by stopping challenger Johnny Avila in the ninth round in Los Angeles.
De La Hoya (16-0, 15 knockouts) forced Avila to back off with several jabs and combinations. (AP) Randall Stops Moore: Frankie Randall stayed on course for a third and rubber showdown against Julio Cesar Chavez by stopping Rodney Moore in the seventh round to retain his World Boxing Association junior welterweight title last night in Monterrey, Mexico.
In another title fight, a battered World Boxing Association middleweight champion, Jorge Castro, surprised John David Jackson with a left hook that floored the challenger in the ninth round and went on to knock him down two more times in the round before the fight was stopped.
FIGURE SKATING Yamaguchi Prevails In a rematch of 1992 Olympians, Kristi Yamaguchi beat back the challenge of Midori Ito, Katarina Witt, and Yuka Sato to win the Complete World Professional Figure Skating Championships in Landover, Md., last night.
Brian Boitano received perfect scores to dominate the men's field, which included Paul Wylie, Scott Hamilton, and Kurt Browning.


BENEFITS
Musica Sacra Chorus  WEDNESDAY -- Richard Westenburg will conduct the Musica Sacra choral group in a performance of Handel's "Messiah," at 8 P.M. at the Madison Avenue Presbyterian Church, 921 Madison Avenue, at 73d Street.
Tickets, $25, from (212) 874-3104.
Caroling and Such  THURSDAY -- A party at the Algonquin Hotel, 59 West 44th Street, will benefit the lecture series of the Young Adult Ministry of St.
Patrick's Cathedral.
The event, which will begin at 8 P.M., will include caroling, dinner and dancing.
Tickets, $65, from (212) 753-2261, extension 249.
For Future Dancers  FRIDAY -- Billy Taylor, the jazz pianist, will be the host of a benefit for the Bearden Dance School, which offers classes and scholarships to young people.
The event will begin with cocktails at 6 P.M. at the John Jay Theater, 899 10th Avenue between 58th and 59th streets, and will be followed at 7:30 by a dance performance by the Nanette Bearden Contemporary Dance Theater; a new jazz piano composition performed by its creator, Don Militello, and a display of paintings by Felice Batisi.
The evening will end with a reception after the performances.
Tickets, $30, from (212) 925-5375.
Festivities on Ice  SATURDAY -- Alyn Hospital in Jerusalem, an orthopedic hospital and rehabilitation center, will benefit from an ice skating party at Rockefeller Center.
The event will include an open bar, dinner, dancing, rink admission, skate rentals and a live auction for items like theater tickets, dinners and a BMW motorcycle.
Tickets, $75, from (212) 869-8085.
Three Singers Singing  NEXT SUNDAY -- Marilyn Horne, Carolyn James and Bryn Terfel of the Metropolitan Opera will perform at the Colonial Dames of America, 417 East 61st Street.
The concert will benefit Horizon Concerts, a group that sponsors free classical concerts in institutions like homeless shelters, AIDS hospices and Alzheimer's clinics.
The event will begin with a reception at 5 P.M., followed by the concert at 6 and a buffet dinner.
Tickets, $150, from (212) 297-6195.
For St.
Peter's Church  NEXT SUNDAY -- An afternoon party of seasonal readings and carols will benefit the repair and restoration of St.
Peter's Episcopal Church, 346 West 20th Street, beginning at 3.
The event will include a reading by Tony Randall from "A Christmas Carol," a short performance by the Mozart Quartet, caroling and refreshments.
Tickets, $25 for adults, free for children 12 and under, from (212) 929-2390.
Positive Thinking Plus  DEC. 19 -- The 8 P.M. performance of the Christmas Spectacular at Radio City Music Hall will raise funds for the Blanton-Peale Institute of Religion and Health, an interfaith and nonsectarian organization that provides counseling and trains counselors.
The performance will be preceded by a buffet reception at 6 on the 50th floor of the McGraw Hill Building, 1221 Avenue of the Americas, at 49th Street.
Tickets, $150 for adults and $100 for children, from (212) 725-7850.
To Help a School  DEC. 19 -- The Cornerstone School in Jersey City will benefit from a holiday party at Maxwell's, 1039 Washington Street, Hoboken, N.J.
The event will begin at 6:30 P.M. and will include a cash bar, buffet dinner, music and valet parking.
Tickets $25, from (201) 435-2786.


Where the Humble Coach Is Royalty
WATCHING London's bus drivers torpedo their red double-deckers along the Marylebone Road, snake through Oxford Street shoppers or career around the Marble Arch, I often wondered what it would be like to sit in the driver's seat.
In the recently refurbished London Transport Museum, reopened at the end of 1993 after a $6 million renovation, I found out.
The museum occupies the former Central Flower Market in Covent Garden, a great cast-iron-framed hall with a glass roof built in 1870.
This huge enclosed space, with light filtering through the roof in greenish tones, shelters an amazing array of historic transport -- trams, trolleys, buses, underground trains and more.
Cleaned and polished, they are parked in groups, showing the progress and increasing complexity of London public transportation.


SUNDAY, December 11, 1994; Refining the Camera's Eye
Since the last century, scientists and photographers have been trying unsuccessfully to make a photo of a solar eclipse that captures what the human eye sees during the few moments when the moon completely covers the sun.
At those few moments only, it is safe to look directly at the eclipse, and viewers are invariably amazed.
The photographic problem is that totality produces an image varying from brilliant red inner prominences to faint outer wisps of white corona.
No film can record these extremes of contrast in a single exposure.


Sheryl Elkowitz, Mark H. Siegel
Dr.
Sheryl Sue Elkowitz, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Lloyd Elkowitz of Great Neck, L.I., is to be married there today to Mark H. Siegel, a son of Nora Siegel of Manhasset Hills, L.I., and the late Stanley Siegel.
Rabbi Robert Widom is to officiate at Temple Emanuel.
The bride is a radiologist at Long Island Jewish Hospital in New Hyde Park, L.I.
She graduated from Adelphi University and received her medical degree from Wayne State University.


Seeking the Roots of a Celebrity Society
ANDY WARHOL was wrong," Neal Gabler said. "He was right when he said everyone will be famous, but wrong about the 15 minutes.
What we are going to see are more and more people getting famous for shorter and shorter amounts of time."
As more people compete for fame and are anointed by the news media, the time will be more like one minute, he said, adding that today's society is a "celebrity society," in which gossip and fame equal power.
"If people can't be famous, they want to read about it, watch it, listen to it, entrench their lives in it," he said.
"It's a society obsessed and preoccupied with the O. J. Simpsons, the Woody Allens and the Mia Farrows."


Window Dressing
Until recently I lived with bare windows because I was unable to reproduce in my apartment the curtains that in a life spent gazing out windows had made the greatest impression on me.
The first two sets had hung, respectively and almost identically, in the music room of my glamorous piano teacher on Long Island and in the Elysian apartment of my great-aunt on East 88th Street.
These curtains were pale green Scalamandre silk, with tiebacks.
They were cool, remote, elegant, while I was heated, untidy, adolescent.
The third set I had seen in a photograph.
The window, tall and narrow, looked out on a birch forest, and the lace curtains that bracketed the view were so long, they pooled on the floor.
These belonged to Isak Dinesen, the Baroness Blixen.
Green is seldom allowed in my household, and in New York, lace underfoot would turn to rags of soot within days.
Nevertheless, I now live in an apartment with 11 windows, and, as if in a dream, curtains -- neither silk nor lace -- have appeared on almost all of them.
They came in pairs, like couples arriving for a dinner party for which I can't recall issuing invitations.


It's Fifth Avenue by a Nose Over Ginza


Small Propeller Planes Less Safe, Studies Say
Two recent studies on small propeller-driven aircraft offer new evidence that they are less safe than large propeller planes and jets.
The International Airline Passengers Association said last month that travelers should avoid flying on commuter airplanes with fewer than 31 seats because they have a higher accident record than larger propeller planes.


Nordson Corp.(NDSN,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 30


Republicans Get a Pep Talk From Rush Limbaugh
To all the advice for the new Republicans coming to Congress, add this from Rush Limbaugh: A hostile press corps lurks inside the Beltway.
"You will never ever be their friends," the talk-show host warned most of the 73 Republican freshmen at a dinner here tonight.
"They don't want to be your friends. Some female reporter will come up to one of you and start batting her eyes and ask you to go to lunch. And you'll think, 'Wow! I'm only a freshman. Cokie Roberts wants to take me to lunch. I've really made it!' " The audience laughed.


People
*
Mike Lyons was named chairman and chief executive at Lyons/Lavey/ Nickel/Swift Inc., New York, the health care agency formed last week by the merger of Dorritie Lyons &amp; Nickel and Lavey/Wolff/Swift.
He was previously chairman and chief executive at Dorritie Lyons.
Also, Al Nickel, president and chief operating officer at Dorritie Lyons, was named to those positions at Lyons/Lavey/ Nickel/Swift. *
James (Ron) Wilson, executive vice president and chief operating officer at Harrison, Star, Wiener &amp; Beitler-NJ, Parsippany, N.J., was promoted to the new position of president.


Spartech Corp.(SEH,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 29


Clinton Says Ouster Was Not for Politics
President Clinton denied today that he had forced Surgeon General Joycelyn Elders to resign in response to pressure from Republicans, saying, "If I wanted to do it for political reasons, it would have been done before the election, not afterward."
Speaking to reporters at the Summit of the Americas in Miami, Mr.
Clinton said he had demanded Dr.
Elders's resignation on Friday because "at some point, the President is entitled to have people in certain positions who agree with him, and who don't depart from the policy positions and personal convictions that a President has."


Trade Pact Forces Social Issues to Sidelines; Vengeful Downsizing
To the Editor:
I write in reference to your front-page article on Speaker-designate Newt Gingrich's setting his Congressional agenda (Dec. 6).


New York Gets Second Chance With New Pennsylvania Station
To the Editor:
Thomas Backen (letter, Dec. 6) asks, why ought we re-create the old Pennsylvania Station?
The short answer is that we need the capacity.


DiNardo Moves From Vanderbilt to L.S.U.
GERRY DiNARDO, Vanderbilt's coach the past four seasons, is Louisiana State University's new football coach.
DiNardo and the L.S.U. athletic director, JOE DEAN, were still completing details of the agreement yesterday, and the school has scheduled a news conference for today.
DiNardo, 42, guided Vanderbilt to a 5-6 record in 1991 and then consecutive 4-7 seasons.
But Vanderbilt was optimistic over a 5-6 mark this season that included close losses to national powers Alabama and Florida and an upset of Georgia. (AP)


A Life on the Set, And That Says It All
Jodie Foster's office on Sunset Boulevard is crammed with budding flowers, gifts from friends and colleagues for her birthday.
She just turned 32.
"I can't say, 'Where did all those years go?' because I know exactly where they went," she said with a laugh.
"Making movies. That's what I've done my entire life."


Breaking the Mideast Cycle of Kill and Be Killed
BEYOND THE PROMISED LAND Jews and Arabs on the Hard Road to a New Israel  By Glenn Frankel  416 pages.
Simon &amp; Schuster. $24.


Black Images Stir Up Strong Emotions
Appraising the exhibition at the Whitney Museum of American Art, the students from Walt Whitman Junior High School in Brooklyn tried to extract lessons from gold sneakers in a police lineup, a 9-millimeter handgun, photographs of homeless men and other art on view in "Black Male: Representations of Masculinity in Contemporary American Art."
The students gazed at the black man in a blond wig and tutu in Lyle Ashton Harris's photographs and filed past the phallic images represented by Robert Mapplethorpe.
Their teachers encouraged them to think of Roman marble sculptures or even Adam and Eve, just in a different color.
Some students giggled, while others squirmed and looked away.


Stocks Lower in Japan
Stocks were lower here today.
The Nikkei index of 225 issues was down 3.20 points, or 0.02 percent, at 18,975.10.
On Friday, the Nikkei fell 201.74 points, or 1.05 percent.


ResultsPlus
PRO BASKETBALL Strickland Leads Blazers Over Kings  Rod Strickland scored 23 points and made two key baskets down the stretch as the Portland Trail Blazers defeated Sacramento, 93-88, last night to snap the Kings' four-game winning streak.
Buck Williams, the former Net, needed 1 point to reach the 15,000-point career plateau.
He got it quickly, scoring the opening basket for the Blazers to become the 10th player in N.B.A. history to accumulate more than 15,000 points and 11,000 rebounds.
Sacramento has lost 22 consecutive games at Portland. (AP) SOCCER  Late Goal Helps U.S.
Tie Honduras, 1-1  Jovan Kirovski scored in the final minute yesterday, lifting the United States national soccer team to a 1-1 tie with Honduras at Fullerton, Calif.
Kirovski's goal was set up when defender Marcelo Balboa passed to Mike Sorber in the left side of the penalty box.
Sorber redirected the ball to Kirovski, who kicked the ball into the upper left corner of the net.
Honduras took a 1-0 lead in the 68th minute on a goal by Wilmer Velasquez. (AP) GOLF  Eichelberger-Floyd Beat Nicklaus-Palmer  Dave Eichelberger rolled in a pair of pressure birdie putts on the 18th and 19th holes of play yesterday as he and his partner, Raymond Floyd, beat Arnold Palmer and Jack Nicklaus, 1 up, in the Seniors competition of the Diners Club Matches in La Quinta, Calif.
Nicklaus and Palmer came from four holes down with seven to go to take a one-hole lead into No. 18.
Eichelberger, however, then came up with a charge of his own.
In the PGA final, Jim McGovern and Jeff Maggert edged Rocco Mediate and Lee Janzen in a one-hole playoff.
Kelly Robbins and Tammie Green were the L.P.G.A. champions in the event. (AP) SKIING  Moe Picks Up Second Place in Super-G  Skiing as if his memorable Olympic season had never come to an end, Tommy Moe of the United States finished his first race of the 1994-95 World Cup campaign on now-familiar territory: on the podium.
Moe placed second yesterday in the season's opening Super-G with a time of 1 minute 22.58 seconds in Tignes, France.
Only a superb run from Austrian Patrick Ortlieb, who started six places later in 18th position, kept Moe, from winning.
Ortlieb finished in 1:22.25; Luc Alphand of France was third in 1:22.65.
"This is the way I wanted it," said Moe, who took gold a medal in the downhill and silver medal in the Super-G at the 1994 Winter Olympics in Lillehammer, Norway.
His 50-foot sailboat, True Blue, moved into second place in the fleet yesterday, passing Steve Pettengill, whose 60-foot yacht, Hunter's Child, had been second.
Still in the lead was Christophe Auguin aboard the 60-foot boat, Sceta Calberson.
BOXING  Chavez Keeps Superlightweight Title  Starting the final phase of his illustrious career, Julio Cesar Chavez easily stopped Tony Lopez in the 10th round Saturday night in Monterrey, Mexico.
At 1:41 of the round, the ringside doctor prevented the return of a bloodied and battered Lopez.
Chavez, 32, was comfortably ahead on all three judges' scorecards as he won for the 93d time in 95 pro starts to keep his World Boxing Council superlightweight title.


Getty Petroleum (GTY,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Montefiore Patient Stabs 2 Employees
A 66-year-old patient at Montefiore Medical Center in the Bronx stabbed two hospital employees yesterday after he and a nursing attendant got into a shouting match, hospital officials said.
The patient, Hopeton King, 66, of the Bronx, who had been transferred to Montefiore from a nursing home in November after experiencing seizures, stabbed the attendant in the neck and then ran from his room and stabbed a dietitian in the left breast and arm as she tried to subdue him, the police said.


Delay Seen In Fed's Rate Move
While the Federal Reserve is clearly determined to raise short-term interest rates further, comments by the central bank's top two officials suggest that it may not act at the next meeting of its policy-making committee on Dec. 20, preferring to wait until January or early February.
The delay seems likely because top Fed officials made clear last week that they wanted to weigh information on the economy's health that would not be available until January.
Fed officials also expressed little concern that any tax cuts would widen the budget deficit and feed inflation next year.


Journey's End Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


AutoZone Inc.(AZO,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 19


Storm Warning?
Russia's armed invasion of Chechnya, the small, fierce Caucasian state that declared independence three years ago, will make this week's visits to Moscow of Vice President Al Gore and Defense Secretary William Perry that much more difficult and delicate.
Mr.
Gore and Mr.
Perry will inevitably try to restore a sense of comity and momentum to a Russian-American relationship that to Washington, at least, suddenly seems to have lost its spark.
Similarly, Secretary of State Warren Christopher plans a separate meeting with Foreign Minister Andrei V. Kozyrev to "clear the air" after sharp Russian opposition last week to American policy on issues like NATO enlargement, Bosnia and Iraq.


Free State Audit Doesn't Add Up For a Shore City
This neighbor of Atlantic City is a well-run place, but it could still cut its budget, just as Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman is cutting hers, according to state auditors.
All it has to do is raise beach fees, lay off some firefighters and make a few other changes.
Thanks for the compliment, but not necessarily for the advice, city leaders say.
Recommendations for tax savings may add up in dollars and cents, but not practically, and not politically, in the view of Ventnor officials who requested a state audit after the Governor challenged New Jersey's localities to reduce their spending just as she was cutting the state's.


Amcast Industrial Corp.(AIZ,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 27


California Assessing Orange County Losses
California officials moved on two fronts today to assess the damage caused by Orange County's declaration of bankruptcy last week.
A county supervisor said the investment loss might have reached $2 billion, a third more than previously thought.
Gov.
Pete Wilson dispatched a team of state auditors to review the county's books, although he has said that the state can play only a "very limited role" in the county's recovery attempts.


Issue for Jury: Did Principal Punish Hard Or Endanger?
The 13-year-old boy was hardly visible -- only his head showed over the top of the witness stand -- as he testified in the Brooklyn courtroom.
But his voice was loud and clear as he gave his version of what the man at the defense table had done to him.
"He pulled me up by the collar and neck and he slammed me against the closet," the boy said last week.
"I felt pain in my neck and my back. I was crying because I was scared."


CLASSICAL MUSIC
Analytic Clarity Contrasts With the Magic of a Blend  Tallis Scholars Alice Tully Hall


For Denver, 'The Longest Yard' Is No Film
Their best passer wore a windbreaker, their best runner wore a neck brace and their best hope for a playoff spot lays wasted now in a clump of dirt on the 1-yard line.
The Denver Broncos, without John Elway and Leonard Russell, were at the foot of the Los Angeles Raider goal line for what seemed to be hours today, but they kept doing their best imitation of a stationary bicycle.
Denver had five snaps from the Raider 1-yard line this afternoon -- and eight snaps from inside the 6 -- but twice settled for field goals when life demanded touchdowns.
By game's end, it was too much of a handicap, and the Raiders (8-6) are the ones about to qualify for football in January, following a 23-13 victory.


Herbert S. Zim Is Dead at 85; Wrote Children's Science Books
Herbert S. Zim, a prolific writer of children's science books who was best known for the Golden Nature Guides, died on Dec. 5 in Plantation Key, Fla., where he had lived for many years.
He was 85 and suffered from Alzheimer's disease, family members said.
Mr.
Zim, the author or co-author of more than 100 books and countless articles, was known to generations of children as the man who explained everything from the workings of parachutes to which birds could be found in Central Park in the fall.


Another Dropout In Sony Competition
Ogilvy &amp; Mather New York has withdrawn from the review of the Sony Electronics account, with billings estimated at $50 million, citing a conflict with another client, Eastman Kodak.
The withdrawal last week, which came after the previously announced withdrawals of DDB Needham New York and Berlin Cameron Doyle, leaves four participants: Chiat/Day in New York; Foote, Cone &amp; Belding in San Francisco; Lowe &amp; Partners/SMS in New York, and Messner Vetere Berger McNamee Schmetterer Euro RSCG in New York.


Bengals And Shula Don't Like The Calls
All during this pro football season, coaches, players and spectators have been baffled and angered more than ever by game officials' calls or noncalls.
No game may have aroused more ire than the Giants' 27-20 victory today over the Cincinnati Bengals.
In his post-game news conference, Coach David Shula of the Bengals did not choose his words carefully or discreetly, even though the National Football League routinely fines coaches for publicly criticizing officials.


Mr. Pataki: Save the Watershed
Despite their differences, there is one huge task that Mayor Rudolph Giuliani and Governor-elect George Pataki must face together: stopping pollution in the 2,000-square-mile watershed northwest of New York City.
The watershed supplies eight million city dwellers and one million upstaters -- half the state's population -- with cheap, high-quality drinking water.
Failure to protect it will require billions in filtration costs.
That is a financial punch neither official can happily absorb.
They have only two years to duck it.
Last December, the Federal Environmental Protection Agency told the city to clean up the water supply.
If there is no real progress by December 1996 the E.P.A. will order filtration.
City Comptroller Alan Hevesi says a filtration plant will cost $4.5 billion, plus annual debt service of $365 million and operating expenses of $145 million.
Water and sewer rates could easily double -- a ridiculous price to pay for something New Yorkers now get cheaper than most Americans.


All in the Eye of the Official
Two pass-interference calls in the fourth quarter underlined the subjective nature of the penalty and the large role it can play.
With the Giants leading, 20-10, the Giants' Phillippi Sparks grabbed the left arm of the Bengals' Darnay Scott as they were going for a 50-yard pass into the end zone (left).
The pass was incomplete and interference was called against the Giants.
However, the call was overruled in the Giants' favor. (With the help of a subsquent 14-yard pass-interference call, the Bengals scored a touchdown several plays later.) Then, in the last minute of the fourth quarter, with the score tied at 20-20, the Bengals' Corey Sawyer was called for interference against Mike Sherrard on the Cincinnati 3-yard line (below).
The infraction did not appear clear-cut, but unlike the call against Sparks, this one was not overturned.
One play later, Rodney Hampton scored the game-winning touchdown.


U.S. Plans to Curb Fires by Allowing Increased Logging
In an attempt to prevent wildfires like those that charred millions of acres of forests last summer, the United States Forest Service has proposed changing how it manages forest land in the West.
The agency, in a proposal that it is showing to Congress, environmentalists and timber-industry officials before making it public this week, is calling for nursing the forests of the Western states back to health by removing dead or densely crowded trees.


Irish Coalition May Include Leftist Party
Irish political leaders said today that they were trying to form a new Government that would include a small party with past links to the outlawed Irish Republican Army and with ideological -- and possibly financial -- ties to the old Soviet Communist Party.
The new effort seeks to avoid an election at Christmastime as Ireland enters its fifth week without a Government.
The previous governing coalition between the Fianna Fail and Labor parties broke up over an extradition case involving a Roman Catholic priest who was accused -- and later convicted -- of child molestation in Northern Ireland.
Albert Reynolds, acknowledging that his party, Fianna Fail, had made mistakes, resigned as Prime Minister on Nov. 17.


Admiral With High-Tech Dreams Has Pentagon at War With Itself
Just down the hallway from Bill Owens's Pentagon office is an elaborate scale model showing how oil platforms could be lashed together to create a futuristic floating air base.
For now, the "mobile offshore base" is only a gleam in Adm.
William A. Owens's eye.
But if he gets his way, it could become part of a broader technological revolution in equipping and restructuring the military to fight the nation's wars.


Convoy of U.N. Military Tankers Hijacked by Serbs Near Sarajevo
United Nations military fuel trucks and communications vehicles were hijacked by Serbs late Saturday in a suburb of Sarajevo, a United Nations spokesman said today.
The hijackings appeared to continue a two-week-old campaign of harassment by Serbs that has all but shut down the organization's operations in many areas of the country that are dependent on its aid.


Trade Pact Forces Social Issues to Sidelines
To the Editor:
The General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade gets Congressional approval even though it will cost billions of dollars in lost tariff revenues.
On the other hand, food-stamp programs, child nutrition, school lunches and other Federal expenditures that actually help people are scheduled for reduction on the grounds they are "budget busters" ("House G.O.P. Would Replace Scores of Programs for the Poor," front page, Dec. 9).
The message is that people can go wanting, but nothing must impede a huge bonanza for big business and the rich.


Abroad at Home; Mocking Justice
A mere two-and-one-half months after the selection process started, a jury and alternate jurors have been sworn in for the murder trial of O. J. Simpson.
The trial will not begin before February at the earliest.
But Americans have already learned two things from the Simpson extravaganza:
1.
The way juries are selected in this country, in high-profile cases especially, is outrageously expensive and damaging to respect for law.


An Off-Duty Officer Shoots 2 After Attack
An off-duty police officer shot and slightly wounded two men early yesterday outside a bar on the Upper East Side after he and two friends were attacked and beaten by them and four companions, the police said.
The two wounded suspects -- one of whom came at the officer with a razor, the police said -- were charged with second-degree assault.
Four others were being sought.


Bridge
Cover the West and South hands in the diagramed deal and put yourself in the East seat.
You are defending four spades after South has opened one spade and jumped to four spades following a one no-trump response.
Your partner has led the diamond four, dummy has played low, and South has played the queen under your king.
Now plan your defense.
The deal is featured in the 576th and penultimate tip in "Defensive Tips," a new book from Edwin Kantar, one of the world's leading player-writers.
It is obtainable from the author, P.O.
Box 427, Venice, Calif., 90291-0427, for $12.95 including postage.


Holly Corp.(HOC,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Executive Had Vaulted To No. 2 Post at Agency
On Dec. 1, Thomas J. Mosser was promoted to a position that was likely to be the pinnacle of his 25-year career in public relations and advertising.
Nine days later, he was dead, the victim of a powerful mail bomb that exploded in his home in North Caldwell, N.J.
Since early this year, Mr.
Mosser, 50, had served as executive vice president at Young &amp; Rubicam, the giant worldwide advertising and communications company based in New York, as well as a member of its powerful operations committee.
His duties included corporate projects and initiatives for clients including the Philip Morris Companies, the nation's second-largest advertiser.
With his recent promotion he also became the general manager of Y.&amp; R.


Mahler's Seventh, Stamped With Boulez's Style
Mahler once said, expressing hard-won faith, that some day his time would come.
Judging from the programming at Carnegie Hall the last two seasons and the continuing release of recordings of Mahler's symphonies, we have not seen anything yet.
Now, Pierre Boulez is beginning to record the entire symphonic cycle for Deutsche Grammophon.
The Sixth, with the Vienna Philharmonic, is about to be released; the Seventh has been recorded with the Cleveland Orchestra, and next year the Ninth will be recorded with the Chicago Symphony.
But as Mr.
Boulez's performance of the Seventh with the Chicago Symphony showed here on Thursday night, these will probably not be standard Mahler performances.
The interest will not be in the virtuosity of these three orchestras (all of which will be involved in the recording project), and it probably will not be in the gargantuan psychological worlds Mahler seems to construct in these works.
This version of Mahler, as some listeners will recall from years past, is indelibly and often compellingly stamped with the style and intellect of Mr.
Boulez.


GTC Transcontinental reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Nihilistic Sing-Along With Nine Inch Nails
Some 13,000 people gathered on Friday night for the second of two sold-out shows at Madison Square Garden to celebrate hate, rage and self-loathing with one of rock's most popular sociopaths, Trent Reznor of Nine Inch Nails.
Mr.
Reznor's success (Nine Inch Nail's second full-length album went to No. 2 on the pop charts this year, and he was voted one of the 10 sexiest rockers by Playgirl magazine) comes at a strange time, almost a decade after the style of music he plays flourished.
His appearance and attitude -- from his jet-black hair, all-black clothing and pasty white skin to his lyrics about being miserable, godless and suicidal -- come straight from gothic rock, the dark and bleak musical cult that gathered around 1980's bands like Bauhaus and Sisters of Mercy.
Mr.
Reznor's music is nearly identical to that of the hard-edged electronic dance bands that peaked creatively at the same time, groups including Cabaret Voltaire, Ministry and Nitzer Ebb, who mixed industrial noise with disco beats.


CLASSICAL MUSIC
Songs by a Schubert Heir, Glimpses of Debussy's Finale  Martin Bruns, Baritone 92d Street Y


The Joffrey Cancels April Dates
The Joffrey Ballet has canceled its two and half weeks of scheduled performances in April in California and Texas.
The company's 40 dancers will be on layoff from Jan. 30, after a weeklong season in Chicago, to late April, when rehearsals begin in New York City for a new piece by Ralph Lemon.
In a statement released last week, the company attributed the cancellation to the costs of stretching 14 performances over a five-week period.
Cecil C. Conner Jr., executive director of the Joffrey, said yesterday that money for the spring rehearsal period had already been raised.


CHRONICLE
GEORGE J. MITCHELL of Maine, retiring from the Senate after almost 15 years there, the last six as majority leader, has married HEATHER MacLACHLAN , a Canadian-born sports marketing consultant who was formerly managing director of T-V Enterprises in New York.
The wedding took place on Saturday in New York City, said a statement issued by the Senator's office, which declined to disclose the exact location.
The private ceremony was performed by the Rev.
William Tully of St.
Bartholomew's Church, The Associated Press reported.


Celtics Coach Will Undergo Colon Surgery
Doctors have found precancerous polyps in the colon of CHRIS FORD, which will require surgery for the Boston Celtics coach.
The Boston Globe is reporting in today's editions that the 45-year-old coach is to have the polyps removed and will miss the Celtics' upcoming West Coast trip.
The Celtics, 8-11 under Ford this National Basketball Association season, would not confirm the coach's condition.
But the club has called a news conference for today, and a spokesman said the topic would not be about player or roster moves. (AP)


A Needed Capital Gain
To the Editor:
In the renewed discussion of a possible cut in the capital gains tax, it is seldom mentioned that for many middle-class Americans the most significant capital gains vulnerability will come when they retire to a smaller dwelling.


Village Super Market Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 29


Reitmans (Canada) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 29


Sailor Who Survived Gale at Sea For Nearly 2 Days Is Doing Well
A Ukrainian sailor was in stable condition in a hospital here today after surviving the North Atlantic seas for almost two days wearing only a cloth coverall, two woolen sweaters, a nylon jumpsuit and an orange life jacket.
The sailor, Aleksandr Taranov, was rescued by helicopter on Saturday afternoon.
He is one of two known survivors from the Salavador Allende, a cargo ship with a crew of 31 that sank Friday 750 miles from shore in a raging gale.


Northwestern Steel &amp; Wire Co.(NWSW,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


A Classic Alternative Magazine Flirts a Little With the Mainstream
For 11 years Utne Reader has been one of the most distinctive voices in magazine journalism.
Serving as the Reader's Digest of the alternative press, it has brought attention to the best writing from little-known publications like Centrifugal Bumble-Puppy, Posse Comitatus and Disability Rag and Resource.
Recently, however, Eric Utne, the founding editor and president, began to ask himself what on earth alternative means these days.
He also found himself increasingly irritated by "the co-optation" of the word as a marketing device.


Miscellany
*
Publishers Information Bureau, New York, said magazine advertising pages rose 7.9 percent in November, to 19,016, compared with November 1993.
For the first 11 months of 1994, pages rose 4.8 percent, to 163,518, compared with the corresponding period a year earlier.


Despite Vow, Serbia Is Said to Supply Serbs Fighting in Bosnia
Exploiting a loophole in United Nations monitoring of his promise to close the Bosnian border, Serbia's President, Slobodan Milosevic, has provided important assistance to the Bosnian and Croatian Serbs, Western officials said today.
The assistance, provided mainly to the Croatian Serbs who have joined the Bosnian Serbs in an attack on the Muslim enclave of Bihac, appears to have tipped the balance of power in northwestern Bosnia, the officials said.
The Bosnian Serbs there have recently been under severe military pressure from the army of the Muslim-led Bosnian Government.


It's Time to Punish Haiti's Criminals
To the Editor:
" 'Nothing to Build On': Haiti Starting at Zero" (front page, Dec. 4) states that within Haiti there is "a hopeful patience in the slums and shantytowns." This impression of tranquillity is sharply at odds with what I heard on my visit in late November with the Haiti Commission, a human rights group.


Trade Pact Forces Social Issues to Sidelines; Import-Dependent U.S.
To the Editor:
However fervent the hosannas over GATT's passage, free trade will only work in an industrial system that is up to date, does most of its own manufacturing and imports special products that are roughly balanced by similar exports.
After the high-tariff umbrella that protected its industry during the 19th century, the United States stayed on top by having superior products and efficient production systems.


Is Western Civilization Worth $20 Million?; The Gift Is Huge and Welcome, but Its Restriction to Western Studies Fuels a Debate
Yale University called a news conference on April 17, 1991, to announce an extraordinary gift: Lee M. Bass, the youngest of four billionaire brothers from Fort Worth, had pledged $20 million to his alma mater to further its study of Western civilization.
The centerpiece of the Bass program was to be a rigorous, yearlong undergraduate course that would analyze virtual every major development in Western history, from ancient Mesopotamia to Nazi Germany.
Conceived by Mr.
Bass, Benno C. Schmidt Jr., then Yale's president, and Donald Kagan, the dean of Yale College, the double-credit course was to begin in the fall of 1993 and was intended to make a powerful statement -- that multiculturalism might be laying siege to the study of the West on other campuses, but not at Yale.


Republicans May Hold Down The S.E.C. and Investor Suits
The shift to a Republican-controlled Congress in January is likely to make it more difficult for the Securities and Exchange Commission to expand its regulatory activities and for investors to pursue claims of fraud against the securities industry.
In interviews last week, more than a dozen legislators, staff aides, industry executives and regulators agreed that an expanded S.E.C. budget to provide for more examiners to oversee mutual funds and investment advisers and to upgrade consumer education would collide with Republican concerns that the agency is already too intrusive and creates unnecessary expenses for the industry.


Patriots Give Colts the Wind and Win by the Air
A treacherous wind whipped through Foxboro Stadium, and Patriots Coach Bill Parcells knew his chances to score on offense and win the game would be limited by time and weather conditions.
So at the half, trailing by 10-7, he made a calculated choice.
He decided to take the ball at the start of the third quarter and give the Colts the wind in the fourth quarter.
"It was just my instincts," Parcells said.
"I just did not want to give them the ball and the wind. I figured if they got another one it would be 17-7, now we're pressing."


F.B.I. Says Fatal Mail Blast Is Work of Serial Bomber
Federal officials said today that a mail bomb that killed a prominent advertising executive here on Saturday was sent by the same man who has mounted a string of similar attacks since 1978, striking targets across the corporate and academic landscape in one of the most notorious unsolved crime sprees in the nation's recent history.
The death of the executive in this wealthy suburb about 15 miles from New York City deepened the mystery of the bomber.
The suspect, described as an anarchist with a mastery of explosives and a grudge against the influence of technology in society, has long eluded a team of Federal investigators that has roamed from Connecticut to California trying to track him down.


Essay; Avoid Dunkirk II
President Clinton wants Americans to believe that we have long been committed to using U.S. ground troops to extract U.N. peacekeepers from Bosnia.
That is false.
"We agreed for planning purposes," he told Univision last week, "that in the event the United Nations mission in Bosnia would be terminated and the soldiers had to get out, and they were in trouble so that they needed protection in getting out, that we would participate in doing that.


D.M.B.&amp; B. Office To Eliminate 24 Jobs
D'Arcy Masius Benton &amp; Bowles in St.
Louis will dismiss 24 of its 326 employees, or 7.4 percent, effective Dec. 31.
The decision comes a month after Anheuser-Busch Inc. dismissed D.M.B.&amp; B. on its flagship Budweiser beer account with billings estimated at $125 million.
Charlie Claggett, managing director, said Friday that efforts would be made to find jobs for the laid-off employees at other D.M.B.&amp; B. offices or at other agencies.


Virginia Captures 4th Title in Row
Moments after today's championship game of the Division I soccer tournament was over, Virginia's players gathered in front of their fans and raised their index fingers in unison.
It was a scene like the one played out the last two years here at Davidson College's Richardson Field and, the year before that, at the University of South Florida in Tampa.


Three Finalists In Avon Review
Avon Products Inc. of New York has narrowed the review on the creative portion of its account to three finalists from seven semifinalists.
The account, with billings estimated at $15 million to $20 million, was previously handled by FCB/Leber Katz Partners in New York.


Owners Talking Tough Before N.H.L. Meeting
Rod Bryden, the chairman of the Ottawa Senators, says he is prepared to outlast the National Hockey League players in their bitter, 73-day labor dispute.
Bryden, who will be in Manhattan today for a crucial N.H.L. owners meeting, said although his team was losing $2 million a month by locking out the players, it might be more profitable in the long run to close down until next September, if that's what it takes to make the players return to work on the owners' terms.


Market Place; Exide is looking to Europe for its next spurt of growth.
FOR the third time in slightly more than a year, Arthur M. Hawkins is leading a roadshow for the Exide Corporation's stock and, just as before, Wall Street is getting excited.
The battery company's shares jumped more than 25 percent immediately after it went public 14 months ago at $20 a share.
When it sold a secondary offering in March at $34 a share, the shares climbed more than 10 percent in the week before the sale.


AM Int'l.(AM,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 29


Unlikely Allies For Coalition In Slovakia
More than two months after his party won parliamentary elections in Slovakia, former Prime Minister Vladimir Meciar announced a coalition Government today with two small political parties, one on the far right and one on the far left.
Mr.
Meciar said that on Monday he would present his proposed Cabinet to President Michal Kovac, who is expected to swear in the new Government this week.


Teaching Teen-Agers How to Avoid Violence
Kahlil Smith was only looking for a summer job. Instead, he found a cause.
Kahlil, a 14-year-old from Park Slope, Brooklyn, spent last summer in a workplace that was part classroom, part theater and part support group, helping lead other youths toward an urgent goal: stopping violence in their communities.


Boston Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Albany Democrats Face End of an Era
Albany is a company town, and in the interregnum between the Cuomo administration and the Pataki administration it is a town where the company faces a hostile takeover.
For Sale signs are sprouting in the front yards of anxiety-ridden Democrats, even at Lieut.
Gov.
Stan Lundine's attractive, two-story house on St.
Agnes Lane (4BR, 2 1/2BA, and "very well priced" at $239,000, said an agent).
Headhunters are sending form letters by the hundreds to Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo's top aides, and advising them to prepare to relocate.
The state's Employee Assistance Program, which provides mental health and drug counseling, reports a noticeable increase in consultations since the Nov. 8 election.


SHIFT IN INSURANCE TO COVER OIL SHIPS MAY DISRUPT FLOW
The flow of foreign oil into the United States could be disrupted late this month because of a new Federal law that requires tankers to carry 10 times the liability insurance they have taken to cover accidents and spills in the past.
No one expects the change to cause lines at the gasoline pumps, but some experts predict that tight supplies could raise the price of gasoline and heating oil by at least a few cents a gallon.
The Northeast is particularly vulnerable, because of its heavy dependence on oil for heating in the winter.


Front-Runner Bows Out of French Election
Throwing France's opposition Socialist Party into disarray, Jacques Delors announced tonight that he would not seek the presidency after his retirement next month as head of the European Union's executive commission.
The latest opinion polls indicate that he is the favorite to win next spring's presidential election, but Mr.
Delors told a nationwide television audience tonight that he had decided not to accept the Socialist candidacy, for personal and political reasons.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-13  RUSSIA ENTERS SEPARATIST REGION
Russian tanks rolled into a rebellious Muslim republic in southern Russia, setting off the country's worst crisis since President Yeltsin had troops fire on Parliament.
A1


Khartoum Journal; In Sudan, All the Horses Run Under a Handicap
There isn't much incentive to race a horse in the Sudan.
Betting is illegal.
Jockeys earn a dollar a race.
And the prizes barely cover the cost of a bag of oats.
Nonetheless, horse racing, introduced by the British in 1929, has endured, if not always prospered.
And the new season at the racetrack here, which began in October and will end in June, is drawing an eclectic collection of spectators who set aside their bitter political enmities for the love of sport, at least for a few hours.


Russian Forces Move Into Rebel Region
Hundreds of Russian tanks rolled across the border of a rebellious Muslim region in southern Russia today, setting off the worst internal political crisis in Russia since President Boris N. Yeltsin had troops fire on the Moscow Parliament last year.
The threat of a full-scale war in the region, Chechnya, grew throughout the day as columns of Russian forces thundered toward the region's capital from three directions.
But there was hope that tensions could be eased with possible talks on Monday between the two sides.


Patents; A new microwave technology may help deliver clear images of body organs.
DOCTORS who want an image of a heart, liver or brain may soon be able simply to bombard a patient with microwaves, say a husband-and-wife research team of physicists.
Scientists have been trying for decades to harness microwaves to make images of things that ordinary visible light cannot penetrate, from body organs to the inside of a suitcase.
But they have been stymied by the fact that microwaves tend to yield pictures so blurry that, for example, it is impossible to tell where a heart ends and a liver begins.


In Miami, Freer Trade
The United States, Canada and 32 Latin American countries declared yesterday in Miami that they would create a free-trade area by 2006 -- in effect, a larger version of Nafta.
That represents a political victory for President Clinton and an economic victory for people throughout the hemisphere.
By one estimate, free trade could raise income in Latin America by $500 per person -- a huge boost in countries racked by poverty.
The summit meeting's declaration is credible.
Compare it to a similar pledge by Asian-Pacific nations meeting last month in Indonesia.
There, countries bowing to pressure from the U.S. announced a commitment to free trade but wavered by delaying a start date and taking no immediate steps to achieve their lofty goals.
Some signatories backed away within hours of the declaration.
Not so in Miami.
The Latin American leaders pushed the U.S. to adopt an early target date for free trade.
They also agreed to concrete steps to get negotiations under way.


Nets Sound an Alarm: They Mean Business
The warning came from P. J. Brown, an interoffice memo to the National Basketball Association's nouveau superpower, Orlando.
"I think they have an attitude they can stomp all over us," said Brown, whose Nets face the Magic on Monday night at the Byrne Meadowlands Arena.
"With what they've done to us lately, they probably think things will be easy again.


CLASSICAL MUSIC
Anger in Chromatics, A Maiden's Death as Antidote  Muir String Quartet Weill Recital Hall


Sports of The Times; The Giants Are Going to Philadelphia With a Chance
WHEN the Giants were in their seven-game losing streak, they were going nowhere.
But with a four-game winning streak, they're going to Philadelphia.
If the Giants extend the Eagles' losing streak to six next Sunday, they would be assured of finishing ahead of the Eagles in each team's struggle to qualify for the Super Bowl XXIX playoffs, along with the Vikings, Bears, Lions, Packers and the Cardinals.


Cott Corp.(COTTF,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 29


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Press; Fairness, bias and judgment: grappling with the knotty issue of objectivity in journalism.
JAY ROSEN, a journalism professor and director of the Project on Public Life and the Press at New York University, is a press critic who often draws criticism from reporters and editors by saying journalism needs to rethink its fundamental canon: objectivity.
Mr.
Rosen sat down last week for a conversation about the way the press uses, or abuses, the claim to objectivity.
Here are some excerpts:
Q.  What is journalistic objectivity?


Accounts
*
Beaver Reitzfeld Inc., New York, was awarded two accounts on a project basis: Classic Sports Network, New York, and International Thomson Publishing, Stamford, Conn.
Billings were not disclosed. *
Overnite Transportation Co., Richmond, to O'Keefe Marketing, Richmond, to handle print advertising and marketing projects, previously at Caswell Coleman, Richmond.
Billings were not disclosed.


Rivers Just Glad to Be Back
Almost lost in Saturday night's benching of John Starks and Greg Anthony was the play of Doc Rivers, who saw his first significant game action in nearly a year.
Before the Knicks' 107-103 victory over the Philadelphia 76ers, Rivers was trying to remember the last time he had played in Madison Square Garden.
That would have been Dec. 16, 1993, when he blew out his left knee against the Lakers and missed the rest of the season.


Cenex Inc. reports earnings for Year to Sept 30


At Trial Marked by Twists, Defense Witness Dominates
Edward L. Summers, a 23-year-old premedical student from the Bronx, is on trial here for carjacking and execution-style murder, but for much of the time he has been overshadowed by a figure named Dino who may or may not exist.
When Mr.
Summers described him in a since-recanted confession and in six days of testimony, Dino was a colorful, if menacing, neighborhood drug lord who changed flashy cars the way most people change shirts.
But no one came forward to say that Dino was a living, breathing human being, rather than a phantom dreamed up by Mr.
Summers to conceal his solitary crime, as prosecutors have charged.


The Hemisphere Summit Talks: Strictly Business
Although Latin American leaders have often been seen as distant neighbors in the past, most of those who came here this weekend knew Miami better than the American President.
With their countries building on this intimacy, economic integration seems bound to accelerate in the Americas through the end of the decade.


DANCE
Performers and Images Flat on the Floor and Walls  K2 Dance and Arts Company Context Studio


Sports of The Times; 'Big Brother' for Salaam Watches With Pride
RASHAAN SALAAM is a testament to the ancient proverb that it takes an entire village to raise a child.
As Salaam accepted his Heisman Trophy on Saturday evening, the longest part of his acceptance was a list of thank yous: to The Creator, of course.
To his mother and stepfather, to Bill McCartney, the retiring Colorado head coach.
There was also his offensive line, and all of those special others who helped him see and run to daylight.


Apple Lawsuit May Renew Legal Battle With Microsoft
Apple Computer Inc. has filed suit against a small San Francisco software developer in a case that may reignite a legal quarrel between Apple and the mighty Microsoft Corporation, its principal competitor in operating software.
Apple, based in Cupertino, Calif., filed the complaint Dec. 6 in Federal District Court in San Jose, accusing a small Apple contractor, the San Francisco Canyon Company, of theft of intellectual property and breach of contract.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy The upcoming Republican Congress is likely to make it more difficult for the S.E.C. to expand regulatory activities.
Several legislators, aides, executives and regulators agreed that commission's programs to hire more examiners and to provide more consumer education would clash with Republican concerns that the agency is already too intrusive.  [ Page A1. ]


Bengals Force Giants (7-7) to Work Hard to Become Average
The game is tied, 20-20, and you have the ball with 1 minute 42 seconds left.
A 25-mile-an-hour wind that is gusting so strong, it seems it could flip a small plane, is blowing in your face.
You don't want to lose to Cincinnati because a loss to one of the worst teams in the league means any playoff hopes are probably dead.
Time is running out. What do you do?


Dividend Meetings
Following is a partial list of dividend meetings this week:  MONDAY


No Headline
"We must find a political solution to the problems of one of the members of the Russian Federation." -- BORIS N. YELTSIN, President of Russia.  [ A1:6. ] "Our independence is forever. On that my life is my wager. DZHOKHAR DUDAYEV, President of Chechnya."  [ A13:1. ]


Empire Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


U.S. Sets Weekly Bill Sale
The Treasury's schedule of financing this week is confined to bills, beginning with today's regular weekly auction of three- and six-month bills.
At the close of the New York cash market on Friday, the rate on the outstanding three-month bill was 5.64 percent, traders said, and the six-month issue was at 6.16 percent.


U.S. Census Study Reveals A Nation of Rolling Stones
Nearly three times as many Americans are transients with shallow roots only months old as homebodies who have lived in the same house for more than three decades, a new study shows.
Over all, according to a Census Bureau analysis being released today, more than 2 in 10 of the nation's households moved in the 15 months before the 1990 census, evidence of a mobility that among developed countries, is unique to the United States.


Marcus Corp.(MCS,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 10


METRO DIGEST
A DEATH IS ATTRIBUTED TO A SERIAL BOMBER
Federal officials said a mail bomb that killed a prominent advertising executive in North Caldwell, N.J., on Saturday was sent by the same man who has mounted a string of similar attacks since 1978, striking targets across the corporate and academic landscape in one of the most notorious unsolved crime sprees in the nation's recent history.
The suspect, described as an anarchist with a mastery of explosives and a grudge against the influence of technology in society, has long eluded a team of Federal investigators that has roamed from Connecticut to California trying to track him down.
A1.


National Semiconductor Corp. (NSM,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 27


Clubs Say Offer Is New, But Players Say It Isn't
Baseball's major league club owners, on the last day of the fourth month of the players' strike, handed the players a new tax proposal tonight that they championed for its "substantial movement." But Donald Fehr, the union leader, said the proposal appeared to have "virtually all of the elements" of the salary cap the clubs really want.
Another union official, who insisted on anonymity, called the plan brilliant but said, "It's designed to deceive people." Management people appeared to be disturbed by the union's characterizations.


CHRONICLE
JOHN L. TISHMAN , chairman and chief executive of the Tishman Realty and Construction Company, has been elected chairman of the board of the New School for Social Research.
Mr.
Tishman, 67, will serve a three-year term beginning in May and will succeed Malcolm Smith.


On Both Sides of Urban Violence: Dehumanized and Interchangeable
The murderous teen-ager who is the title character of Charles Fuller's "Zooman and the Sign" is, on his own harrowingly skewed terms, a thorough egalitarian.
In the stunning monologue that begins the 1980 play, which has been revived at the Second Stage Theater, this inner-city Philadelphia youth seems to cast an eye of combustible contempt over anyone who crosses his line of vision.
He knifed an "ole jive West Indian" at a subway stop, he tells us, because the man was swinging his arms as if he owned the platform.
He is glad, he says, that his aged aunt's Social Security check was stolen by junkies.
Old people in general, "all bent over and twisted up, skin hanging off their faces," make him sick.


Poland Is Ready for NATO Membership
To the Editor:
Since last fall enormous progress has been made in discussions on the future of NATO.
It is no longer, as President Clinton said in Warsaw, a question of if NATO will expand, but when and how.
This progress does not mean that all problems have been solved.
Many concerns are now being voiced and we in Poland understand them very well.
Entering into a military alliance constitutes the most serious and consequential step any nation can make.


Mourning Victims of a Theater Fire in China


CAMPUS CRIME
Reported violent crime on college campuses in the region increased by 10 to 20 percent in 1993 from 1992, according to the F.B.I.'s index crime statistics.
The Federal Right-to-Know and Campus Security Act, which took effect in 1992, requires colleges and universities that receive Federal funds to make public their security policies and the number of reported on-campus crimes.
Reported property crimes, which vastly outnumber violent crimes, declined in 1993.
Making intercampus comparisons is difficult, as statistics are affected by several factors: the characteristics of the surrounding community, accessibility of the campus to visitors, enrollment, and so on.
But the large state university campuses in the area had similar crime rates in 1993.


Pier 1 Imports Inc.(PIR,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 26


Gay Rights Battle Flares in Florida
Nancy Clayton says she is no Archie Bunker. She says she has gay friends.
But she was among those who voted on Election Day to repeal an ordinance in Alachua County that granted gay people protection from discrimination in housing and employment.
Mrs.
Clayton, 34, says the law singled out homosexuals for "special" rights -- rights that went beyond those afforded to her as "the mother of 2.5 kids."


Recognition Int'l.(REC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


U.S. Officials Warn of Further Unrest Among Cubans in Panama
American officials warned this weekend that renewed rioting in the camps housing 8,500 Cubans here may be inevitable unless the United States is able to resolve their refugee status.
With only three months left on the six months Panama has approved for the Cubans to stay on United States bases here, American officials concede they are hardly any closer to solving that problem than they were when the first Cubans arrived in early September from camps at the American naval station at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba.


DANCE
Movements Inspired By Persian Poetry Robin Becker and Company Playhouse 91


These Are Desperate Times For Eagles
It sounded as the Giants' locker room did barely more than one month ago -- quiet and frustrated.
Randall Cunningham criticized the offense.
William Fuller used the phrase "in disarray."
Once 7-2 and on track for what looked to be a sure playoff berth, the Eagles' collapse continued today at Three Rivers Stadium, where Cunningham and his lackluster offense posted one measly field goal en route to a 14-3 loss to the Pittsburgh Steelers.
It was the fifth straight defeat for the Eagles, whose fragile playoff hopes could be obliterated when they face the resurgent Giants next Sunday in Philadelphia.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; In a Lands' End ad, the sweater is usually not as important as the company's catalogue image.
WHILE the advertising experts at many retailers were busy last week polishing their last-minute pre-Christmas ads, a different story was being played out at Lands' End Inc., the big catalogue apparel company.
At the Lands' End headquarters in the dairy country of Dodgeville, Wis., Michael Atkin, the marketing vice president, and his staff huddled with top executives of their ad agency, Biederman, Kelly &amp; Shaffer of New York, to plan next year's ads.
The two groups also held meetings during the week with the company's merchandisers to determine which private-label products to highlight in the months ahead.


Couple Are Found Dead In Unheated Bronx House
On Saturday afternoon, responding to a call from a 23-year-old-man's concerned sister, the police found him and a 55-year-old woman friend dead, lying together fully clothed on a bed in the living room of a house she had moved into a year ago in the northeast Bronx.
There was no sign of violence and no suicide note.
The electricity had been shut off and there was no heat.
But there was a charcoal grill and the fumes were heavy in the room, the police said.
The deaths of Iton Cox and Leonida Sykers may have been accidents caused in part by a late-autumn cold snap.


Chock Full O' Nuts (CHF,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Sun Microsystems Selects Thompson
The Sun Microsystems Computer Company, a unit of Sun Microsystems Inc. of Mountain View, Calif., has selected the J. Walter Thompson Company to handle its worldwide systems and Sunsoft software accounts, previously at Anderson &amp; Lembke in San Francisco.
Combined billings are estimated at $25 million.
Thompson said on Friday that JWT/West in San Francisco would serve as the lead agency, drawing on Thompson's New York office to serve Sun's global needs and JWT/ Direct in New York to handle direct marketing.
Thompson was awarded the accounts after a three-and-a-half- month review that began with 12 agencies and was narrowed to Thompson and Campbell Mithun Esty in Minneapolis.
A campaign is expected to begin in March.


Highflying Merrill Hits a Snag
In a year when most of its Wall Street rivals have been reeling from tumbling earnings, Merrill Lynch &amp; Company is on track to log its second most profitable year ever.
Having escaped the large trading losses suffered by rivals like Salomon Inc., Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company and the Morgan Stanley Group when interest rates began rising in February, Merrill, the country's largest brokerage and investment firm, continued to rack up profits and became the darling of stock analysts who follow the securities industry.


Cygne Designs Inc.(CYDS,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 29


Meticulous in Building His Bombs, Fastidious in Remaining At Large
From the loving way he pieces together his explosives, his choice of targets and clues about which newspaper he might read, Federal investigators have gleaned some notion of his Luddite mind, but they have been unable to predict or prevent his attacks.
The investigators say they believe they know much about the parcel bomber who has left two people dead and 23 injured since 1978.
Based on a glimpse years ago, they believe they know what he looks like.
From the swath he has cut across the country and the clues he has left behind, they think they know where he is from and where he has gone.
They might even know his motivation: a hatred of sophisticated technology, the one apparent link among his targets.


An Expanded Role For Bates USA Chief
Frank Assumma, president and chief executive at Bates USA in New York, was named Friday to the additional new position of chief executive of Bates North America.
In his expanded role, Mr.
Assumma, 41, will oversee all offices in the United States and Canada; he reports to Michael Bungey, chief executive at the parent company, Bates Worldwide.


Jets Hold a Losing Hand, but Carroll Plans to Stand Pat
Despite the Jets' slide, which has produced three straight losses and a virtually certain look at the playoffs from the outside, Coach Pete Carroll will make no significant changes as the team winds down to its final two games.
And General Manager Dick Steinberg yesterday supported the direction of the team, saying, "I don't think there's major, long-term repair work needed."


CLASSICAL MUSIC
Early Reminder of the Joys Of Handel's 'Messiah'  Choir and Orchestra Church of St.
Ignatius Loyola


Critical Loss, Kelly Injury Have Bills Hurting All Over
If the Buffalo Bills are to qualify for the playoffs this season and keep alive their hopes for a fifth straight Super Bowl, they'll likely have to do it without quarterback Jim Kelly, who suffered a sprained left knee against the Minnesota Vikings today and could be out for the final two regular-season games.
Kelly's injury, which occurred with 1 minute 10 seconds left in the game when he was hit by defensive tackle Henry Thomas, was the biggest downer of a disappointing afternoon for the Bills, who saw an 8-point third quarter lead dissolve into a 21-17 defeat before 66,501 fans at frozen Rich Stadium.


'Riley's Son' Is a Net In Knicks Clothing
John Starks is really a New Jersey Net.
He was born to play for the embattled Butch Beard, not the empowered Pat Riley, no head butts about it.


School 'Court': Averting Trouble Before It Starts
ONE day after school, Fingers and Easy (their nicknames) go to a bookstore on Fulton Street.
They walk up and down the aisle, remove books from the shelves and put them back.
They browse until Fingers takes a book and, without Easy knowing it, drops it into his friend's knapsack.


Orphanages Are No Solution
The party that professes to support family values seems excessively eager to yank poor children away from their mothers and dump them in institutions.
Republican proposals for welfare reform suggest orphanages as an alternative to supporting young single mothers with children on welfare for years and years.
And Newt Gingrich, the next House Speaker, has held up Boys Town, the fabled orphanage in Nebraska, as a model way to care for youngsters who might otherwise be thrown off balconies or dropped in dumpsters.
But before the nation moves very far down the orphanage road, it needs to recognize some uncomfortable facts.
Orphanages, if staffed and equipped properly, are very expensive.
Moreover, even well-run orphanages are often unsuitable, especially for the very young.
The act of institutionalization often harms their social and psychological development.


Jordanians And Israelis Fill Out Pact
Israel and Jordan fleshed out their new peace treaty some more today, opening temporary embassies in each other's country and saying they would exchange ambassadors next month.
For the first time, an Israeli flag flew openly in Amman, and in a separate ceremony a few hours later, the Jordanian flag was raised in Tel Aviv, where almost all countries put their missions to Israel.
Both embassies are in hotels for now, until permanent locations are found.


INSIDE
Clinton Looks at Tax Cut
Clinton aides said the President hoped to use a speech this week to propose a tax cut for the middle class and major trims in Government spending.
Page A16.
A Bankruptcy's Fallout
California officials moved on two fronts to assess the damage caused by Orange County's bankruptcy filing, which also marred a very good year at Merrill Lynch.
Page D1.
The Unused Gift
Yale's hesitancy in using all of a $20 million gift for a new Western Civilization course has led to charges that a multicultural agenda is jeopardizing a huge donation.
Page B1.


Giuliani Expected to Veto Police Monitor Bill
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani is expected to veto a bill this week that would create the first permanent independent agency to monitor corruption in the Police Department, mayoral aides said yesterday.
If he vetoes the bill, Mr.
Giuliani will open a new battle with the City Council, which two weeks ago passed the measure to create the agency and is already locked in a bitter debate with the Mayor about revisions to the budget.
Mr.
Giuliani will hold a hearing on the bill today, but he is not expected to veto the bill until later this week, his aides said.


One Family's Cursed Heirloom: Homicide
When other children were hearing fairy tales, Garland Hampton heard bedtime stories about the day Uncle Robert killed two Milwaukee police officers, or the time Grandma, with both barrels, blew away the father of two of her children back in '62.
By the time he was 9, he had seen his mother kill her boyfriend.
Now, at 15, locked up in the County Jail and awaiting trial on murder charges, Garland is still enough of a child that he is afraid he might cry when darkness falls.


QVC Inc.(QVCN,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Time Warner's 'Time Machine' for Future Video
This is a test.
This is only a test.
It is not -- repeat, not -- the interactive television and home-shopping system that will be in your home by Christmas.
Or next Christmas.
Or maybe ever.
That, roughly, is the cautionary message from executives at Time Warner Inc. as they prepare to plug in their long-awaited "full service network" in Orlando, Fla., on Wednesday.


Quanex Corp.(NX,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


U.S. Says Russian Move Is 'an Internal Affair'
President Clinton declined today to criticize Moscow's decision to send hundreds of tanks and thousands of troops to quell an uprising in the southwestern Russian region of Chechnya, saying it was "an internal affair."
At a news conference in Miami, where he was attending a summit meeting of leaders from North and South America, Mr.
Clinton said: "We hope that order can be restored with a minimum amount of bloodshed and violence. That's what we have counseled and encouraged."


Chile Is Admitted as North American Free Trade Partner
President Clinton and the leaders of Canada and Mexico said today that they had agreed to admit Chile to the North American Free Trade Agreement, a move that clearly puts pressure on the other nations of South and Central America to speed the opening of their markets if they want expanded trade with the United States.
The announcement came at the conclusion of a surprisingly harmonious three-day summit meeting.
Mr.
Clinton and 33 other leaders from the Western Hemisphere -- only Cuba was excluded -- agreed to conclude a treaty within a decade to create a free-trade zone for the Americas.


World Economies


New York Gets Second Chance With New Pennsylvania Station; Esthetic Renewal
To the Editor:
Thomas Backen states that seeking to re-create Pennsylvania Station "is carrying nostalgia too far" (letter, Dec. 6).
Nonsense!
It makes good business sense -- even if the pleasure of experiencing the new station will be largely limited to Amtrak passengers since, despite what Mr.
Backen implied, commuter service will remain where it is now.


The Runnin' Rebels Ran, But Seton Hall Ran Harder
Running is so synonymous with the basketball legacy at the University of Nevada-Las Vegas that it is part of the team's nickname.
The Runnin' Rebels ruined opponents with their brash style under Jerry Tarkanian and they promised a return to those glory years after Tim Grgurich, a disciple of the former coach, replaced Rollie Massimino as the head coach in October.
Seton Hall is not synonymous with running.
P.
J.
Carlesimo allowed the Pirates to run the ball about as often as he sported a clean-shaven face.
But George Blaney, another first-year coach, wants Seton Hall to run, play defense and then run some more.
Tonight, at Byrne Meadowlands Arena, the Pirates actually looked more like the old U.N.L.V. than the new U.N.L.V. in rumbling to a 99-79 victory.


Agenda-Setting Week for Clinton May Include Tax-Cut Plan
President Clinton moves this week into a crucial round of choices for the second half of his term, preparing a speech for Thursday in which, aides said today, he hopes to propose major spending cuts, Government restructuring and a tax cut for the middle class.
"I intend to propose one as long as I can pay for it," Mr.
Clinton told reporters today at the conclusion of the Summit of the Americas in Miami, restating his position on a tax cut in the strongest terms so far.
Having promised such a cut in his 1992 campaign, only to drop it in favor of further deficit reduction upon taking office, Mr.
Clinton said, "I want to fulfill the commitment of our campaign and my commitment to tax fairness."


Mid Ocean Ltd.(MOCNF,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Packers Provide Heat As Bears Catch a Chill
Packers 40, Bears 3
A return to frigid Lambeau Field, a white-hot offense and an ice-cold Steve Walsh were just what the Green Bay Packers needed to salvage their playoff hopes.
The Packers routed the Bears, 40-3, yesterday as Brett Favre threw three touchdowns, two of them to Sterling Sharpe, and Green Bay's defense returned to form after a three-game skid.


CHRONICLE
MARIAH CAREY , the gospel-influenced pop singer who announced recently that she hoped to raise $1 million for the Fresh Air Fund, put herself within sight of that goal last week.
Revenue from a concert that she gave on Thursday evening at the Cathedral of St.
John the Divine exceeded $700,000.
Fund officials said that her pledge was the largest the charity had received in at least 30 years, and perhaps in its 117-year history.


Equity Issues This Week
The following equity and convertible debt offerings are expected this week:
American Bingo and Gaming Corp., Austin, Tex., an initial public offering of 1 million shares and 1.5 million warrants.
Investors Associates Inc.


Trade Pact Casts Shadow for Garment Workers
They are scared, angry and frustrated, but mostly scared.
Many have worked in the garment mills of Lehigh Valley for 30 years and more.
The whine of sewing machines and dust of fabric have become as familiar as early snows and now the threat of unemployment.
While the removal of worldwide trade barriers and the lowering of tariffs under the North American Free Trade Agreement and GATT are expected to help American high-tech and service industries, they mean fear among the nation's garment workers.


Labatt (John) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Are 49ers Humming Home Sweet Home?
The San Francisco 49ers are feeling pretty good about themselves right now.
They watched the Dallas Cowboys lose on Saturday and then strolled into Jack Murphy Stadium here today and dispatched the San Diego Chargers as if this were an easy game of checkers.
You've got black, they've got red -- and they've got all kings.


Economic Calendar
Listed below are the scheduled release dates for major economic indicators this week.
Monday None


New Age and Tradition Help Hawaiian Guitars
Cyril Pahinui, Ledward Kaapana and Keola Beamer, three Hawaiian guitarists and singers, played a World Music Institute concert on Friday night at the Washington Square Church that sounded surprisingly familiar.
Their music, Hawaiian slack-key guitar playing, grew out of the colonial era, when Hawaiians retuned the Spanish guitar to play lilting local melodies.
Despite its distant roots, the music resembles the efforts of Leo Kottke and of Ry Cooder, who championed the guitarist Gabby Pahinui, Cyril's father.


GC Cos.(GCX,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Market Place; For some buyers, analysts see Intel as an opportunity.
FOR the strong hearted, there is no buying opportunity to match a corporate debacle.
For such buyers, analysts yesterday recommended purchase of the Intel Corporation's battered shares after I.B.M. said that it had stopped shipments of personal computers using Intel's flagship Pentium microprocessor.
Intel shares fell $4.50, to $58.25, before trading was halted at Intel's request for more than two hours so that it could respond to the International Business Machines Corporation's announcement.
I.B.M. said it had stopped shipments because its internal research showed that a flaw in the Pentium would cause math errors far more often than Intel had acknowledged last month, when the problem was first disclosed.


Novel Bypass Method: A Dose of New Genes
THE tiny cardiac catheterization room at St.
Elizabeth's Hospital was never meant to hold two dozen doctors, nurses and visitors, all wearing heavy lead aprons to protect them from a constant barrage of X-rays.
But last Wednesday was a day most of the crowd in the room had anticipated for years.
It was the day when Dr.
Jeffrey Isner and one of his associates, Dr.
Robert Schainfeld, were attempting the first gene therapy for vascular disease.
If the experiment succeeded, it would herald a revolution in the treatment of vascular disease that might eventually replace bypass surgery with gene therapy.
The idea was to add genes to arteries that would direct the formation of new blood vessels to grow around an area blocked by plaque.
If it worked, it would be a sort of auto-bypass.


Corrections
A theater review on Saturday about a production of "Macbeth" at the Classic Stage Company Theater in the East Village misidentified the founder of the production company, Falstaff Presents.
He is Michael Winter. (Jack Stehlin plays the title role and is the director.)


New Editor in Chief Named For News Corp.'s Mirabella
In the latest appointment in a year of changes at the highest levels of Murdoch Magazines, Dominique Browning was named editor in chief yesterday of the women's magazine Mirabella.
Ms.
Browning, who is 39, will assume her new duties on Jan. 3, as the successor to Gay Bryant.
Ms.
Bryant, who was named editor in chief of Mirabella in October 1990, was assigned to the development of special projects for the News America Publishing Corporation, another arm of Rupert Murdoch's News Corporation.


Replacing The Mouse With Even Better Mice
MICE are virtually essential for PC's running Microsoft Windows, and they are absolutely essential for Macintoshes, but they do wear out.
Even if you are meticulous about keeping them clean internally, and not all of us are, they eventually grow creaky with age, like the rest of us.
The simplest way to replace a mouse is to buy the same kind again, probably the shapely Microsoft mouse for a PC or Apple's smooth mouse for a Mac.
But there are alternatives.


More Talks On Warburg Merger Plan
To complete their proposed merger, Morgan Stanley and S. G. Warburg Group must still negotiate a number of issues, and the most difficult may be the fate of Warburg's fund-management subsidiary, Mercury Asset Management, analysts and people involved in the deal said today.
Mercury, which is 75 percent owned by Warburg, is the largest and one of the most successful fund managers in Britain, with assets of $100 billion.
Analysts said that gaining control of the subsidiary was a main attraction of the deal for Morgan Stanley.


Idaho Siege Report Says F.B.I. Agents Violated Procedure
A confidential Justice Department study of a deadly 1992 standoff between a white separatist and Federal agents found that senior officials violated not only their own policies but also the Constitution when they relaxed the rules that govern when Federal agents may shoot a suspect.
The study was prepared by a 24-member investigative team reporting to the Office of Professional Responsibility, the Justice Department's internal disciplinary unit.
It traces the long chain of events that led to a 10-day siege around the remote mountain home of the separatist, Randall C. Weaver, after a sharpshooter for the Federal Bureau of Investigation mistakenly shot Mr.
Weaver's wife, Vicki, as she stood in the doorway.


Science Times E-Mail
Science Times has an electronic mail address for comments from readers about published articles and suggested areas of coverage:
scitimes@nytimes.com.


CHRONICLE
KATHRYN J. RODGERS, vice president and general counsel of Barnard College, is moving on to a new job.
She has been named executive director of NOW's Legal Defense and Education Fund, which will observe its 25th anniversary next month.
During her 11 years at Barnard, which included a stint last year as acting president, Ms.
Rodgers developed the school's policies on child-care and pregnancy leave and sexual harassment and taught a colloquium on civil rights and women's issues.
So, she said, "the issues I will be dealing with are ones that I have already been working on in one way or another."


Survey Reports More Drug Use By Teen-Agers
A new study of teen-agers' use of illegal drugs shows that the increases of recent years are continuing, a trend that the study's director attributed to the "glamorizing" of drugs by the entertainment industry.
The survey of nearly 50,000 students from 420 public and private high schools nationwide, which was made public today, found that one in four high school sophomores and one in three seniors said they had smoked marijuana at least once within the last year.
Those figures were an increase of six percentage points among the 10th graders and an increase of four percentage points among the 12th graders.


Shula and Dolphins on Wheels All Night
Don Shula is 1-0 coaching from a golf cart and the Miami Dolphins are 9-5 and heading into the playoffs.
The Dolphins, who had won just two of their last five games, scored three touchdowns during a six-minute span in the second half tonight to defeat the Kansas City Chiefs, 45-28, before a crowd of 71,578 at Joe Robbie Stadium


Air Crews Can Sue On Smoke
A Miami judge ruled yesterday that airline flight attendants could sue leading tobacco companies for smoking-related problems, permitting the first class-action suit to address the health consequences of cigarette smoke on nonsmokers.
Judge Robert P. Kaye of the Circuit Court for Dade County ruled that a so-called passive-smoking suit brought in 1991 by 25 former nonsmoking flight attendants of various airlines against the Philip Morris Companies and seven other cigarette makers could proceed as a class action in Dade County court.


Amtrak to Consider Major Cuts in Service to Make Up Its Deficit
Hurt by airline fare wars, accidents and rising costs, Amtrak is considering major cuts in service, the first since the early 1980's.
The railroad's board will meet today to consider how to make up a deficit projected at $200 million for the fiscal year that began on Oct. 1.


Stocks Gain Despite Intel's Chip Problem
The stock market managed a surprising gain yesterday, despite the plunge in Intel stock that followed I.B.M.'s decision to halt sales of its personal computers that use Intel's most advanced chip.
Another busy holiday weekend for retailers and the prospect of higher oil prices apparently prompted traders to flock to the shares of department stores and oil companies, analysts said.


Everything Is an Object Of Serious Percussion
David Van Tieghem, who performed a music-theater piece called "Absence of Mallets" at the Bessie Schonberg Theater of Dance Theater Workshop on Sunday, is the percussion world's David Copperfield.
He coaxes audiences into seeing everyday objects as fantastical creations with a life and poetry all their own, but instead of making the objects levitate and disappear, he performs feats of percussion on them.
On Sunday, for example, he drummed blindfolded on two moving tables set with kitchen utensils.
Like the magician, Mr.
Van Tieghem has been making the same tricks appear new for more than 15 years.
"Absence of Mallets," which continues Thursday through Sunday at the theater, 219 West 19th Street, Chelsea, opened with his usual routine of drumming on everything in sight.
Mr.
Van Tieghem started the show by tapping on the risers, the walls, the floor, the soles of his sneakers and even a drum set.
With a bored expression plastered to his face, he soon moved on to solo on dozens of bits of scrap metal strung from four coat racks and to use electronic delay effects to turn the noises of toys into quirky rhythmic loops.


At Companies, Fear of Being 'a Big Fat Target'
Worried customers are standard fare for Kroll Associates, the security consultants, but the stream of calls was swifter and the callers' voices had an added edge yesterday, with the news that an advertising executive had been killed by the same parcel bomber who has baffled investigators for 16 years.
"There's a good bit of anxiety, understandably," said Robert J. McGuire, the president of Kroll.
"We've been getting quite a lot of calls today."


Coleman &amp; Co. Rock O'Neal and the Magic
It was one of those defining moves, a moment of near physical perfection.
Derrick Coleman drove down the left side, switching the ball from his right to left hand as he went around 7-foot-1-inch Shaquille O'Neal.
He deftly moved around the Orlando center and calmly finger-rolled a layup in with 27 seconds left in the first half.


Fight Looms On Extending Cortines's Job
With the Board of Education saying it wants to reappoint Schools Chancellor Ramon C. Cortines, the Giuliani administration has begun a campaign intended to make the Chancellor so uncomfortable that he withdraws his name from consideration, mayoral advisers say.
In the rotunda of City Hall yesterday, Deputy Mayor Ninfa Segarra, who is also a board member, and Herman Badillo, who monitors school finances for the Mayor, accused Mr.
Cortines of refusing to give them information on how the Board of Education spent money in its last fiscal year.
They threatened to subpoena the documents and suggested the public be wary of a Chancellor who would not disclose spending.


Following Ailey By Being Individuals
During his lifetime, Alvin Ailey always tried to make his company a troupe of distinct individuals.
Judith Jamison, who has directed the Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater for the last five years, obviously shares his desire.
The group's performance on Thursday night at City Center honored Ailey's vision.
His esthetic philosophy and directorial policies were the very point of Ms.
Jamison's "Hymn," a choreographic tribute to Ailey that combined dancing, acting and music.
It began with tape-recorded reminiscences by Ailey himself.
Then the actress and writer Anna Deavere Smith appeared onstage and recited a text she had written based upon dancers' comments about Ailey and the company.
As she characterized these performers in words, they danced vividly to taped music by Robert Ruggieri.


Lillian Poses, 86, New Deal Lawyer And Philanthropist
Lillian Louise Poses, a lawyer who worked on the New Deal and was long active in public life, died on Sunday in her apartment on the Upper East Side of Manhattan.
She was 86.
The cause was complications from a stroke, said her daughter, Barbara Poses Kafka.


Variables, Scenarios, Playoffs
The Giants are only one variable in the complicated National Football League playoff equation, but their most realistic chance of qualifying for the post-season is if they win their final two games, at Philadelphia next Sunday and Dallas on Christmas Eve.
There are many scenarios, but the most important ones involve the National Conference Central Division.
According to the Giants, if the team wins both its remaining games, there are 32 possible outcomes of games involving Green Bay, Detroit, and Chicago.
The Giants would qualify for the playoffs with 29 of the 32 outcomes (91 percent).


Congress's Out-of-Work Try to Keep Smiling
Bathed in light from the brushed gold chandelier of the spacious Ways and Means Committee hearing room, Eugene Pugliese tried to keep a sense of humor as he filled out applications for collecting unemployment in the temporary office of the District of Columbia's employment service.
"They ask you the name of your dependents, and I put down my daughters who are 7 and 9," said Mr.
Pugliese, who has been a lawyer on the House Judiciary Committee for 15 years.
"And then they ask you if they're physically able to work. I mean, work what? A paper route?"


F.B.I. Agent Kills Himself in Public Plaza
A Federal Bureau of Investigation agent fatally shot himself in the head on a public promenade in lower Manhattan yesterday afternoon, the F.B.I. said.
The agent, David A. Priarone, 45, an 11-year veteran of the agency, was found lying face down, fully clothed in a suit, tie and raincoat, with his 9-millimeter automatic handgun at his side.


Some Time Later, a Sequel to 'Time and Again'
It's about time.
That statement says a lot about Jack Finney's new novel.


Paterno Wins Award
Penn State Coach JOE PATERNO was selected yesterday by the Maxwell Football Club as its 1994 college coach of the year.
Paterno received 518 of 1,171 votes, said DICK VERMEIL, the Maxwell Club's selection chairman.
Nebraska's TOM OSBORNE was second with 216 votes. (AP)


G.O.P. Critic Of Korea Pact Eases Stance
A leading Senate critic of the nuclear agreement between the United States and North Korea softened his tone today and predicted that the new Republican-controlled Congress would not follow through on recent threats to overturn the accord.
"As far as any efforts to scuttle that agreement, I don't anticipate any," Senator Frank Murkowski said at a news conference here, after he and Senator Paul Simon made a rare visit by high-level American officials to North Korea.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.50
8.50
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
4.75
4.75
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
5.56
5.48
2.96
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.76
5.64
3.03
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
6.32
6.16
3.23
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.86
7.79
5.75
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.92
7.86
6.23
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.77
8.75
7.27
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
7.06
7.04
5.53
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


A History of Antagonism
The Chechens, now in revolt against Russian rule, are one of the more than 50 ethnic groups in Caucasia, which hugs the eastern shore of the Black Sea and is one of the historical links between Europe and Asia.
A Muslim people of the northern Caucasus, the 1.3 million Chechens are dark-haired and tawny skinned, often with lush mustaches.
Older men wear beards and tall rounded hats of karakul, or Persian lamb.
Women in the male-dominated society favor long dresses and colorful shawls over their hair.


Serb Pounding of Bihac Wounds 4 U.N. Peacekeepers
Nationalist Serb fighters mounted a mortar and rocket attack today on a heavily crowded neighborhood of Bihac, in northern Bosnia, and wounded four Bangladeshi peacekeepers with missiles that set fire to their armored vehicle, United Nations officials said.
The attacks amounted to a serious affront to the United Nations in Bihac, where nationalist Serbs have ignored Security Council resolutions declaring it a "safe area."


Observer; Let's Go Shopping
Don't despair if your shopping list is infested with friends who care about politics.
Just check out the Newt &amp; Bill catalogue.
What Harry and David are to pear fanciers, what J. Peterman is to people who gorge on haberdashery satire, what Bean and Bauer are to people crazy for the great slushy outdoors -- that's what Newt &amp; Bill are to the political types on your gift list.


French Successfully Bluff Allies on Bosnia
More than signaling a dramatic change in policy, France's recent threat to withdraw its troops from the United Nations peacekeeping force in Bosnia and Herzegovina was widely viewed here as a maneuver aimed at focusing attention on the new crisis there and mobilizing support for a fresh peace effort.
Political experts said that, by seeking in meetings in Washington today to dispel any notion that France wants to pull out of Bosnia, the French Defense Minister, Francois Leotard, was therefore reaffirming this country's long-term commitment to maintaining a peacekeeping mission there.


Corrections
An obituary on Dec. 10 about Maurice Auslander, a mathematics professor at Brandeis University, omitted two survivors.
Mr.
Auslander, who died on Nov. 18, is also survived by his wife, Bernice, of Newton Centre, Mass., and a brother, Louis Auslander, of Pelham Manor, N.Y.


Jets Plan to Go With the Status Quo
Despite the howling of fans and the crackling noises over the call-in airwaves beseeching the Jets to do something -- anything -- the club will ride out the season with no coaching or front-office changes.
If the Jets are poised to make any significant alterations after this disappointing season, their president, Steve Gutman, declined to say so today.


TRANSACTIONS
Auto Racing  DICK SIMON RACING -- Named Hiro Matsushita and Eliseo Salazar 1995 PPG Indycar World Series drivers and David La Croix and Diego Guzman Indy Lights drivers.


New York Police Want an Independent Corruption Monitor
To the Editor:
In the wake of the Mollen commission's findings, how can Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani object to the New York City Council's bill to create an independent agency to monitor police anticorruption efforts, as you report in a news article of Dec. 12?


N.H.L. Yet to Arrive At Point of No Return
On Day 73 of their labor lockout, the owners of National Hockey League teams drew a line in the smoke.
Instead of setting a so-called drop-dead date for canceling their season if they don't get a new collective bargaining agreement with the Players Association, the league was vague -- sort of suggesting a point of no return, probably sometime this month.
After a board of governors meeting in Manhattan, Commissioner Gary Bettman announced that the already-damaged season would be scrapped if the teams can't play a 50-game schedule followed by four full rounds of playoffs that end by July 1.


CLASSICAL MUSIC
Modern Novelties Balanced By More Traditional Fare  Igor Kipnis, harpsichordist Miller Theater
Igor Kipnis is a harpsichordist who does not confine himself to music of the deep past.
Fully half of his program on Thursday night came from the 20th century: Schnittke's "Drei Fragmente," Castelnuovo-Tedesco's "English Suite" and a "Suite de Clavecin" by the utterly obscure Dutch composer Alexander Nicolas Voormolen.
He balanced these novelties with more familiar fare from Handel (Suite in D minor), Bach (four preludes and fugues from Book I of the "Well-Tempered Clavier") and Domenico Scarlatti (seven sonatas).


CD-ROM Review; CD-ROM's to Get Better and Faster But Even So They May Not Survive
ALTHOUGH it has been around for more than a decade, CD-ROM technology has only recently become a standard component in new personal computers.
And wouldn't you know it, today's technology is already well past its prime just as it is becoming widespread.
That does not mean that the CD-ROM is nearing the end of its useful life, but rather that new generations of devices are emerging that will gradually, but inevitably, replace it.
The next generation of CD-ROM players and disks will begin showing up early next year, and some really dazzling advances are just two to three years away, analysts say.


In the 60's, We Learned Lessons for Life
To the Editor:
I sensed in the tone of your Dec. 4 Week in Review article on Jerry Rubin ("Born to Be Wild. Scratch That. Born to Be Mild.") another gleeful attempt on the part of the 1960's-bashers to drive a nail into the coffin of the 60's, and I want to set the record straight.
We do not all work for corporate America.


RESULTS PLUS
N.B.A.
Suns Stop Warriors  Charles Barkley had 18 points, 9 rebounds and 7 assists last night, helping the Phoenix Suns to improve to 8-0 at home with a 90-84 victory over the Golden State Warriors.
Dan Majerle scored 15 points and Danny Manning had 14 off the bench for Phoenix, which led from the first basket and took a 70-57 lead into the fourth quarter. (AP)


METRO DIGEST
BOMBING IN NEW JERSEY: COAST-TO-COAST CONNECTIONS
It did not take long for Federal agents to conclude that the mail bomb that killed an advertising executive over the weekend was sent by the shadowy figure who had unleashed 14 similar attacks.
The bomb was designed like the others.
And, the agents disclosed, the information still legible on the shredded package was also chillingly familiar.
A1.
Members of a special task force are pursuing an attacker they have never seen, yet they talk as if he is out there watching them.
B8.


A Big Celebration of Bergman
Seven New York City institutions will honor the Swedish film director Ingmar Bergman next spring and summer with a festival that is to include more than 100 screenings, live performances, lectures and symposiums devoted to his life and work.
The festival is to run from May through September, it was announced yesterday.
Mr.
Bergman's films will be shown in a retrospective organized by the Film Society of Lincoln Center that is to run from May 5 to June 15.
Channel 13 will show many of the films in a two-day marathon: the first day is to be June 17; the second has not yet been scheduled.
Mr.
Bergman's work for television, including complete versions of "Scenes from a Marriage" and "Face to Face," are to be featured at the Museum of Television and Radio from May 5 to July 2.
From June 9-29, the Museum of Modern Art is to present a retrospective devoted to the Swedish director Alf Sjoberg, an important influence on Mr.
Bergman's stage and film work.


Enter a Daring New Sugarplum
Miranda Weese's dancing in two recently acquired lead roles was a highlight of the New York City Ballet's weekend performances of "The Nutcracker" at the New York State Theater.
On Saturday night, she made her debut as the Sugarplum Fairy, partnered by an elegant Philip Neal.
On Sunday afternoon, she danced for the second time as Dewdrop, in a cast led by Zippora Karz and Nilas Martins.
She was dazzling in both roles.
Ms.
Weese, who is 19 and has just been promoted to soloist rank, clearly has no problem with technique.
She sailed through the demands of the two tricky roles not only with aplomb but also with daring.
Her triumphant air as Sugarplum was understandable but robbed the role of its crucial warmth.
Her Dewdrop had a softer, more compelling edge to it, in addition to some breathtaking musical phrasing.
The pulled-up stretch and openness of her torso gave her dancing an even lighter, sharper look.


His Friends Are Asking: Why Thomas Mosser?
Co-workers, competitors and friends of Thomas J. Mosser spent yesterday puzzling over his life, and the few details of his death, wondering what might have made him the target of a mail bomb.
"We're all perplexed," said Kathy Hyett, a senior vice president for marketing at the Hill &amp; Knowlton public relations agency in New York, who worked with Mr.
Mosser at the Burson-Marsteller public relations agency from 1983 to 1991.
"Why? Why?"


Stuart A. Roosa, 61, Astronaut Who Flew 3d Mission to Moon
Stuart A. Roosa, an astronaut who flew on the third lunar landing mission in 1971, died yesterday at Fairfax Hospital in Falls Church, Va., where he was visiting family members.
He was 61 and lived in Sessums, Miss.
The cause was complications from pancreatitis, the National Aeronautics and Space Administration said.


Monarch Casino
Shares of Monarch Casino and Resort, a casino and hotel operator in Reno, fell $1.75, to $5.75, in Nasdaq trading yesterday.
The company failed to get a gaming license for a riverboat in Gary, Ind.


Players Shrug And Dismiss The Owners' Latest Plan
While members of the owners' negotiating committee roamed the hotel corridors promoting their new tax proposal today, union officials worked with their economists, studied the ramifications of the figures they produced and emerged with a different view.
"There is no significant difference in their proposal," Donald Fehr, the players' labor leader, said on the first day of the fifth month of the baseball strike.
"It varies from their previous proposal in a very small degree. It still serves as a cap. They took all the things we thought would make the tax palatable and eliminated every single one of them."


National Gypsum Spurns a Bid
The National Gypsum Company turned down a takeover offer from a group led by its nonexecutive chairman yesterday, saying the $940 million bid, worth $43.50 a share, was too low.
The response from National Gypsum, the nation's second-largest maker of gypsum-coated wallboard, which is used mainly in houses, came less than a month after C. D. Spangler Jr., the North Carolina investor who is also the company's largest shareholder, made his offer.


Corrections
An article in the Styles pages on Sunday about the flea market on Avenue C in the East Village misstated a customer's given name.
He was Pablo Hoffman, not Pedro.
A picture with the article, showing the market and a seller, Dimitri Joseph, carried an erroneous credit.
The photographer was Andrea Mohin, not Bill Cunningham.


Crack Means Power, and Death, to Soldiers in Street Wars
The three teen-agers slumping in their chairs, legs stretched out to show off their unscuffed Nikes and Filas, had seen people get shot, shot at people themselves, lost friends to shootings, run from the police, been hit by the police and served time in juvenile detention.
After pleading guilty to various assault and drug charges, they were in a rehabilitation center, where they talked about one of the things that got them into all of this: crack.


Local Investors Demand Some Funds Back
Local governments that put money into the loss-plagued investment pool of Orange County, Calif., sought the return today of at least some of their funds to meet continuing expenses, with the Orange County Water District asking for $5.8 million rather than the $34 million it had requested in court on Friday.
The demands have become so urgent, according to one county official who spoke on condition he not be identified, that the county might announce this week plans to liquidate the less than $9 billion that remains in the pool.
At least a portion of the proceeds would be distributed to the local government units that have funds frozen in the pool.


INSIDE
Pressure on Cortines
Mayor Giuliani wants to make the Schools Chancellor so uncomfortable that he will not seek reappointment, mayoral aides say.
Page B1.
Novel Bypass Surgery
A dose of new genes may prompt a blocked artery to grow its own bypass, researchers in Massachusetts say.
Science Times, page C1.
Railroad Feels Squeezed
Hurt by airline fare wars, accidents and rising costs, Amtrak is considering cuts in service, including trims on the Northeast corridor.
Page A27.


Chess
The Polugayevsky Tournament in Buenos Aires in October can be taken as a benchmark of Judit Polgar's recent progress and a hint of things that may come.
The 18-year-old Hungarian grandmaster made an even score in this elite competition in which almost every player was considered a world championship aspirant.
She tied for third place with Vasily Ivanchuk of Ukraine, ahead of Gata Kamsky of the United States, Anatoly Karpov of Russia, the former world champion, and Aleksei Shirov of Latvia.
Only Valery Salov of Russia and Viswanathan Anand of India exceeded her achievement.
If she can maintain this level of performance, she will also have to be regarded as world title material.


Boston Chicken Discusses Account
Boston Chicken Inc. said yesterday that it was "informally talking" to other agencies on its account, which has been handled by Bayer Bess Vanderwarker in Chicago since November 1992.
Though billings were not disclosed, trade publications estimated them at $30 million.


Jets Are Not Flatliners, Yet
Yes, the Jets can make the playoffs with an 8-8 record -- but they need a lot of other teams to fall apart.
Essentially, the first ingredient would be for the Jets to finish second behind Miami in the American Conference East Division.
If the Jets wound up in a three-way tie for second with the Patriots and the Bills, the Jets would beat those teams out based on a better head-to-head-to-head record among the three.


CLASSICAL MUSIC
When the Star Is a Lion Surrounded by the Exotic Ensemble for Early Music Cathedral of St.
John the Divine
Noah Greenberg's path-breaking production of "The Play of Daniel" with the New York Pro Musica Antiqua, in the 1950's and 60's, had a lovable touch of the circus about it.
But it seems positively austere in retrospect, alongside Frederick Renz's new staging of his 1982 production "Daniel and the Lions," presented on Friday evening by the Ensemble for Early Music.


Q&amp;A
Pink Armadillos
Q.  What is a pichiciego?
A.
The pichiciego (pee-chee-see-AY-go) is a small armadillo.
Pichi is a native name for armadillos in Argentina.
Ciego is Spanish for blind, and refers to its dim view of the world through small, armor-hooded eyes that may be entirely sightless.


Corrections
An article on Nov. 27 about preparations for Thanksgiving and Hanukkah overstated the rarity of the holidays' occurring so close together.
Since 1896, there have been 10 instances when the two holidays came as close together as they did this year; in 9 of those, Hanukkah overlapped the Thanksgiving weekend.


Next Week: Fermat's Theorem
Never in the history of the National Football League has the playoff picture been so muddy so late.
A week ago, 25 of the 28 teams remained in the playoff picture.
Only the Washington Redskins, the Cincinnati Bengals and the Houston Oilers had been eliminated.


CLASSICAL MUSIC
An Afternoon's Romp Through the 'Brandenburgs'  Chamber Music Society of Lincoln Center Alice Tully Hall
Bach's "Brandenburg" Concertos straddle the chamber and orchestra repertories in an interesting way.
The fabulous interplay in these works is best heard when the concertos are played as chamber music, with one player to a part.
Yet because the scoring varies from work to work (the set was a job application and Bach was eager to show his facility with different kinds of ensembles) a small orchestra is required to play all six.


CD-ROM Review; Disks for PC: From Ameslan To 3 Simpsons
There is no reason to suspect that multimedia titles will have a higher success rate than their counterparts in arts, letters and entertainment.
Like movies and pay television, CD-ROM software cannot easily be looked at before it is purchased.
Since it is typically quite expensive, it should be bought with an unconditional money-back guarantee.
Still, interesting and useful multimedia works are increasingly available, and some of them are reviewed here.
Unless otherwise noted, they run only on Windows.


U.S. Embargo of Cuba Defies All Reason
To the Editor:
How ironic that while you report on Vietnamese-Americans who are returning to open businesses in Vietnam (front page, Dec. 5), you also write about the bleak prospects for lifting of the United States embargo on Cuba (news article, Dec. 5).


CD-ROM Review; The CD-ROM in Transition: A Medium in Search of Its Message
THE movie starts, and you have the leading role.
As each scene unfolds, you are asked to make choices, and your decisions influence what happens on the screen.
Or:
As you read a biographical entry in an encyclopedia, you wonder what a Bach cantata actually sounds like.
Two clicks of the mouse later, a choral fugue fills the room.
Or:


CD-ROM Review; The Hardware Choices: On PC's, CD's Can Be a Pain
ON Apple Macintosh computers, installing CD-ROM hardware and software is not quite as simple as connecting an audio compact disk player or playing a music CD, but it comes close.
On other machines, the process can be a pain.
The simplest way to get multimedia hardware for DOS and Windows is to buy a computer conforming to the Multimedia PC Level 2 standard (MPC2), which demands, at a minimum, a 486 SX/25 microprocessor, a double-speed CD-ROM drive and a 16-bit sound card.
Another way, if you have a sufficiently powerful machine, is to buy an MPC2 upgrade kit ($200 and up): sound card, CD-ROM drive and, often, free programs and cheesy speakers.


CLASSICAL MUSIC
Verdi on an Intimate Scale With an Amateur Cast  'La Traviata' Amato Opera
For the opera fan who dwells mainly in the uptown houses, the principal draw of the Amato Opera may be its occasional explorations in unusual repertory.
This year the company is devoting itself to familiar works, but the charms of hearing them in an intimate theater are not to be overlooked.


T.V.A. Plans to Stop Work On 3 Partly Built Reactors
The Tennessee Valley Authority said yesterday that it would not finish three partly built nuclear reactors and that it might close a completed plant.
The T.V.A., an independent Federal corporate agency, once had the most ambitious nuclear program in the country, and had ordered 17 reactors.
Now it has only one plant under construction, the last one being built in the United States.
Of the five plants the agency built, only three are operable.


Corrections
An article on Saturday about the resignation of Surgeon General Joycelyn Elders reported her position on the legalization of drugs incorrectly in some editions.
Dr.
Elders has spoken in favor of studying legalization; she has not advocated legalization.


Ant and Its Fungus Are Ancient Cohabitants
THEY are tiny mandibled versions of Shiva, the Hindu god of devastation and restoration.
In a mere three days, they can strip away every last trembling leaf, every vestige of chlorophyll from a large grove of trees.
A herd of elephants or a blazing inferno could hardly do more damage to the face of a forest.
Yet once they take their herbaceous plunder underground, the pillagers become gentle farmers, using the leafy matter to cultivate vast gardens of blooming fungi.
They nourish the fungus, and the fungus in turn feeds their hungry multitudes.
And so the famed leaf-cutting ants act out their high drama of destruction and renewal, defoliating trees, bushes, vines, everything in their path -- and from the wreckage creating a subterranean Eden, a myrmecian paradise.


Jury Indicts Mother of Drowned Boys


Federalism Gone Wild
As pressure increases to shrink government at all levels and make it do more with less, there is little mention of one of our most beleaguered institutions: the state courts.
Last week, a panel of Federal judges released a draft report that addresses problems facing Federal courts.
While these problems are severe -- at a time of rising caseloads and falling resources -- it is only fair to consider the panel's recommendations in light of the burdens on the state courts.
Overwhelmingly, the nation's legal battles take place in state, not Federal, courts.
States handle more than 97 percent of all litigation, including criminal, housing and family-related cases, which tend to affect people most directly.
It is no wonder that this year's front-page courtroom dramas -- the trials of Heidi Fleiss, the Menendez brothers and O. J. Simpson -- have been in state courts.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; He is everywhere in ads for Tanqueray. But Ridgely Harrison Jr. is 'just a piece of art.'
MR.
JENKINS lives, sort of.
And he's bringing new life to a dominant but slow-growing brand name.
Mr.
Jenkins is the martini-swigging boulevardier in those eye-catching ads for Tanqueray gin, which began running in large cities last summer and nationwide in October in a $27 million campaign.
Since then, the Schieffelin &amp; Somerset Company, the New York company that imports Tanqueray, says sales this year are likely to rise more than 15 percent, to 1.1 million cases.


Yeltsin Appeals for Support on Invasion of Rebel Area
President Boris N. Yeltsin appealed today for political unity and parliamentary support for his invasion of the secessionist Chechnya republic.
The Russian troops who invaded over the weekend have stopped 15 miles outside Grozny, the capital, after minor clashes.


Consolidation Planned by 3M
The Minnesota Mining and Manufacturing Company said yesterday that it planned to consolidate most of its worldwide corporate and consumer advertising, now handled by 25 agencies.
Billings were not disclosed, but Advertising Age estimated them at more than $40 million.
Stephanie Haack, a company spokeswoman in St.
Paul, confirmed reports of the planned consolidation this week in Advertising Age and Adweek.
The consolidation is intended to give the diversified company "a more consistent image globally," she said.


House Clerk Makes History
A Republican Party official was selected today as clerk of the House, the first time in the chamber's 205-year history that a woman was chosen for that post.
The woman, Robin Hewlett Carle, 39, formerly of Twin Falls, Idaho, is political director of the Republican National Committee.
Previously, she was chief of staff to Louis W. Sullivan, the Secretary of Health and Human Services in the Bush Administration.
Her selection as clerk by House Republicans will be ratified when Congress convenes in January.


Defense in Carjacking Trial Brings Case Against a Witness
The jury in the trial of Edward L. Summers on carjacking and murder charges turned its attention today to a trial within a trial, as lawyers and witnesses argued over the guilt or innocence of a Bronx barber named Deno Lloyd.
Last week, Mr.
Summers, a 23-year-old premedical student from the Bronx, identified Mr.
Lloyd as the drug dealer who, he says, commandeered a Jeep at the Nanuet Mall last Jan. 3 and shot its two occupants in the head, killing one.
Mr.
Lloyd, though, has denied the accusation and testified he was working that day at Tribesman Master Barbers, a shop in the Williamsbridge section of the Bronx.


Discordant and Brittle, Tinged With the Eerie
Two veteran East Coast noise rockers re-examined their roots on Saturday night at Tramps.
The Jon Spencer Blues Explosion, led by the former Pussy Galore frontman Jon Spencer, and Come, led by the former Live Skull singer Thalia Zedek, made music that combined 1950's and 60's rock with only a touch of dissonance.
Where Pussy Galore was confrontational and alienating, the Jon Spencer Blues Explosion was engaging and exhausting.
Mr.
Spencer, a charismatic vocalist and guitarist, shook and shimmied onstage like a 1950's sock-hop singer gone bad, howling Big Bopper-inspired exclamations and entreaties into the microphone.
The band, which also included Russell Simins on drums and Judah Bauer on guitar and harmonica, played revved-up jams rooted in the lewd rockabilly of the garage groups of the 1950's.


Frosting Recipe: To Water, Add Air (Chilled); Mix Well


History Hung Over: Post-Soviet Aches And Absurdities
Tony Kushner's "Slavs!" does not lack for deaf bureaucrats, dumb politicians and blind party apparatchiks offering their theories on the downfall of the Soviet state and the collapse of the great socialist dream.
But the most eloquent testimony in this curious, roundabout play, which opened last night at the New York Theater Workshop, is provided by an 8-year-old girl (Mischa Barton), who sits, prim and patient, on a chair no bigger than she and says nothing at all.
She is a mute, one of the "yellow children" in a medical facility in Talmenka, Siberia, whose parents were recklessly exposed to nuclear radiation.
She looks as if she belongs in a Hans Christian Andersen storybook, but a doctor describes her with a kind of helpless forthrightness, as "a nuclear mutant" and admits there's little to be done about her plight.


Goma Journal; Next Door to Rwanda, Pillaged City Picks Itself Up
A decade ago this was an idyllic resort town of charming whitewashed villas lining the shores of Lake Kivu in eastern Zaire.
Tourists came to see the mountain gorillas, hike in the tropical forests and visit the Mountains of the Moon, an area of extinct and active volcanoes.
Though in the last few years the place looked increasingly run-down, Goma thrived on the export of vegetables, beef, coffee, smuggled gold and stolen cars.


Kenneth Rush, U.S. Diplomat, Is Dead at 84
Kenneth Rush, who as a United States Ambassador helped negotiate the ground-breaking four-power agreement in 1971 that ended the post-war crises over Berlin, died on Sunday at his home in Delray Beach, Fla.
He was 84.
A son said he had been under treatment for heart and blood ailments.


Americans Are Raising Some Intercontinental Eyebrows
Little more than a year ago, Tommy Moe finished third in a super-giant slalom here in the hometown of Jean Claude Killy.
It was Moe's first time on the podium in the Super-G and cause for whoops, hollers and an evening of celebration.
On Sunday, in the neighboring resort of Tignes, Moe competed in his first race of the 1994-95 World Cup season.
This time he finished second in a Super-G, but there were no whoops and nothing that qualified as a genuine holler -- only a raised fist and a grin that was nine parts satisfaction and one part relief.


Note to Readers
The Op-Ed page welcomes unsolicited manuscripts.
Because of the volume of submissions, however, we regret that we cannot acknowledge an article or return it unless it is accompanied by a self-addressed, stamped envelope.
If manuscripts are accepted for publication, authors will be notified within two weeks.


Prince Albert Seeking Lifetime Ban in Drug Violations
Monaco's Prince Albert, the only athlete on the 101-member International Olympic Committee, called today for a lifetime ban for athletes who test positive for banned substances.
The Prince also admonished the I.O.C. over its efforts at doping control, saying, "We don't need so many parties; we should have more drug tests."


Racial Redistricting Gives Minorities a Voice; At-Large Voting
To the Editor:
On several occasions, most recently in the one concerning minority representation in a Maryland county (Law page, Dec. 2), the courts -- and the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People -- have seemed to favor gerrymandering over at-large voting to achieve proportional representation of minorities in local legislatures.
I believe this is very bad policy.


A Lull in the Fighting in a Secessionist Republic in Russia


Dr. Elders's Candor
To the Editor:
I will miss Surgeon General Joycelyn Elders, who was forced to resign (front page, Dec. 10).
I will miss her wisdom and courage.
Dr.
Elders spoke out about legalizing drugs.
Where needle exchange programs exist, AIDS cases have dropped substantially, an indicator of what legalization might accomplish.


Corrections
A front-page picture caption yesterday with an article about the Russian Army offensive against secessionists misidentified the vehicles shown.
They were self-propelled antiaircraft guns, not armored personnel carriers.


I.B.M. Deals Blow to a Rival As It Suspends Pentium Sales
Setting off a dispute between industry giants, the International Business Machines Corporation yesterday took the highly unusual step of suspending sales of all its personal computers using the Intel Corporation's most powerful chip because of a flaw in the device.
Although the problem with Intel's chip, known as the Pentium, has been widely publicized for more than a month, I.B.M. said it had decided to halt shipments at the height of the busiest season for personal computer sales after determining that "the risk of error may be significantly higher" for common calculations than Intel has indicated.


Mr. Yeltsin's Chechen Predicament
The tiny Russian breakaway region of Chechnya confronts President Boris Yeltsin and his fellow reformers with a serious internal crisis.
The three-year insurrection cannot be allowed to stand.
Though a negotiated political settlement would be the best outcome, Mr.
Yeltsin is justified in using military force to suppress the rebellion.
Failure to deal decisively with Chechnya's defiance could have two calamitous consequences.
First, it could encourage similar rebellions elsewhere and bring about the collapse of the Russian Federation.
Second, in strictly political terms, it would surely arouse a ferocious backlash among right-wing nationalists, in turn destroying the Yeltsin Government.


Mexico's Leftists in Turmoil as New President Holds Out a Hand
The badly bruised Mexican left, still trying to recover from a drubbing in the last national elections, faces a new crisis of confidence over how to deal with a Government that seems intent on keeping its pledge to work with the opposition.
For the first time in modern Mexican history, opposition legislators have found themselves invited to breakfast and lunch with the President.
They have been offered positions heading congressional committees and important sections of the Mexico City municipal government.
In Chiapas State, the new Government has appointed opposition politicians to important Cabinet positions.


Corrections
An article on Dec. 4 about rivalry among universities for research laboratories referred imprecisely to Yale's Arbovirus Research Unit.
According to information supplied by the Yale provost yesterday, the unit itself is not moving to the University of Texas medical school in Galveston; its two chief researchers and samples of all the viruses are moving to a new lab there.
But Yale plans to keep its lab open.


U.S. Glass Makers in Tokyo Accord
The Clinton Administration said today that it had finally reached an agreement with Tokyo to assure American companies access to Japan's flat-glass market, long dominated by a cartel and one of the most closed industries in Japan.
Even Japan's own Fair Trade Commission has denounced the Japanese glass industry, a constant source of friction over several years of trade negotiations, as an example of a distribution system that locks out foreign competition and keeps prices artificially high.
Three Japanese makers account for 95 percent of the market -- and one company, Asahi Glass, controls about half of all sales.


Supreme Court Roundup; Justices Reject Decades-Old Limit on Veterans' Health Claims
The Supreme Court ruled today that Congress meant what it said 70 years ago in a law that entitled veterans to compensation for injuries resulting from Veterans Administration medical treatment, although for nearly as long, the agency has insisted that compensation was due only if the injury resulted from medical negligence.
The unanimous decision upheld a 1993 Federal appeals court ruling that the Clinton Administration had warned would cost the Government $1 billion in the next five years in claims by veterans whose treatment was not negligent but nonetheless had a poor outcome.


Smarting From Defeat, Democrats Meet and Decide Their Message Needs Sharpening
Elected Democratic officials from throughout New York met here today to discuss the future of their battered party, and emerged saying they needed to sharpen the party's message to recover from the drubbing they took in this year's elections.
The meeting, called by Assembly Speaker Sheldon Silver, was an effort to insure that elected officials play a major role in rebuilding a party that has been controlled by Democratic governors for the last 20 years.
With George E. Pataki's defeat of Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo last month, the party finds itself without a designated leader and at least half a million dollars in debt.


Are the Knicks Ready For Woe or Victories?
The Knicks' recent internal problems can become either a rallying point or the beginning of more trouble.
There was no rallying last night as the Knicks were beaten by the Heat, 122-111, at the Garden.
Now they need to regroup during a three-game West Coast trip that begins Thursday in Sacramento, Calif.


Jurors Find Principal Hit Two Students
The principal of an elementary school in Brooklyn was convicted yesterday of criminally endangering the welfare of two students who said he had hit them with a metal object after a teacher reported they had been fighting.
A jury in State Supreme Court in Brooklyn returned the verdict against Harvey Possner, the principal of Public School 154 in Windsor Terrace, in a case that people familiar with the New York City school system called highly unusual.


G.O.P. Senate Bill Would Slash Foreign Aid for Africa
The Senate Republican who is expected to have the most influence over foreign aid called today for slashing aid for Africa and population programs as well as cutting assistance everywhere except to the Middle East and Europe by about 20 percent.
In introducing a foreign aid bill, Senator Mitch McConnell of Kentucky, who is to become chairman of the Subcommittee on Foreign Operations, proposed sweeping changes that would award assistance -- which totals $13.7 billion this year -- to countries based on whether such aid would advance America's security and economic interests.


Making Ends Meet in a Nether World; A Secret Network Helps Salvadorans Survive on Long Island
From the street, the only sign that marks Gloria's cafe is the fragrance of pork-filled tamales and steaming Salvadoran corn tortillas, bulging with cheese.
Yellow Pages listings for the clandestine kitchen in Gloria's house do not exist.
Credit cards are not accepted.
All payments must be in cash.
And woe to the customer who strides up the clean-swept porch without respecting a basic rule of the underground economy -- reservations are a must.


N.F.L. Exacta: 49ers and Cowboys
It is Christmas already in Cleveland.
In Pittsburgh, where the Steelers await the Browns on Sunday in a match for divisional supremacy, their fans sure feel as if this is the 70's and a championship is once again ringing in the air.
They are giddy in New England.
In Detroit, where the Lions await the Minnesota Vikings on Saturday, the National Conference Central Division championship is at stake.
There is hope in December in places like Arizona.
Say what?
There is hope in December in places like Arizona.


Overseer of the Case: Tough and Experienced
There is little, if any, precedent for the battle shaping up among bankrupt Orange County, Calif., the local government units that invested in its loss-plagued fund and a battery of Wall Street brokerage firms.
But that should not prove overwhelming for John E. Ryan, the tough and experienced Federal bankruptcy judge who will oversee the case.
"No one is going to intimidate him," said Ronald Rus, an Irvine, Calif., bankruptcy lawyer whose firm represents some of the more than 180 public entities with investments in Orange County's badly soured investment fund.
"He did two tours of duty in Vietnam," Mr.
Rus said, citing Mr.
Ryan's experience as a former Navy fighter pilot.


On the Broadway Beat, the Famous, the Lost, the Elephants
Eddie Sixpack walks a beat one block long: 46th Street between Seventh and Eighth Avenues, from 6 P.M. to 2 A.M.
Like the marquees above his sidewalks, his job goes dark on Sunday and Monday nights.
Why do theater people call him Eddie Sixpack?


DANCE
Miniatures of Madness, Magic and Mincing  Peter Pucci Plus Dancers Playhouse 91
Peter Pucci specializes in choreographic miniatures.
When every gestural stroke in them is clear and meaningful, these sketches can be very satisfying, as Peter Pucci Plus Dancers demonstrated on Sunday night when the troupe performed at Playhouse 91 as an attraction in the Harkness Dance Project.


No End to Growth; People Are Spending With Abandon And U.S. Goods Are Selling Overseas
The economic recovery, like the Energizer Bunny, just keeps going and going.
In spite of tax increases, sharp rises in interest rates this year and widespread skepticism that Washington will be able to put its fiscal house in order, rapid growth continues unabated.
Unemployment has dropped to its lowest level in four years.
Indeed, as the Federal Reserve's chairman, Alan Greenspan, told Congress last week, "there is very little evidence throughout this economy of any degree of slowdown." Mr.
Greenspan, who only a little more than a year ago was complaining of powerful forces holding back the economy, added that "the 50-mile-an-hour headwinds have disappeared" and that the real worry today is inflation.


Knicks Have It Down to a Science, Weird Science
Pat Riley said before last night's game that he was looking to change the struggling Knicks' chemistry.
Riley's experiment may be dangerous.
Suffering a deflating home loss against a struggling team, the Knicks were beaten by the Miami Heat, 122-111, at Madison Square Garden.
And the Knicks' problems with their rotation and their shooting guards continued.


Dictator, a Councilman Calls Giuliani. Despicable, the Mayor Responds.
The Giuliani administration called yesterday for the City Council to condemn a Republican Councilman from Queens for saying that Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani's leadership style was like that of Mussolini.
Reacting to a story in The New York Post yesterday, Randy M. Mastro, the Mayor's chief of staff, said that the Council should censure Councilman Alfonso C. Stabile, who represents Ozone Park and Howard Beach, Queens.


Yale Accepts Blame for Safety Lapses Linked to Lab Accident
Reeling from a laboratory accident that infected a researcher with the dangerous Sabia virus last August and caused a public health scare, Yale University today released reports from two committees that scathingly criticized the university's handling of biological safety.
In accepting the criticism, Yale officials said at a news conference that they expected to carry out fully the recommendations to tighten safety practices within two months.
Yale will also speed the reorganization of its safety programs.


In Suffolk, Less of a Sanctuary for Salvadorans
Nine years ago, at the height of the civil war in El Salvador, Suffolk County took the bold step of joining a few dozen communities in the United States that voted to protect Central American refugees by barring public officials from reporting them to immigration authorities.
For a staid suburban region far removed from the war and with few Salvadoran residents, it was an unusual move, but one that County Legislator Gregory J. Blass said was the "humane thing to do."


5-Year Deal for DiNardo
Vanderbilt Coach GERRY DiNARDO has signed a five-year contract with Louisiana State and will take four of his assistants with him, The Nashville Banner reported. (AP)


Maximum Sentence in Woman's Strangling
A 35-year-old employment agency executive who was convicted of first-degree manslaughter in the strangulation of his former girlfriend in the Grand Hyatt Hotel in Manhattan last year was sentenced yesterday to a maximum term of eight-and-a-third to 25 years in prison.
Justice Franklin Weissberg of State Supreme Court also urged that the man, Gerald Ardito, serve the full term without chance of parole.
After the woman's death, the judge said, "his conduct was cold, calculating and utterly devoid of remorse."


Discussion on 'Hapgood'
The Lincoln Center Theater is to hold a round-table discussion at 5 P.M. tomorrow at the Mitzi E. Newhouse Theater.
The discussion is to be on art and science suggested by "Hapgood," the Tom Stoppard play about espionage and physics now playing at the Newhouse.
The participants are to be Diane Ackerman, the poet and naturalist; Dr.
Sharon Endow, a molecular geneticist; Andrew Forge, a painter and writer; Dr.
Melissa Franklin, a physicist; Adrian Hall, the artistic director and founder of the Trinity Repertory Company, and Dr.
Ronald Hoffman, the poet and Nobel laureate.
The discussion, open to the public, is first come first served; there are 270 seats available at the Newhouse.


A $3 Billion Gas Deal Is Planned
The Williams Companies said yesterday that it had agreed to buy the Transco Energy Company in a $3 billion transaction, creating the largest supplier of natural gas in North America.
The deal would combine the natural gas pipeline system of Williams, which runs through the West and Midwest, with Transco's system, which runs from the Gulf of Mexico to the Northeast and is a large supplier to the New York City area.


PATTERNS
A Name and a Career
Anyone who contends that Sofia Coppola's becoming a fashion designer is just one more example of celebrity offspring milking a name would hardly get an argument from her.
In fact, she gives a wink and nudge to that contention in the collection's name, Milk.


'Patch' Planned for Pentium
The Intel Corporation said it was working with I.B.M., Compaq and other customers to develop a software "patch," or small program, that could be executed in the computer and used to bypass the faulty area of the Pentium chip.
Intel officials said they expected to have the patch available by the end of the month.
A copy will be posted on the Internet, the global web of computer networks, the company said.
Patches have already begun to appear on Compuserve and other on-line information services.
Typically, the patches work by simply disabling the floating point unit of the Pentium chip.
However, I.B.M. and Intel both contend that they have not yet developed a patch that does not significantly harm the overall performance of the microprocessor.


Tenneco to Sell Chemical Division to Public
Tenneco Inc. said today that it planned to sell its chemicals division in a public offering on the London Stock Exchange early next year.
The division, Albright &amp; Wilson, based in Birmingham, England, is the smallest of Tenneco's six divisions, with $914 million in revenues last year, or about 7 percent of Tenneco's total revenues of $13.2 billion.


Orange County's Long Prosperity Appears Dented but Not Undone
Things are suddenly looking up at the H. W. Wright Hardware Company, a small family-owned enterprise that buys the inventories of companies that go out of business.
"I think this bankruptcy is going to wipe out a lot of small-business men in Orange County -- the people who would supply oil for the county's trucks and toilet paper for the bathrooms," said H. W. Wright, the owner.
"They will be the very last to be paid by the county, and a lot of these are small-business men who can't afford that kind of delay."


BUSINESS DIGEST
Orange County's Bankruptcy  Bankruptcy is unlikely to derail economic growth in Orange County, Calif., even as school districts and county supervisors consider financing problems.
The county's economy remains fundamentally healthy, analysts say.  [ Page A1. ]
The Orange County Water District tried to get back $5.8 million, as local governments sought the return of some of the money they put in the county's investment fund.  [ D7. ] The Federal judge who will oversee the county's bankruptcy has earned a reputation for strictly interpreting the law.  [ D7. ] Companies  I.B.M. halted sales of all personal computers using the Pentium, saying the risk of error in the chip "may be significantly higher" than Intel has indicated to its customers.
Intel accused I.B.M., potentially a big competitor, of overstating the problem.  [ A1. ] Williams will acquire Transco Energy in a $3 billion deal.
Despite higher interest rates and taxes, it has been aided by an easing of concern about jobs and by the resurgence of many economies overseas, increasing demand for U.S. goods.
Economic Analysis.  [ D1. ] The Supreme Court ruled that states may tax the interest earned from repurchase agreements involving Federal securities.  [ D2. ] Internation  An agreement was reached on Japan's flat-glass market, assuring American companies access to the $4.5 billion market.  [ D2. ] Markets  Stocks surged.
The S.&amp; P. 500 index rose 2.50 points.  [ D8. ] The dollar was weaker against most currencies.  [ D17. ] Gasoline prices tumbled after the E.P.A. said it would not enforce a requirement for reformulated gasoline in 29 counties.  [ D17. ] Treasury prices fell.  [ D18. ] Today's Columns  Intel's problems with Pentium may create bargains.
Concerns about a flaw in the chip, which have dragged down Intel's stock price, may be overblown, some analysts say.
Market Place.  [ D8. ] The face that launched a million ads for Tanqueray was a snapshot of a retired chief executive in Palm Beach, Fla., cut out of Town &amp; Country magazine.
Advertising.  [ D21. ]


Bomber Leaves Familiar Trail, Going Nowhere
It did not take long for Federal agents to conclude that the mail bomb that killed an advertising executive over the weekend was sent by the shadowy figure who had unleashed similar attacks 14 times before.
The bomb was designed like the others.
And, the agents disclosed today, the information still legible on the shredded package was also chillingly familiar.
The postmark was San Francisco, long a center of activity for the suspect.
And the return address was San Francisco State University, an indication that the bomber's violent fascination with academia had not ebbed in the 18 months since his handiwork maimed a professor in Connecticut and another in California, senior law-enforcement officials said.


Heart Disease Felled Player
Richard Saunders, the San Francisco State basketball player who collapsed and died after a scrimmage on Nov. 16, was a victim of heart disease, according to an autopsy report.
Dr.
Marie Schafle, the team physician, said yesterday in San Francisco that the autopsy, released on Friday, concluded that Saunders had a case of degenerative cardiomyopathy, an abnormal weakening of a portion of the heart muscle similar to the condition that killed Loyola Marymount's Hank Gathers in 1990.
According to Schafle, the muscle cells of Saunders's heart "degenerated to the point that it could not conduct electrical impulses," and it resulted in the player's collapse last month in the campus gym.


PARIS ENDS THREAT TO DROP ITS ROLE IN BOSNIAN FORCE
One week after Western European proposals to withdraw peacekeeping troops from Bosnia created a diplomatic furor, France reversed course today and said it wanted not only to keep its soldiers in the former Yugoslavia, but also to expand their mission.
"My Government does not wish to see this withdrawal take place," the French Defense Minister, Francois Leotard, told reporters at a Pentagon news conference after a meeting with Defense Secretary William J. Perry.
"It would undermine the credibility of international organizations, namely the United Nations and NATO."


Accounts
*
Swarogem, Wattens, Austria, to Warwick Baker &amp; Fiore, New York, as the first agency to handle the jewelry manufacturer's global integrated communications account.
Billings were estimated at $2 million.
McCabe &amp; Co., New York, continues to handle advertising for Swarogem's parent, Swarofski.


SCIENTIST AT WORK: Leonard Adleman; Hitting the High Spots Of Computer Theory
THERE is nothing to look at in Dr.
Leonard Adleman's office at the University of Southern California, no clue that the office is even occupied.
There are no pictures of his wife or of his three daughters, no cartoons or mementos -- just a computer, two chairs, a desk and a blackboard.
And that is fine with Dr.
Adleman.
For although he is an active faculty member at the university, although he is a devoted husband and father, his is a life of the mind.
It is a life that is nourished by deep philosophical questions and the overarching beauty of mathematics.
It is a life that involves days, weeks, months of pure thought, alone in his equally barren office at his home in Northridge, Calif., 30 miles from the campus.
And it is a life that has led Dr.
Adleman to play a central role in some of the most surprising, and provocative, discoveries in theoretical computer science.


Bonds Drop In Advance of Inflation Data
Prices of Treasury securities fell lower yesterday as investors and traders grew concerned that economic reports this week will suggest that interest rates have not risen high enough to keep inflation from accelerating.
Traders also attributed early weakness in the market to selling prompted by President Clinton's comments on Sunday that he might back a middle-class tax cut.
The bond market fears a tax cut would undermine prices by stimulating the economy and swelling the budget deficit.


Executive Named at Kennedy To Lead Airport in Expansion
The Port Authority yesterday turned to one its most experienced executives to manage Kennedy International Airport, at a time when the airport is undergoing major reconstruction and city officials are advocating turning it over to a private company.
Robert J. Kelly, 52, who began his career with the agency in 1970 as an economic analyst, took over as general manager of the airport's daily operation yesterday, officials said.
He replaces Richard L. Rowe, who retired in June.


Where Screenwriters Can Get a Hearing
Peter Coyote had his own idea for a film.
Over four years, the actor has written nine drafts of a screenplay, "Crimes of Opportunity," with a co-author, Sylvia Peto.
But it was not until the lights dimmed in a narrow cafe downtown last Tuesday night that human voice met written word, stirring imagination to life.
It was then that Mr.
Coyote heard 14 actors speaking the lines and stage directions of his work at one of the script-reading sessions held weekly at the Nuyorican Poets Cafe.
As the reading went on, Mr.
Coyote could envision the male lead in his script, an ex-convict who vies for the attention of a confessional talk show host, as an updated early Brando, thanks to the raspy efforts of Jared Harris to hide his British accent.
He could consider questions from an audience of friends and industry professionals, who asked about the screenplay's structure and techniques, like the use of black-and-white flashbacks to convey different versions of a crucial moment.


A Task Force Comes Alive Once More
When the bomber struck twice, within days, last year, the agents and detectives and inspectors were summoned together with great urgency in a task force called Unabom.
But as the days dragged on and the leads ran dry, just as they had repeatedly over the years, some investigators who once spent full time pursuing leads in the case were reassigned, one after another, to other cases.
Until Saturday, when the bomber struck again.


P's in a Pod: Philadelphia and Playoffs
Has Dan Reeves been thinking about the 'P' word?
"We're talking about the 'P' word this week," the Giants coach said today.
"Philadelphia."


CHRONICLE
Spousal abuse charges against the actor MICKEY ROURKE were dismissed yesterday because his estranged wife, CARRE OTIS, a model and actress, refused to testify, The Associated Press reported.
Ms.
Otis had charged that Mr.
Rourke, who is also a boxer, slapped her, knocked her down and kicked her at a Hollywood office on July 18.
He could have received a year in jail.


Who's to Determine Price for Fame?
It never seemed right to David Cone, this idea that just because one may be an incredibly successful ballplayer, you get to walk into a room, see kids lining up to spend their allowance, sign your name and hours later collect a fistful of dollars.
"It's hard to quantify what a piece of cardboard is worth," Cone, a pitcher for the Kansas City Royals, said.
"There's a collector talking about uprooting Mickey Mantle's house and moving it somewhere for a museum. I guess that's how deep the memory goes. I guess that's what its about, trying to preserve those memories."


Henke and Jackson Sign With Cardinals
The St.
Louis Cardinals moved yesterday to strengthen one of the worst pitching staffs in the National League, signing the free agents DANNY JACKSON and TOM HENKE.
Jackson, 32, signed a three-year deal worth between $10.5 million and $11 million.
Henke, 36, signed a one-year contract for $1 million plus a signing bonus to be the Cardinals' closer.
The Cardinals had a 5.14 earned run average last season, ahead of only league-worst Colorado.
The team previously changed pitching coaches, replacing JOE COLEMAN with MARK RIGGINS and BOB GIBSON.


Yao Yilin, A Hard-Liner, Is Dead at 77
Yao Yilin, a conservative central planner who served as a member of the Communist Party's Politburo from 1985 to 1992, died on Sunday.
He was 77.
A member of the hard-line faction often opposed to the scale and pace of reform in the 1980's, Mr.
Yao was among the five members of the Standing Committee of the Politburo that sanctioned the military crackdown on the Tiananmen Square uprising of 1989.


At Jaguar, Spit and Polish for the Balance Sheet
They were madly painting and polishing at the Jaguar Cars plant here one recent day, making the place sparkle for a visit from a loyal customer, Queen Elizabeth II.
But the changes at Jaguar of late have been more than cosmetic.
After nearly five years in which it has posted nothing but operating losses -- and made its parent company, the Ford Motor Company, look foolish for having paid $2.5 billion to acquire it in 1989 -- Jaguar appears on track to reap something more than a visit from the Queen: a profit.


Simpson Lawyers Are Ready To Cancel Hearing on DNA
Facing mounting costs, a judge giving them few breaks and a client anxious to pick up the pace, lawyers for O. J. Simpson are expected to stipulate on Tuesday that the results of DNA tests can be admitted into evidence at Mr.
Simpson's murder trial.
But it was unclear just how much the defense was willing to concede on the issue of the reliability of DNA evidence, and whether the prosecution and the judge would accept the offer.
Lawyers on both sides have been girding for a prolonged and excruciatingly technical wrangle over the general merits of DNA evidence, set to begin after New Year's Day and lasting six weeks or more.
A decision by the defense to forgo those proceedings and instead challenge before the jury the significance of particular findings in Mr.
Simpson's case could streamline the proceedings significantly, allowing trial testimony to begin after Jan. 1.


Clinton Ponders a Tax Cut Of as Much as $40 Billion
President Clinton is reviewing proposals for a middle-class tax cut in the range of $30 billion to $40 billion over five years that could be narrowly drawn to apply to families in a limited income range -- but he is still debating how to pay for it, aides said today.
Among other ideas under serious review is eliminating or restructuring the Department of Energy, giving its authority over oil and gas distribution to the Commerce or Interior Departments and its nuclear weapons research functions to the Defense Department, a prospect that has drawn sharp protests from science and environmental groups.


Entitlement Bungling
The bipartisan commission on entitlements is heading for failure.
It is scheduled to meet tomorrow for the last time to vote on a plan by its chairmen -- Senators Bob Kerrey and John Danforth -- to cut Federal spending by enough to keep the deficit from claiming a larger share of the economy over the next 35 years.
That is the right goal.
But their proposed solution is misguided, and has no chance of garnering enough votes.
The failure is sobering.
Mr.
Kerrey is right that entitlements, programs like Social Security and Medicare for which spending is driven by formula rather than annual decisions by Congress, pose a huge budget problem.
They, along with interest payments, are expected to account for over 70 percent of Federal spending by the year 2003, leaving crumbs for everything else.
Addressed now, the solutions need not be onerous.
Left to fester, they could prove horrific.
But as Mr.
Kerrey observes, Washington displays little stomach for tackling a problem that will not bite soon.


Racial Redistricting Gives Minorities a Voice; Cost of Gerrymandering
To the Editor:
Both articles in the "Redistricting, in Black and White" dialogue (Op-Ed, Dec. 7) miss the central dilemma of racial gerrymandering: there is a trade-off between the symbolic and the substantive representation of black interests.


No Headline
"I am not a great fan of capitalism. But I am a realist." -- FIDEL CASTRO.  [ A1:2. ]


When Trouble Starts Young -- A periodic report: Examining Causes; Crack's Legacy of Guns and Killing Lives On
On a spring morning four years ago in a dead-end neighborhood in Chicago, it was Jovan Rogers's turn to sell a little bag of crack that, added to the bags that he figured were sure to follow, could buy him gym shoes and girlfriends and maybe keep the electric company from turning off the lights at his mother's apartment again.
He was 14, and not sure he was ready to be out there on his own.
He had been playing lookout for the older boys, watching for police cars and yelling "Five-O" when he thought he saw one.
He had not yet had to look a customer in the eye and wonder if this was an undercover police officer trying to make an arrest or a rival dealer there to rob him.


False Alarms
The New York City Fire Department's plan to disconnect its network of alarm boxes will save money and help save lives by eliminating thousands of false alarms and freeing firefighters for emergency rescue work.
Removing those familiar red boxes from the city's sidewalks arouses fear for the worst.
Fire dispatchers and City Council members concerned for poor neighborhoods with poor telephone service assert that the plan will cost lives when there is no quick way to report a real fire.
But Chicago, St.
Louis, Los Angeles and other big cities have turned off their boxes for the same reasons -- cost and false alarms -- and report no problems.
It makes sense for New York, too.


Sports of The Times; Breakup Of the N.H.L. Republic?
FAR from the Royal ballroom at the Sheraton Hotel, where Gary Bettman folded his arms and defiantly threatened D-day for the National Hockey League, another "major league" hockey commissioner predicted yesterday that day will never come.
"It won't," Bob Ufer said from his International Hockey League office in the northern suburbs of Detroit.
"It's too irrational."


COMPANY BRIEFS
ALLIED SIGNAL INC., Morristown, N.J., said its unit Allied Signal Automotive Europe would be forming a joint venture with Japan's Jidosha Kiki Co. to supply brake boosters for Japanese cars built in Europe.


CD-ROM Review; Disks for Mac: Voyager Still Leads
Far more CD-ROM titles are produced for Windows-based personal computers than for the Apple Macintosh, even though the Mac is arguably the preferred machine for exploiting CD-ROM technology.
Still, there are scores of interesting Mac CD-ROM titles from which to choose, especially if one has the System 7 operating system and at least 4MB of system memory.
Many CD-ROM's are produced in dual versions that can be used on either a Mac or a Windows machine.
In such cases, the instructions for using the CD-ROM disks, in this case a language instruction program, are enlightening:


Stepped-Up Border Patrols Halve Unlawful Crossings
Immigration officials reported today that a $25 million, two-month-old experiment in stepped-up border patrolling appeared to have almost halved attempts by illegal aliens to sneak across a once notoriously porous section of the international boundary just south of here.
But the officials tempered their jubilation about the success of the operation, Operation Gatekeeper, with warnings that adjacent, less-guarded sections of the border were beginning to experience corresponding increases in illegal crossing attempts.


COLLEGE BASKETBALL REPORT
St.
John's  St.
John's (5-0), which needs one victory to become only the fourth basketball team in the National Collegiate Athletic Association to win 1,500 games, is having to wait an unusually long time to reach that milestone.
The Red Storm, which last played at Pittsburgh on Dec. 5, does not play again until Fordham (1-3) travels to Alumni Hall on Thursday.
Excluding an exhibition victory over Marathon Oil last Saturday, the Red Storm's inactive stretch is its longest since the 1918-19 team went 41 days between games.
That season St.
John's finished 0-7, completing the only season without a victory in the team's 88-year history.


Racial Redistricting Gives Minorities a Voice
To the Editor:
In the "Redistricting, in Black and White" dialogue (Op-Ed, Dec. 7), Abigail Thernstrom takes issue with the creation of "majority-minority" election districts.
She complains that both the Democratic Party and minority voters have suffered when such districts are established under the Federal Voting Rights Act.


Counseling Helps a Family Get Over a Trauma
Raheem Jones looked toward the heavens one night, then painted what he saw -- bright stars and the vast nothingness surrounding them.
For him, the stars represented his mother, and the darkness the suicide that took her away.
Raheem, 14, draws to express his deepest feelings.
"I don't want to think about it, so I bring out in a picture what I feel," he said.
"If I'm angry, I draw something like a sword. Dark colors mean death. Drawing really helps me think about things."


A Higher Nurse Ratio
To the Editor:
Re "Fewer Nurses to Answer the Buzzer" (Op-Ed, Dec. 6): Suzanne Gordon and Ellen Baer cite an anecdotal survey conducted in Massachusetts hospitals to bolster their assertion that reductions in nursing staff are jeopardizing patient care.


A Side Trip Into AIDS Theory
IN a career studded with successes, Dr.
Leonard Adleman's one disappointment was his venture into the field of AIDS research.
He noticed that when a person is infected with the human immunodeficiency virus, which causes AIDS, the decline of white blood cells of the immune system follows a predictable pattern.
One class of cells, the CD4 cells, start to fall in number while, at the same time, another class, the CD8 cells, rise in number.
"To a mathematician -- and I've shown those graphs to lots of mathematicians -- they almost always say, 'Well, the sum of those two graphs is a constant,' " Dr.
Adleman said.


A Simple Argument for the Mac
FOR more than a decade the Apple Macintosh personal computer has set the standard for ease of use.
It is still the easiest one to set up, learn to use, operate and upgrade.
The Mac remains innovative in several technical areas and currently offers the most powerful microprocessor and the most intuitive operating system software on the market.
It is an ideal platform for the multimedia and graphics-intensive software that makes personal computing so much fun these days.


CHRONICLE
For 20 years, whenever he was in Rome, ALEXANDER LIBERMAN, a former editorial director of Conde Nast, would head for the Campidoglio, the hilltop plaza designed by Michelangelo, which surrounds the celebrated equestrian monument of the Emperor and philosopher Marcus Aurelius.
Mr.
Liberman photographed the statue and its environs thousands of times, at every hour of the day, in all seasons and weather.
Now, he has compiled 90 photographs in a book that has been published by Random House and includes an essay on Marcus Aurelius by Joseph Brodsky, the Nobel Prize-winning author.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-18  FRENCH TO STAY IN BOSNIA  A week after saying it planned to withdraw its troops from Bosnia, France said it wanted to stay and to expand its mission.
The United States said it supported the new position.
A1


Cooper Companies to Pay in Fraud Case
The Securities and Exchange Commission said yesterday that the Cooper Companies had agreed to pay $2.77 million to settle charges of fraud related to junk bond trades by the company's senior executives in 1991.
The company, which makes contact lenses and other ophthalmic products, also agreed to the release of an S.E.C. investigative report that was highly critical of the Cooper board for continuing to entrust the day-to-day management of the company to the executives despite "evidence of serious wrongdoing."


An Evening With Castro: 36 Years and No Regrets
The Summit of the Americas had just ended in Miami, and President Clinton and his counterparts from 33 other countries were heading triumphantly home.
At a long table in the Palace of the Revolution in Havana, the man not invited, Fidel Castro, argued that Cuba's exclusion had been their loss, not his.
"If the summit of Miami was a great show, it would have been a better show if I had been there," he said, grinning through the beard.
"We are the last rebels," he said of his Communist Government.
"That was no meeting for rebels."


Art or Vanity? Fashion's Ambiguity
It is the sort of scene that is most feared by anyone who hopes to see fashion taken seriously.
A sociologist in William Klein's satiric film, "Who Are You, Polly Maggoo?" (1965), is holding forth to a television crew about the hidden meaning behind "Cinderella." In his version, following that of the Grimm brothers, one of the stepsisters cuts off her toe to fit into the glass slipper.
The meaning of the tale, he says, is "the value of tiny feet and beautiful clothes." He sums up the lesson: "So there you are: fetishism, mutilation, pain. Fashion in a nutshell."
Attending Dr.
Valerie Steele's recent lectures about her coming book, "Fetish: Fashion, Sex and Power" (New York: Oxford University Press, 1995), it's difficult to shake Mr.
Klein's Cinderella story, especially when a Viennese foot-mangling fetish shoe is projected on a screen behind Dr.
Steele.


States Win in Ruling On Taxation of Interest
In a victory for state treasuries, the Supreme Court ruled unanimously today that states may tax the interest earned from repurchase agreements involving Federal securities.
States are barred by Federal law from taxing interest income on Federal notes and bonds.
But states have contended that the law does not apply to repurchase agreements, a financing arrangement in which the security serves as collateral for a loan, because the income from such an agreement reflects not the interest rate on the underlying security but rather the premium that the borrower has agreed to pay to get the security back.


U.N. Picks A Leader For Fight On AIDS
A Belgian scientist who has spent years studying AIDS in Africa was named today to head a new United Nations office that will coordinate efforts of six international organizations working on H.I.V.-AIDS research, treatment and prevention.
The scientist, Dr.
Peter Piot, 45, has been associate director of the World Health Organization's global program on AIDS since 1992.
Officials there said the head of that program, Michael Merson of the United States, was expected to resign shortly.


Veto Is Likely on Council's Police Corruption Bill
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani said yesterday that the City Council had overstepped its authority by passing a bill to create the first permanent independent agency to monitor police corruption, adding that the issue might have to be resolved in court.
Mr.
Giuliani spoke to reporters after conducting a hearing on the bill, which mayoral aides have indicated that he will veto.


By Design; Waves With That Natural Touch
Clothes are becoming more feminine, and so are hairdos.
This is especially true for evening, when waves can add softness to short or long hair.
It is not necessary to have naturally wavy hair or to indulge in a permanent.
Hair can be finger-waved for a special occasion by following these tips from Peter Coppola, owner of the New York salon that bears his name:


Times Co. Sheds Paper Mill
The New York Times Company said yesterday that it had transferred its minority interest in the Gaspesia Pulp and Paper Company to Abitibi-Price Inc., the majority owner of the paper mill in Chandler, Quebec.
In addition, the Times Company said it had entered into a new long-term agreement to buy newsprint from Abitibi-Price.
The terms of the transaction were not disclosed.


24 Not So Easy Preludes and Fugues
Beethoven never called his 14th piano sonata the "Moonlight" nor Mozart his last symphony the "Jupiter." Later more fanciful souls did it for them.
It is also likely that the "Well-Tempered Clavier, Book II" is not at all the title Bach intended for his second set of keyboard pieces in every key.
In 1744, some 20 years after the first collection had appeared, the heading "Twenty-Four New Preludes and Fugues" seemed to suffice nicely, but they have come down to us differently.
By whatever name, all 24 were played by the pianist Vladimir Feltsman at the 92d Street Y on Sunday afternoon.
The point would be niggling were it not for the noticeable differences between Bach's first and second efforts.
Book I, in the manner of Chopin's Preludes, has the trappings of privacy but sounds overtly dramatic, even theatrical, as if the music were conscious of some public ear.


Something New for Your Tax Dollar: Blind Dates
JUDITH QUINN has survived in the matchmaking trade for 20 years despite the rise of computer dating services, electronic bulletin boards, telephone party lines and other schemes promising true love.
But even she doesn't know what to make of her latest competitor: the government of this Westchester County town.


Woolworth, for First Time, Goes Outside for a Chairman
After 115 years of growing its own chief executives like stubborn oaks, the Woolworth Corporation today turned to an outsider for the first time, appointing as its new chairman and chief executive Roger N. Farah -- a department store executive who never wanted to be a retailer at all.
Woolworth's 8,500 stores in 13 countries include not just its traditional five-and-dime stores -- which now form a tiny part of the company -- but the Foot Locker chain, which sells athletic shoes, Northern Reflections, a women's sportswear chain, and Kinney shoe stores.
The company was battered last year by $495 million in losses and the discovery of shoddy accounting practices.


Glasgow Is Hit With Flooding


Barneys Halts Store Display Of Pop Creche in Window
A parody of the scene of the birth of Christ, fashioned by an artist using colored duct tape, was yanked from its place in the window display of Barneys, the upscale clothing retailer, over the weekend after a Roman Catholic advocacy group called it to the attention of news organizations and the store subsequently received hundreds of outraged calls.
Yesterday the store apologized to the group, the Catholic League for Religious and Civil Rights, and it has taken out advertisements in newspapers to explain the fracas.
The advertisement appears today in The New York Times on page A6.


Federal Express Corp.(FDX,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Executive Changes
ANESTA CORP., Salt Lake City, appointed Thomas B. King executive vice president, chief operating officer and director.
BANKUNITED FINANCIAL CORP., Coral Gables, Fla., appointed Christopher Phillips chief financial officer.


Wine Talk
IF you're thinking about giving wine gifts this year, why beat around the bush?
Buy wine.
It's a safe bet that your wine friends have corkscrews.
It's just as safe to assume they don't have enough wine.
Here are a few ways you can help them out.
Give a bottle or two of Dolce, the delicious Sauternes-like sweet wine from Far Niente Winery in California.
The wine is delicious, the Art Deco packaging is striking and the price, $50 for a half-bottle, is high enough to make this wine something many people probably won't buy for themselves.


CHRONICLE
The actor and dancer BEN VEREEN thinks that having a disability should not be a barrier to participating in theater, music or dance, so he is establishing the Ben Vereen School for Performing Arts in Chicago.
The school, to open next month in quarters borrowed from the nondenominational Christ Universal Temple, will cater to everyone, Mr.
Vereen said, including "the physically challenged, the hearing impaired, the able-bodied, all God's bouquet."


Soccer Report
United States
Coach Bora Milutinovic, who piloted the Americans into the second round of the World Cup last summer, may have found a legitimate striker in Jovan Kirovski.
Milutinovic discovered the 18-year-old Kirovski, a native of Escondido, Calif., playing for the reserve team of Manchester United in the English Premier League.


Luby's Cafeterias (LUB,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


METRO DIGEST
MAYOR PRESSES EFFORT TO OUST CORTINES
Mayor Giuliani intensified his campaign to push the Schools Chancellor, Ramon Cortines, to resign, saying that he had no confidence in the Chancellor's ability to bring change to the New York City school system.
The Chancellor said his decision on remaining in the job past next June would be based in part on whether he can be effective in spite of the criticism.
A1.
NEW YORK CITY JUDGE IS CHARGED WITH TAKING BRIBES
A Manhattan Housing Court judge was charged with accepting bribes of $1,000 to $1,500 to rule in favor of landlords and tenants who paid them.
The Manhattan District Attorney, Robert M. Morgenthau, said the judge, Arthur R. Scott Jr., a housing judge for 13 years, had accepted at least four bribes, three of them part of a sting operation mounted by Mr.
Morgenthau's office.
B3.
STUDY FINDS MALNUTRITION IN SHELTERS
Many homeless children tested by health workers in the city's shelter system suffered from iron deficiency and other symptoms of malnutrition that could severely affect their long-term health, according to a survey by an advocacy group for the homeless.
B3.
OLD IS MODEL FOR NEW AT YANKEE STADIUM
A preliminary plan for the renovation of Yankee Stadium calls for construction of an exact replica of the original facade of the stadium as a new outer wall for the ball park, according to Fernando Ferrer, the Bronx Borough President, who was briefed on the plan.
B3.
MAYOR READY TO SELL CITY TV STATION
Mayor Giuliani said that he plans to sell the city-owned television station, WYNC, Channel 31, and to delay plans to sell its two radio stations, WNYC-FM and WNYC-AM.
B7.
Something extraordinary happens in Kathleen Tolan's classroom in Harlem.
Education, B10.
REGION AIRPORT FAULTED IN CRASH DEATHS
The crash of a charter flight at Sikorsky Memorial Airport in Stratford, Conn., in April was mostly the fault of the pilot, the National Transportation Safety Board ruled, but the fiery deaths of eight of the nine people aboard were caused by the airport's flawed design.
B6.
POLICE SAY OFFICER'S GUN DIDN'T MISFIRE
The gun used by a police officer in the fatal shooting of a 20-year-old college student at a Long Island shopping mall on Dec. 4 did not malfunction, the Suffolk County police said.
B4.
PATAKI TEAM REVIEWS CURBS ON WELFARE
Governor-elect George E. Pataki's transition team is reviewing a proposal by a Republican lawmaker that would allow the state to establish sharp new restrictions on welfare benefits to adults deemed able to work.
B5.
SWINDLER SAYS VICTIM MUST HAVE KNOWN
John M. McNamara, the Port Jefferson, L.I., car dealer who has admitted receiving $6 billion in fraudulent loans from General Motors over 11 years, said that he believed some G.M. employees had detected his illegal activities but chose to look the other way.
B4.
L.I.R.R. SUSPECT QUESTIONS WITNESSES
Acting as his own attorney, Colin Ferguson cross-examined his first witnesses at a pretrial hearing on charges that he killed six people on the Long Island Rail Road a year ago.
B4.
Neediest Cases B2
About New York by Michael T. Kaufman B3
Chronicle B7


Schoolyard Bully
Mayor Rudolph Giuliani and Schools Chancellor Ramon Cortines make a good team for New York City.
Mr.
Giuliani's demand for budget reform has saved millions.
Mr.
Cortines has gotten the schools focused on teaching.
Unfortunately, the two men get along so badly that the Mayor seems intent on making Mr.
Cortines miserable enough to quit.
The Chancellor says he will decide about that next week.
Both men and the city have too much to lose for this confrontation to end badly.
Mr.
Giuliani's valuable reforms will suffer if he comes off as mindlessly dictatorial.
The school system, which has had six leaders in 11 years, will slip into turmoil.


Changing the Golden Arches in Beijing


Public &amp; Private; Every Day, Angels
In October 1992 an obituary with this headline ran in The New York Times: "Harold Brown Sr., 61, Investment Executive." That description was right, as far as it went, but it did not capture the essence of Mr.
Brown's life.
If it had, it would have read: "Harold Brown Sr., 61, Did Good."
For a long time I've been meaning to write this particular column, and it's somehow fitting that it turns out to be my last.
For more than 20 years I've been a reporter, a job that people say is sure to make you cynical and has somehow only left me more idealistic.
For the last five I've been here, in this space, considering the great issues of the day.


Market Place; Sony's startling stock comeback draws only mixed reviews.
IT was no surprise when the stock of the Sony Corporation plummeted after the company suddenly announced on Nov. 17 that it would suffer a stunning $3.2 billion loss because of problems at its Hollywood studios.
What is surprising is how rapidly the stock has recovered.
Sony stock, which closed at 5,790 yen on the Tokyo Stock Exchange the day before the announcement of the loss, fell to 5,480 yen the following day, and more steeply to 5,000 yen on Nov. 24, a total loss of more than 13.6 percent.
But since then, Sony shares have climbed, as high as 5,510 yen on Dec. 6, dipping and rallying again, closing at 5,400 yen yesterday.


Fordham to Make Switch To Atlantic 10 Conference
Fordham University's decision to abandon the Patriot League next season and join the Atlantic 10 Conference, a move to be announced at a news conference this morning, is a result of a debate over whether players should receive financial aid based strictly upon their athletic skills, according to a person familiar with the discussions.
"The bottom line is winning," said the person, who spoke on the condition of anonymity.
"When you don't win, people distance themselves from you, no matter how well intentioned you are."


Corrections
A picture in Business Day yesterday with an article about John E. Ryan, the Federal judge who will oversee the Orange County bankruptcy suit, was published in error.
It showed John E. Ryan, deputy and acting chief executive of the Resolution Trust Corporation, the Government agency responsible for disposing of the assets of failed savings institutions.


No Misfiring of Officer's Gun in Death, Police Say
The gun used by a police officer in the fatal shooting of a 20-year-old college student at a Long Island shopping mall on Dec. 4 did not malfunction, the Suffolk County police said today.
Detective Lieut.
John Gierasch, head of Suffolk's homicide squad, said laboratory tests showed that the 9-millimeter handgun functioned normally.


Davis Water &amp; Waste Industries(DWW,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-14  RUSSIAN INVASION CONTINUES  Russian troops continued to invade a secessionist area in the south, apparently hoping to seal off the capital, and while Parliament criticized the action, it did not call for withdrawal of the troops.
A1  The crisis in Russia has big stakes and a long history.
A14


DDB Needham Gets Moulinex Account
Moulinex S.A., the maker of household appliances like microwaves and coffee machines in Bagnolet, France, said yesterday that it had selected DDB Needham Worldwide to handle its consolidated account, previously divided among several local agencies.
Billings were estimated at $40 million.
DDB Needham, which already handles Moulinex brands in markets including Asia, was awarded the account after a review that was narrowed to DDB Needham and Saatchi &amp; Saatchi Advertising.
DDB Needham France in Paris will serve as the lead agency.


Britain Cool to French Plan To Step Up U.N. Bosnia Effort
Britain today declined to endorse a French plan to strengthen the United Nations peacekeeping effort in Bosnia and Herzegovina, raising doubts about NATO's ability to forge a common position on the Bosnian crisis.
Defense Minister Malcolm Rifkin of Britain took a decidedly cool stand toward the plan after a meeting with Defense Secretary William J. Perry at the alliance's headquarters here.


Food Notes
'Sprates' With Purpose . . .
With a name like the Peace Works, you know this food company has a mission.
It hopes to promote cooperation between groups of people that have been enemies.
The company has introduced a line of condiments including a pesto, a sun-dried tomato spread and a green olive spread, made in Israel by Arabs and Jews.
The spreads, called "sprates" to suggest a cross between spread and pate, are delicious and lack the saltiness of other spreads.
The ingredients are grown by Palestinians and the products are produced in factories, including one in Gaza, owned and managed by Arabs and Jews.
Profits will be reinvested in similar ventures, including one planned for Chiapas, Mexico, said Daniel Lubetzky, who founded the company.


Carl Marzani, 82, 'Loyalty' Case Defendant, Dies
Carl Marzani, a former employee of the Office of Strategic Services and the State Department imprisoned after being convicted of hiding his Communist Party affiliation from Government loyalty examiners, died on Sunday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 82.
The cause was heart failure, said his son Anthony.


Orange County to Gradually Sell Fund in Effort to Limit Its Losses
Orange County said today that it would sell all the holdings in its investment fund in an effort to minimize further losses, setting off a scramble among local governments and agencies in the fund to recover as much of their money as possible.
The fund now faces a 27 percent loss, or $2.02 billion, nearly one-third more than estimated two weeks ago, and the loss could grow -- especially if the Federal Reserve decides to raise short-term interest rates in the near future.


Corrections
A report in the Night column in the Styles pages on Sunday about a Hanukkah festival and commemoration of World AIDS Day organized by Jews for Racial and Economic Justice and held at the Brecht Forum on Dec. 1 misidentified one participant.
She was Rabbi Ellen Lippmann, the director of the New York regional office of Mazon, a Jewish hunger-relief organization, not Rabbi Ellen Levine.


Bowne &amp; Co. (BNE,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


RUSSIAN TROOPS SURROUND REBELS
Fighting intensified today in a secessionist Muslim region of southern Russia as Russian troops moved to surround and seal off the region's capital.
President Boris N. Yeltsin ordered troops into the region of Chechnya on Sunday, declaring that they were necessary to defend the unity of the Russian state.
The Russian troops have moved toward the capital, Grozny, in three columns while Interior Ministry troops have tried to seal Chechnya's borders, hoping to prevent any new deliveries of arms.


Push Is On for Family Doctors To Spot Psychiatric Problems
WHILE as many as one in five of the patients who see an internist or family physician may suffer from a psychiatric disorder, the doctors fail to diagnose or treat these problems in as many as 75 percent of cases, according to a report today in The Journal of the American Medical Association.
These facts, plus the growing recognition that a large majority of people with mental disorders will never consult a psychiatrist has led to new efforts to train internists and family practitioners in the art of psychiatric diagnosis.


15 Die as Commuter Plane Crashes in North Carolina
An American Eagle commuter flight approaching Raleigh-Durham International Airport in North Carolina crashed last night, killing 15 of the 20 people on board.
The flight, a hop of about 60 miles from Greensboro, N.C., ended in rain and fog, according to the Federal Aviation Administration.
The plane, a Jetstream Super 31, crashed into a wooded area about four miles southwest of the runway, said Daniel F. Bruneau, an airport spokesman.


COMPANY BRIEFS
CALTEX PETROLEUM CORP., Dallas, a unit of Chevron Corp. and Texaco Inc., opened new offices in Hanoi and Ho Chi Minh City to promote its products and develop and evaluate investment projects in Vietnam.
CUC INTERNATIONAL INC., Stamford, Conn., a membership services company, will acquire Essex Corp., New York, a marketer of financial products for banks, for $27 million in cash and future payments.


The New Yorker Names A New Fiction Editor
The New Yorker has named Bill Buford, the publisher of the British literary magazine Granta, to be its fiction and literary editor.
The title is a new one.
The fiction department has been run in recent years by three senior editors who are writers themselves and who also served as fiction editors.
In September, Daniel Menaker left the magazine to go to Random House as senior literary editor.
Last month, Charles McGrath, who was also the magazine's deputy editor, was named editor of The New York Times Book Review, effective in March.
And Roger Angell, long a presence in the department, said he wanted to reduce his editing duties.


How Rent, Not Food, Can Hold a Restaurant's Fate
LA COTE BASQUE, one of New York City's most esteemed and historic restaurants, has lost its lease after 36 years and will be moving in April.
As is true of so many restaurants in New York, its dislocation has little to do with food quality, dining trends or management practices.
It will have to move, and take on the risk and disruption that entails, because the Walt Disney Company wants to open a gift shop in the space, at 5 East 55th Street, and has offered the landlord substantially more than the $750,000 a year La Cote Basque pays for its 4,500 square feet.
"What can I do?" asked Jean-Jacques Rachou, the chef and owner.
Mr.
Rachou is being bought out with one year remaining on his 15-year lease.
He is now looking at another site in the same neighborhood.
Neither Mr.
Rachou nor his landlord, the Coca-Cola company, would discuss the terms of the agreement.


Struggling Through Crises at Howard University
In past years, Howard University has been known as a cradle of black intellectual and cultural life; the place where L. Douglas Wilder learned law, Toni Morrison perfected her prose and Jessye Norman nurtured her soaring soprano.
But if in years past Howard has been remembered most for its glories, this year it may be known more for a host of crises and reams of bad publicity.
First, there were two raucous and anti-Semitic speeches on the Howard campus by Khalid Abdul Muhammad, the former spokesman for the Nation of Islam.
In the spring, an official suggested to David Brion Davis, a Jewish professor from Yale that he might reconsider a planned lecture at Howard because his religion might draw protests from some students.


A Turning Point, Then a New Life
It began with the spinning when she was 9.
She would turn round and round until she fell to the floor, gasping and giggling until the dizziness wore off, and then she would spin again.
A relative introduced her to alcohol that same year, and soon she was intoxicated by this new way to spin, this potable escape from the beatings and loneliness that were her life.
By junior high, she was smoking marijuana, and it was a natural bridge to another world, a world filled with heroin, crack, cocaine and drugs with pretty names like Christmas Trees and Black Beauty.


New doubts about the Pentium chip give Intel a marketing problem with few precedents.
WHAT should Intel's marketers do?
At stake is an $80 million advertising campaign, begun this fall and culminating this month, that was supposed to make Intel and its Pentium computer chip the gold standard of the computer industry.
Whether a Pentium-based computer stumbles once every 27,000 years, as Intel says, or as often as once every 24 days, as I.B.M. says, goes to the heart of the company's reputation as a quality manufacturer.


Brown and Walters Give Unexpected Spark
They both show up early and stay late.
When their shots fail and their minutes dwindle, they blame themselves.
Affable, articulate, their biggest complaint usually has to do with the windchill factor.
P.
J.
Brown and Rex Walters do not know it yet, but if they keep up this surprisingly good etiquette they may quietly explode the longstanding reputation afforded players who start for the New Jersey Nets.


Blast Flattens Fertilizer Plant, Killing 4
An early morning explosion demolished a farm chemical plant near here today, killing four workers, injuring at least 15 and sending a huge cloud of ammonia gas drifting over the snow-covered countryside.
Hundreds of people in a string of small towns and subdivisions in Nebraska and Iowa were rocked awake by the blast and told to evacuate their homes as a precaution.


Pentium Flaw Creates Confusion for PC Buyers
Windows or Mac?
Pentium or 486?
Now or never?
Buying a personal computer has never been simple.
And for the consumer planning a Christmas splurge on a PC or the corporate buyer filling out a purchase order, the buying decision has just become more difficult.
In the wake of I.B.M.'s announcement on Monday that a bug in the Intel Corporation's Pentium microprocessor causes mathematical errors far more often than Intel has acknowledged, buyers face many more variables than price and performance.


For Three Cuban Defectors, Getting Fights Is a Victory
Two weeks ago, Diobelys Hurtado gave a courier $1,000 to take to Cuba for his parents.
They live in Oriente province in a house with a dirt floor and a roof made of palm leaves.
"When the woman gave them the money and told them it was from Diobelys, they cried," said Julio Martinez, who is a principal of Mundo Promotions, which is promoting Hurtado's professional debut on Friday.
"They wished they had him back, but they understand what he is doing."


Madison Avenue Businesses Work to Improve Community Life; Judge Not, and Give
To the Editor:
Your Dec. 7 photo essay on Madison Avenue shook me up.
I recognized what appeared to be the uncomfortable feelings and indifference that the homeless often provoke in the more comfortable, well-fed and well-housed people who walk the streets of New York.


Car Dealer in Fraud Says G.M. Workers Must Have Known of Swindle
John M. McNamara, the Port Jefferson car dealer who has admitted receiving $6 billion in fraudulent loans from General Motors over 11 years, said today that he believed some G.M. employees had detected his illegal activities but chose to look the other way.
Mr.
McNamara's comments, on his third day of testimony in the Federal bribery trial of two Long Island politicians, were his first suggesting that anyone at the General Motors Acceptance Corporation, the auto maker's financing arm, knew of the scheme.
Mr.
McNamara also testified that he did not bribe anyone at the company to help him.
And he offered no explanation as to why any employee might have tacitly cooperated.


Owners Take Off the Gloves
Now we know.
The whole debacle that is the baseball strike of 1994 has never been about cost certainty.
It's never been about fixing what is wrong in the market when it comes to having to run a low-revenue team.
The 122-day disaster has apparently always been about the salary cap.
No more, no less.
That was proved without a doubt yesterday when the players uttered words that were heretofore believed to be impossible for any member of the players union to say.
And those words were, in the form of a proposal, that the union would give up its cherished salary arbitration for players with three or more years of service in return for the owners' granting of free agency to players with three or more years rather than six or more years.


Max Bill, 85, Painter, Sculptor And Architect in Austere Style
Max Bill, a painter, a sculptor, an architect and a former member of the Swiss Parliament who was known for his austere geometric forms and advocacy of modern design, died on Friday in Berlin after collapsing at Tegel Airport.
He was 85 and lived in Zumikon, a Zurich suburb.
He had had a heart attack and died en route to a hospital, said an airport spokeswoman.


Expos' Alou Receives Extension as Manager
FELIPE ALOU will manage the Montreal Expos through the 1997 season under a contract extension announced yesterday.
Alou signed a contract in 1992 that was revised this year and called for him to manage next season and then stay on for two years of personal services, probably in a scouting or player development role.


Stanislaw Maczek, 102, General Who Led Poles in World War II
Gen.
Stanislaw Maczek, a Polish combat commander in World War II, died on Sunday at his home in Edinburgh.
He was 102.
He enlisted in the Polish Army in 1918 and by 1939 was a major general.
In September of that year, the forces of Hitler's Third Reich invaded Poland.
The Polish Army held out for six weeks and then went down to defeat.


Eating Well; If It Clucks Like A Bowling Ball . . .
WHEN people buy chicken at the supermarket, they have every reason to assume it is fresh.
It doesn't feel or look frozen.
But some chicken sold in this country is completely or partly frozen on the way from the processor to the store, where it is then defrosted and sold as fresh.


Tele-Communications May Be Near On-Line Deal
Tele-Communications Inc. is close to acquiring a stake in the new Microsoft Network on-line computer service, according to an executive familiar with the transaction.
The possible terms of the deal were not disclosed, but the executive said Tele-Communications was expected to buy about 20 percent of the equity of the on-line service from the Microsoft Corporation.
A spokesman for Tele-Communications was traveling and could not be reached for comment.
A spokeswoman for Microsoft declined to comment.


Toll Brothers Inc.(TOL,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Telemedia Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Battling Over the Life of a Convicted Killer
The end of a 16-year legal battle over the life of a convicted murderer is the subject of a follow-up on tonight's "48 Hours." The case was covered by Richard Schlesinger, a "48 Hours" reporter, in December 1992, after Harold LaMont Otey, a k a Walking Wili, won one of his nick-of-time reprieves from the electric chair.
That program raised the question, echoed tonight, of whether the efforts to save Mr.
Otey were a tribute to America's justice system or a waste of time and resources.
In 1978, Mr.
Otey was convicted of the murder of a 26-year-old Nebraska woman, largely on the basis of his graphic description of how he had stabbed and smothered her and then hit her a few times with a hammer just to be sure she was dead.
Later he said the confession had been coerced, but his volunteer lawyer, who is at the center of tonight's account, does not take that tack.
Granting that his client might have done the deed, Victor Covalt argues that Mr.
Otey should live because in his years on death row he studied philosophy and wrote poetry and was now a different man from the one who murdered Jane McManus.


Daly Returns in January
JOHN DALY, on the sidelines since a scuffle with the father of another player last August, will return to the PGA Tour in the 1995 season-opening Mercedes Championship, Jan. 5-8, in California.
Daly, a former PGA champion, has also filed formal commitments to play in six other early-season tournaments, PGA officials said yesterday. (AP)


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.50
8.50
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
4.75
4.75
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
5.43
5.52
2.95
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.76
5.76
3.03
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
6.37
6.32
3.24
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.81
7.86
5.80
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.85
7.92
6.29
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.69
8.77
7.34
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
7.01
7.06
5.55
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Give C-Span Greater Reach
Few devices have done more to familiarize Americans with the workings of Congress than C-Span.
The public affairs cable service, now entering its 16th year, provides gavel-to-gavel coverage of House and Senate sessions and committee hearings, as well as many other government and political events.
This unvarnished view, free of editing and commentary, has not always flattered government.
It has also given rise to a new breed of couch potato: the C-Span junkie.
The next House Speaker, Newt Gingrich, adroitly used C-Span in his rise to power.
Brian Lamb, the channel's founder and C.E.O., has now asked Mr.
Gingrich and the next Senate majority leader, Bob Dole, to allow expanded access.


Aris Industries(AISI,NNM) reports earnings for 13wks to Oct 29


Television Gets Closer Look As a Factor in Real Violence
In 1960, Dr.
Leonard D. Eron, a psychology professor at Yale University, embarked on a study to identify the causes of aggression among children.
He was most interested in finding out how the children were treated at home, but, to put the parents at ease, he also asked what he called "Ladies' Home Journal questions" about how much television the children watched.
Ten years later, Dr.
Eron went back to interview the same families.
To his surprise, he said, the best predictor of aggression among the boys, now in their late teens, had nothing to do with how their parents had treated them; it was the amount of television violence they had watched a decade earlier.


U.S. Is Upheld on Tests of Beef for Deadly Bacteria
A Federal judge in Texas has denied an injunction sought by seven food industry trade associations to prevent the Department of Agriculture from testing ground beef for the presence of a deadly bacteria.
Under a program that went into effect in October, 5,000 samples of meat are being tested annually for the pathogen E. coli 0157:H7, which may be responsible for as many as 500 deaths a year.


Penn Teaches Michigan a Lesson in Late-Game Heroics
Pennsylvania 62, Michigan 60  In Ann Arbor, Mich., Jerome Allen's short jumper with four seconds remaining lifted Pennsylvania to a victory over No. 25 Michigan.
It was the second straight loss for Michigan (4-4) and the fourth straight victory for Penn (4-1).


Mourning 'a Real Class Act'; Bomb Victim Recalled as Man in Love With Work and Play
The smooth contours of the life of Thomas J. Mosser were hardly the kind that might have foretold a violent death: his Roman Catholic boyhood, his rise in business, his commitment to his alma mater, his apparently happy suburban life.
As friends tell it, Mr.
Mosser was a good man: a successful son, selfless mentor and devoted father, who made a ritual out of taking his eldest daughter to Sardi's and the theater every year around Christmas.


Clinton Is Reported Set to Seek Revolution in Mortgage Agency
Federal officials said today that President Clinton would probably ask Congress to replace the Federal agency that provides mortgage insurance to millions of home buyers with a new Government-controlled corporation that operates more like a private business.
The agency, the Federal Housing Administration, was created 60 years ago to help combat the effects of the Depression.
It has provided mortgage insurance for more than 51 million home buyers, enabling many of them to obtain mortgages they could not otherwise get.


Amex Chooses Merkley Newman
The American Stock Exchange in New York said yesterday that it had selected Merkley Newman Harty in New York to handle its account, which had been at McCann-Erickson New York for little more than a year.
Billings were estimated at $3 million.


Peacekeeper Dies and U.N. Blames Serbs
The Security Council expressed outrage tonight at the death this morning of a Bangladeshi peacekeeper who was forced to endure a nine-hour overland ride to an American field hospital in Zagreb, Croatia, after Serbian troops blocked his medical evacuation by helicopter.
It was the first strong response by the Council despite weeks of Serbian harassment of United Nations forces in Bosnia and Herzegovina.


Corrections
The $25 and Under column in Weekend on Friday, about the restaurant Old Devil Moon in the East Village, misstated the previous positions of the owners, Steve and Tami Latham.
They were managers, not owners, at Exterminator Chili in TriBeCa.


The Changing Guard at the Bank of New York


Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


15 Killed in Crash Of Commuter Plane
An American Eagle commuter plane carrying 20 people to Raleigh-Durham International Airport crashed about four miles southwest of the airport last night, killing 15 people, Federal aviation officials said.
Three survivors were in critical condition.


U.S. Petroleum Data
In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
Dec. 9
Dec. 2
Dec. 10
1994
1994
1993
Gasoline production, daily
7.9
8.2
7.6
Distillate production, daily
3.3
3.3
3.5
Gasoline stocks
212.3
215.0
223.4
Distillate stocks
142.1
145.2
144.8
Crude imports, daily
7.2
6.5
7.1
Product imports, daily
1.8
1.4
1.9
Crude stocks
339.1
339.2
345.4
Crude production, daily
6.7
6.6
6.9
Refinery utilization (%)
92.2
94.9
92.4
Source: American Petroleum Institute


The U.S. and Cuba: Double Fantasy
Fidel Castro, conspicuously excluded from last week's Miami meeting of hemispheric leaders, sat down afterward with Times reporters.
His mood was expansive, and while he acknowledged that he had no wish to import Western-style democracy, he recognized that the world had changed.
Mr.
Castro nevertheless seemed as suspicious as ever about the rewards of capitalism for his own country, making no exception for his own tentative experiment with free markets.
He seemed to hope that the small farmers' markets he is now allowing would give Cubans a new appreciation of the Socialist state that subsidizes most of their food.


To Catch a Bomber
Bombings like the one that killed an advertising executive in New Jersey on Saturday are among the most diffiuclt cases to solve, because the explosion can obliterate much of the evidence and because the bomber can be far away when it goes off.
In several famous cases, agents had to follow a trail of clues that streched back many years.
Bearing a Grudge George P. Metesky, the Mad Bomber who terrorized New York through the 1940's and 50's, left a clue when he wrote a letter to The New York Journal-American revealing his grudge against Consolidated Edison, where he had worked years earlier.
He died last May at the age of 90.
Seeking Revenge Walter L. Moody Jr., whose bombs killed a Federal judge and a lawyer in the South in 1989, was tripped up when investigators determined that the bombs he used in 1989 were similar to one that had maimed his wife 17 years earlier.
The judge was a member of an appeals panel that had refused to reconsider Mr.
Moody's 1972 conviction.


Davis Cup Team Lacks 1-2 Punch
The United States boasts the world's top two players in Pete Sampras and Andre Agassi, but since no amount of arm-twisting could get them to agree to lead their country's Davis Cup squad against France in the first round of 1995 competition, the world's 10th- and 13th-best players will have to suffice.
The Davis Cup captain, Tom Gullikson, announced yesterday in St.
Petersburg, Fla., where the 6,000-seat Bayfront Center Arena will serve as the first-round site, that he has selected 10th-ranked Todd Martin and 13th-ranked Jim Courier as his singles representatives.


'Midnight': It's Morning For Author
JOHN BERENDT is bearing up nicely under newfound fame and fortune.
He has not bought a Porsche or a beach house or moved from his second-floor walkup on the West Side, but in his quiet way he is exulting.
Why not?
Why shouldn't a New Yorker allow himself a proud trot through a victory lap when at the age of 54, his first book is a runaway best seller?
And let's not forget, a critical success.
"It has all been very nice," said Mr.
Berendt modestly in his living room as he told what has happened to him since "Midnight in the Garden of Good and Evil" was published by Random House.
The book, which revolves around a murder in Savannah, Ga., has been on the New York Times nonfiction best-seller list for 40 weeks.
Sales are approaching 400,000.
Paperback rights have been sold and a movie is in the works.


Lobbyists Will Rush to Fill House Caucus Void
To the Editor:
"Mr. Gingrich's Leaner House" (editorial, Dec. 8), your endorsement of the vote of Republicans in the House of Representatives to eliminate financing for 28 House caucuses, is shortsighted.
Caucuses are a key resource for Congress.
Without them, members will vote on billion-dollar decisions with little or no information or analysis to guide their decisions.


Intel's Image Problem
Intel's difficulties with Pentium chips have been magnified by a bold ad campaign to make the company a household name by emphasizing the slogan "Intel Inside." Advertising, page D18.


TRANSACTIONS
Auto Racing
DICK SIMON RACING -- Signed Dean Hall, driver, for the 1995 Indy-car season.
Baseball  American League  BOSTON RED SOX -- Acquired Terry Shumpert, infielder, from the Kansas City Royals for a player to be named.
Signed Joel Johnston, pitcher, to a minor- league contract.
CALIFORNIA ANGELS -- Agreed to terms with Lee Smith, pitcher, on a two-year contract.
Designated Bob Patterson, pitcher, for assignment.
CLEVELAND INDIANS -- Signed Alvaro Espinoza, shortstop, to a one-year contract and Tony Pena, catcher, to a minor-league contract.
Named Gordy MacKenzie manager of Kinston of the Carolina League.
KANSAS CITY ROYALS -- Signed Gary Gaetti and Keith Miller, infielders, to minor-league contracts.
NEW YORK YANKEES -- Named Gilbert Hight director of stadium operations.
SEATTLE MARINERS -- Signed Lee Guetterman, pitcher, and Marty Pevey, catcher, to minor-league contracts.
TEXAS RANGERS -- Signed Kevin Gross, pitcher, and Mark McLemore, infielder-outfielder, to two-year contracts.
National League  FLORIDA MARLINS -- Announced that Brian Barnes, pitcher, has refused outright assignment to Charlotte of the International League and elected free agency.
MONTREAL EXPOS -- Extended the contract of Felipe Alou, manager, through the 1997 season.
NEW YORK METS -- Signed Jesse Cross, pitcher, and Derek Lee, outfielder.
South Atlantic League  CHARLESTON ALLEY CATS -- Named Pat Kelly manager.
Western Baseball League  LONG BEACH BARRACUDA -- Signed Brad Keely, pitcher.
Basketball  National Basketball Association  CHICAGO BULLS -- Activated Corie Blount, forward, from the injured list.
Continental Basketball Association  HARTFORD HELLCATS -- Placed Emmett Hall, forward, on injured reserve.
ROCKFORD LIGHTNING -- Traded Ken Redfield, forward, to Hartford for a 1995 second- and sixth-round draft pick.
Activated Jerome Fitchett, forward, from injured reserve.
TRI-CITY CHINOOK -- Announced the retirement of Andrew Moten, guard.
Signed Neil Derrick, guard.
College
ALABAMA-BIRMINGHAM -- Announced that Jim Hilyer, football coach, will resign to become assistant athletic director.
ALABAMA-HUNTSVILLE -- Named Bobby H. Pierce III baseball coach.
COLUMBIA -- Announced the resignation of Sean Couch, men's assistant basketball coach.
Named Buck Jenkins men's interim assistant basketball coach.
INDIANA STATE -- Announced the resignation of Rhonda Woodward, women's volleyball coach, and Joel McCartney, women's assistant volleyball coach.
LIVINGSTON -- Promoted Tom Causey, graduate assistant football coach, to full-time assistant football coach.
NORTHWESTERN, IOWA -- Named Orv Otten football coach.
RADFORD -- Named Lew Kent baseball coach.
VIRGINIA TECH -- Named Rickey Bustle offensive coordinator.
WEST VIRGINIA -- Named Greg Van Zant baseball coach.
YALE -- Named Chris Woodman assistant softball coach.


Intrawest Corp. reports earnings for Year to Sept 30


Hartco Enterprises reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 29


Well, He Look Pretty Jolly


Starks Has Film Class He Simply Can't Cut
A day after another dismal performance, the Knicks faced some harsh realities.
John Starks left practice today carrying a personal horror film: a videotape of Game 7 of the 1994 National Basketball Association finals.
Starks said he had never watched it.
In some ways, he has never gotten over that game, a game in which he shot 2 for 18, as the Knicks fell short in their quest for a championship.


Solectron Corp.(SLR,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 25


Add a Huge Hit Movie To a Data Base, and Stir
OVER the last 30 years, a cookbook writer's persona has steadily become more important than his or her recipes.
Now a persona has "written" a cookbook.
"The Bubba Gump Shrimp Co. Cookbook," a collection of recipes and reflections from Forrest Gump, was probably inevitable.
The Gump character, an intellectually challenged individual from Alabama who served in the Vietnam War and eventually opened a shrimp fishing company, has been like a teddy bear to Americans since his portrayal by Tom Hanks in a movie that has grossed almost $300 million.


New Mast for Autissier
The passage through the Indian Ocean with a jury-rig ended yesterday for ISABELLE AUTISSIER, the BOC round-the-world sailor who lost her boat's mast on Dec. 2.
Autissier arrived at the Kerguelen Islands, a mid-ocean chain on which her French support team has arranged to install another mast.
It will be a second-hand cruising spar, all they could find, but Autissier hopes it will get her to Sydney, Australia.
She plans to set sail again tomorrow.
CHRISTOPHE AUGUIN continues to lead the global race on his 60-foot boat Sceta Calberson.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  *
Enron Corp., Houston, is selling $150 million of notes due in 1996 through Goldman, Sachs &amp; Co.
The notes are noncallable, carry an interest rate of 8.10 percent and are priced at par to yield 51 basis points more than the two-year Treasury note.
The notes are rated Baa-2 by Moody's Investors Service, BBB by Standard &amp; Poor's Corp. and BBB+ by Duff &amp; Phelps Corp.


That Charming Spider And the Dear Little Pig
THE ANNOTATED CHARLOTTE'S WEB
By E. B. White  Introduction and notes by Peter F. Neumeyer
Illustrated. 282 pages. HarperCollins. $35.
"Charlotte's Web" begins with the threat of murder and ends with "the heat of the sun, the passage of swallows, the nearness of rats, the sameness of sheep, the love of spiders, the smell of manure and the glory of everything." It is meant for children and for the adults who rule their reading lives: it has all the fantasy a child needs to make reality manageable and all the realism an adult needs to keep fantasy believable.


In TV Age, Fifth Graders Fall in Love With the Written Word
Something extraordinary happens every day in Kathleen Tolan's fifth-grade classroom at Public School 125, the Ralph J. Bunche School, in Harlem.
At a school where the computer is king in some classes and the eyes and hands of some students never meet paper, Ms.
Tolan's 10-year-old students read books.
And they like it.
They even make play dates to meet on Saturday afternoons at a branch of the New York Public Library to discuss, in surprising depth and with sophisticated insights, the books that they've read, and to choose new ones.


Trak Auto Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 29


CHRONICLE
The DUCHESS OF YORK, visiting Portugal to help support an AIDS philanthropy, announced yesterday that she had had two AIDS tests, The Press Association, the British news agency, reported.
One test was before her first pregnancy in 1988 and the second was for a life insurance policy a year ago.
The Duchess called for open discussion of the disease.


New Old Yankee Stadium?
A preliminary plan for the renovation of Yankee Stadium calls for construction of an exact replica of the original facade of the stadium as a new outer wall for the ball park, according to Fernando Ferrer, the Bronx Borough President, who was briefed on the plan.
Mr.
Ferrer said the new facade would be built 40 feet out from the existing outside wall of the stadium, creating more space for a concession area and additional seating.


CHRONICLE
DEBORAH NORVILLE, a former "Today" show co-host, marked her seventh wedding anniversary on Monday by giving birth to a son, The Associated Press reported yesterday.
The 7-pound, 2-ounce boy, as yet unnamed, was born at New York Hospital, said Grazia Manziano, a publicity agent for the syndicated show "Inside Edition," for which Ms.
Norville, 35, will become an anchor next year.


Ayacucho Journal; Shining Path Is Shackled, and Joy Is Unconfined
The main plaza of this Andean town is buzzing with activity: vendors hawking their wares, schoolboys playing soccer, students arguing politics and lost tourists seeking directions.
These lively streets provide the best evidence that the Peruvian Government has all but won the war against the Shining Path guerrilla movement.


Pssst! Serendipity's Chocolate Secret
RIGHT there on page 152 of the just-released paperback version of "The Serendipity Cookbook" is the secret recipe.
The recipe that was censored in the hardcover version, which came out four years ago.
The recipe the White House asked for more than 30 years ago but never got.
The recipe is for a chocoholic's fantasy, something called the frozen hot chocolate blend.
It is the essential element of one of the diet-destroying confections that the whimsical restaurant Serendipity has been serving beneath its bought-at-a-junkyard Tiffany lamps on the Upper East Side for 40 years.
The secret blend is then ladled over a dozen imported chocolates, milk and crushed ice to make frozen hot chocolate.


Owners Cool on Arbitration Proposal
For months, people in baseball and out speculated that if the players agreed to eliminate salary arbitration, the owners would drop their demand for a salary cap and their labor dispute would be history.
The players proved that premise wrong today.
In a last-minute effort to spark an agreement and avert implementation of a salary cap Thursday, the players offered to rid baseball of salary arbitration in exchange for earlier, unrestricted free agency.
But, according to people on the players' side, the owners let the offer pass without embracing it.


A Harsh New Arena
As new products go, the problems with the Intel Corporation's Pentium microprocessor are little more than the kind of bugs that computer-chip designers expect with each new generation of technology.
What's different this time is that the escalating importance of the personal computer in work and life -- and Intel's own efforts to promote the Pentium as a brand name for home and office use -- have thrown the designer's craft into the harsh light of public scrutiny.


D'Amato Bows to Prosecutor, Delaying Whitewater Hearing
Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato, the New York Republican who will be chairman of the Senate Banking Committee in the new Congress, said today that Whitewater hearings planned for early next year would be delayed to avoid interfering with the inquiry of the independent counsel for the Whitewater case.
While he gave no firm dates, Mr.
D'Amato said he expected his committee's hearings to begin later in the year and spill into 1996, coming much closer to the next Presidential election.


Reeves Approves Sherrard's Play Book
After the Giants' 27-20 victory over the Cincinnati Bengals Sunday, Mike Sherrard called home to California.
His mother, who had watched the game on a satellite dish, could not resist needling her fleet son.
"I couldn't believe that guy ran you down," she said. "What happened?"


Wachtler, in Post-Prison Speech, Recalls a Steep Fall From Grace
The keynote speaker at tonight's monthly meeting of the Westchester County Bar Association chose as his topic "Changes in the Criminal Justice System." It is a subject that he knows all too intimately.
For his first public address since being released from prison in August and a Brooklyn halfway house in October, Sol Wachtler came here to a crowded steak house at the invitation of a group of Westchester criminal defense lawyers.
Mr.
Wachtler -- the former Chief Judge of New York State who was sent to prison after harassing his former lover -- joked nervously about being a convicted felon, told stories about his life behind bars and argued that, if he had learned anything at all in jail, it was that stiff sentences were not succeeding in dissuading first-time drug offenders from using drugs again.


It's Not Easy Being Green (Just Ask the Stylist)
O.K., maybe there is some controversy about the color of Dennis Rodman's hair.
He calls it Christmas green.
Others have said it's Kelly or neon green.
His hair stylist insists that it's none of those, that it's apple green, and is disappointed because Rodman was eager to run a red stripe down the middle for the holidays.
But Rodman, the conservative that he is, scotched that idea -- for now, anyway -- as perhaps not altogether fitting for his regular-season debut Monday night with the San Antonio Spurs.
Especially after five weeks of suspensions and a paid leave.


Burton's 53 Points Bury His Ex-Team
76ers 105, Heat 90
Willie Burton, released earlier this season by the Miami Heat, scored 53 points against his old team last night, leading the 76ers to a 105-90 victory in Philadelphia.


INSIDE
Undercover at Banks
The F.D.I.C. will secretly survey banks to see if they are adequately disclosing that mutual funds are not federally insured.
Page D1.
Judge Charged in Bribery
A Manhattan Housing Court judge was charged with accepting bribes of $1,000 to $1,500 to rule in favor of landlords and tenants.
Page B3.
Confusion for PC Buyers
The outcry over a flaw in Intel's Pentium chip has complicated the choices facing buyers of personal computers.
Page D1.


Simpson Lawyers Ask to Forgo DNA Hearing
Lawyers for O. J. Simpson today asked Judge Lance A. Ito to cancel a hearing on the admissibility of DNA evidence and consolidate it instead into Mr.
Simpson's trial.
But it was unclear whether the prosecution would agree to the defense motion, which could allow testimony to begin shortly after New Year's Day.
In their 13-page motion, defense lawyers offered several reasons the two proceedings should be joined: that combining them would help assure Mr.
Simpson's constitutionally guaranteed right to a speedy trial, that many of the same issues regarding DNA's reliability will be addressed at the trial anyway, and that expediting things would protect the jury from further waves of adverse publicity.


Italian Prime Minister Questioned in Corruption Scandal
Assuring the nation that the allegations were "incredibly" unfounded, Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi was interrogated for more than seven hours today in Milan by magistrates who suspect him of corruption.
Mr.
Berlusconi, a business magnate who promised Italians a new, clean Government in his election campaign this year, was summoned to be interviewed by the magistrates who have led the nation's three-year drive against official corruption.


Why Kelley Takes His Fights Elsewhere
He is, as he likes to point out, "the only champion New York City has." The Queens-born Flushing Flash, whose motto is "Doin it for the People."
So how come the people Kevin Kelley will be doing it for when he defends his World Boxing Council featherweight title on Jan. 7 will be the fans in San Antonio, the site of his HBO fight against the No. 1 contender, Alejandro Gonzalez of Mexico?


French Variations on a Holiday Theme
AFTER traveling through France for much of the last two years, I have a new appreciation for the younger generation of chefs there who are nudging French cuisine forward while at the same time respecting its time-honored traditions.
Thinking about my Christmas menu this year, I decided to incorporate some of the exceptional dishes sampled during those delectable peregrinations.
The menu here, adapted for home cooks who have limited time, draws upon disparate regions of the country, from the rolling Loire Valley in the west central part of France to the rustic Perigord region in the southwest to my ancestral home in the vine-draped north central hills of Chablis.
This is an untraditional holiday meal in the sense that no gargantuan turkey or ruddy baked ham is included.
Yet, it offers a crescendo of flavors and textures that would delight most families, French or American.


New School Concert
New Music Mannes, a contemporary vocal and instrumental group, is to present a free concert at 8 P.M. tomorrow at the New School for Social Research, 66 West 12th Street, Greenwich Village.
The concert is to celebrate the 75th anniversary of the New School and will include works by composers affiliated with it, with a special tribute to Henry Cowell, who taught there from the 1930's until his death in 1965.
The program has four of his works and music by Copland, Cage, Chavez, Ives, Carter, Thomson, Blitzstein and Bowles.
Information: (212) 580-0210.


Grey Will Take A Big Write-Off
In an unexpected disclosure, Grey Advertising Inc. in New York said yesterday that it would take a large noncash write-off in the fourth quarter, resulting in "a substantial loss" for the full year of $18 million to $20 million.
The write-off will be in the range of $35 million to $40 million, or $27 to $31 a share, the agency company said, almost entirely for good will associated with acquisitions made overseas mostly in the 1980's.


Vicorp Restaurants (VRES,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 30


Ford Is Recovering
Boston Celtics Coach CHRIS FORD is expected to make a full recovery after undergoing surgery yesterday to remove an apparently benign polyp on his colon and is expected to resume his duties in about three weeks.
Assistant Coach DON CASEY will handle the team in the interim. (AP)


Shopko Stores Inc.(SKO,N) reports earnings for 12wks to Dec 3


Subway Crime: Another Drop


Oregon Coach Honored
RICH BROOKS, who led Oregon to its first Rose Bowl berth since 1958, won the Bear Bryant award last night as college football's coach of the year.
Brooks was one of six finalists for the honor, presented annually by the Football Writers Association of America.
Oregon recovered from a 1-2 start that included consecutive losses to Hawaii and Utah to finish the season 9-3 and earn a shot at Penn State in the Rose Bowl on Jan. 2. (AP)


The Outsider as Hero: A Story With 2 Sides
In "Peter Grimes" Benjamin Britten came to terms with a truism of contemporary art: that ambiguity is more compelling than certainty.
In this 1945 work, which returned to the Metropolitan Opera on Monday evening after an 11-year absence, certainties are few and ambiguities abound.
That puts it in sharp contrast to most of the Met's fare, operas in which heroes are heroes and villains are villains.
Given the straightforward simplicity of Tyrone Guthrie's 1967 production and a strong cast that comes to the music with original, if sometimes debatable, interpretive ideas, this "Grimes" makes an unusually provocative evening of theater.
Mainly, it keeps one guessing about Britten's intentions.
Grimes, a gruff Suffolk fisherman whose young apprentices are prone to fatal accidents, stands defiantly apart from a hypocritical, oppressive society.
Britten identified strongly with that, and there is a degree to which Grimes is shown as that quintessential 19th-century loner-hero, the misunderstood artist.
"I can see the shoals to which the rest are blind," Grimes declares, striking the classic pose of the Romantic artist glimpsing truths beyond mortal vision.


U.S. Bioscience
Shares of U.S.
Bioscience Inc. established a 52-week low of $1.625 yesterday, before closing at $2 in very heavy trading.
A Federal panel rejected the company's second attempt to win approval for its Ethyol treatment for cancer patients undergoing chemotherapy.


Don't Martyr a Killer
To the Editor:
Whether one opposes the death sentence of Paul Hill for killing two men, one of them a doctor, outside an abortion clinic (news article, Dec. 7) on moral grounds or supports it as retribution, one must doubt whether execution will ultimately punish him or deter like-minded fanatics.


A Private Study Finds Many Children in Shelters Have Signs of Malnutrition
Many homeless children tested by health workers in the New York City shelter system suffered from iron deficiency and other symptoms of malnutrition that could severely affect their long-term health, according to a survey by an advocacy group for the homeless.
The yearlong study of 200 children was done by the New York Children's Health Project, which operates four medical vans that travel among some of the city's shelters providing free care.
The study was not scientifically designed to project precisely the extent of poor nutrition among the city's nearly 10,000 homeless children.


Worthington Industries(WTHG,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Rangers Sign Gross
The Texas Rangers began spending the money they freed in the JOSE CANSECO trade with Boston by signing pitcher KEVIN GROSS and infielder-outfielder MARK MCLEMORE to two-year contracts yesterday.
Gross, a free agent right-hander who had a 9-7 record and 3.60 e.r.a. for the Dodgers last season, will make $6 million over two years.
McLemore started at second base for the Orioles last year, batting .256, and was in right field in 1993.
He will earn $1.7 million over two years. (AP)


Gephardt Calls for Tax Cut For Incomes Below $75,000
The next Democratic leader of the House promised today to propose a tax cut for anyone earning less than $75,000 a year when Congress convenes next month, a proposal that would instantly set his party apart not only from the ruling House Republicans, but also from its own White House.
President Clinton plans to present at least some of his own domestic programs for the next two years, possibly including a tax cut, in a speech scheduled for 9 P.M. on Thursday.
Today, in his own speech to a policy group, the new leader of the House Democrats, Representative Richard A. Gephardt of Missouri, said he did not intend for his announcement to eclipse the President's plans.


Polishing The Image Of Louis Armstrong
By the time Louis Armstrong died in 1971, he had profoundly changed the culture of the world he was born into.
His affability and his musical excellence, underscored by comic genius, combined to make him one of the first great pop figures of the 20th century.
He helped create the balancing act between the fine arts and entertainment that has defined the best products of modern American culture.
Now, all over town, Armstrong the man and Armstrong the self-made creation are on exhibit.
Tonight, with a film program called "Jazz on Film: Celluloid Satchmo," Jazz at Lincoln Center starts a generous public series devoted to the trumpeter, including an evening with two leading jazz scholars, Albert Murray and Dan Morgenstern, who will mull over his place in cultural and musical history.


Georgia Unit Discloses Loss
The Municipal Electric Authority of Georgia said today that it had unrealized losses of about $49 million as a result of derivatives in the authority's $928 million investment portfolio.
The authority, set up by the State of Georgia, supplies wholesale electric power to 48 communities.
The authority said that, unlike Orange County, Calif., it had not leveraged its portfolio through borrowings.


Sports of The Times; Riley Must Calm Starks Or Lose Him
IN these times of trouble, the coach of the New York Knicks cannot let his one-man crusade against the dreaded "disease of me" (in other people) get in the way of saving John Starks.
Let's get this straight: Pat Riley did not cause John Starks's shooting slump.
Nor did Riley cause the chasm between Patrick Ewing and Starks.
But somebody is going to have to interrupt the panic attack in Starks's eyes.
Tough-guy tactics may not be the answer.


Judge Is Charged With Taking Bribes
A Manhattan Housing Court judge was charged yesterday with accepting bribes of $1,000 to $1,500 to rule in favor of landlords and tenants who paid them.
The Manhattan District Attorney, Robert M. Morgenthau, said the judge, Arthur R. Scott Jr., a housing judge for 13 years, had accepted at least four bribes, three of them part of a sting operation mounted by Mr.
Morgenthau's office.


Parcells Has Patriots In the Passing Lane
On the second drive of the third quarter this past Sunday with his team trailing, 10-7, Drew Bledsoe, New England's passing prodigy, threw his fourth interception of the day.
Colt cornerback Ray Buchanan was the recipient again.
Buchanan had returned Bledsoe's first interception 90 yards for a touchdown in the second quarter.
The television cameras cut to Patriots Coach Bill Parcells.
Would he rip the headset off and slam it to the ground?
Drop-kick the clipboard?


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
Orange County, Calif., plans to sell the holdings in its investment fund, which now faces a loss of $2.02 billion.
The move, an attempt to minimize further losses, set off a scramble among the local governments and agencies that invested in the fund to get their money back.  [ Page A1. ]  Local school districts were shouldering their way to the front in the race to claim shares of the billions of dollars left in the county's depleted investment fund.  [ D1. ]


Friedel Dzubas, 79, Abstract Painter Of New York School
Friedel Dzubas, an abstract painter associated with the New York School in the 1950's and Color Field art in the 60's, died on Sunday at his home in Newton, Mass.
He was 79.
He died after a long illness, said Malinda Hatch, his companion.


The Pop Life
Down Time for Etheridge
Melissa Etheridge has been on the road for a year and a half without a break.
She has crisscrossed the country with the Eagles and Sting, and has made additional stops in upstate New York for Woodstock, in Memphis for the Elvis Presley tribute concert, in London for a gay-rights benefit for the Stonewall Group and in Leavenworth, Kan., to perform when an athletic field was dedicated to her father at the high school where he taught and she graduated.
Last night, before giving herself a much-deserved break, she performed a final show in front of a sold-out crowd at Madison Square Garden.
Speaking by telephone before the concert, Ms.
Etheridge, a performer whose onstage energy matches that of Bruce Springsteen, said that this long bout of performances hadn't worn her out too much.
"The shows have actually gotten a little longer," she said.
"They used to be two and a half hours, but now they're more."


No Headline
"I have a tremendous problem understanding what all the hype is about. It's making another set of excuses for kids who are uncontrollably violent. If you're telling me some people can't tell the difference between television and reality, that may be true, but this is someone who's in need of more than censorship." PETER REINHARZ, chief prosecutor for Family Courts in New York City.  [ D20:5. ]


Dylan for a New Audience
Stay-at-homes can now hear and see the revitalized Bob Dylan, who has been turning heads on the concert circuit for a year.
With a band that picks up both the roots and the immediacy in every song, Mr.
Dylan savors and reinvestigates lyrics he has been singing for up to three decades.
On "MTV Unplugged: Bob Dylan," tonight at 8, "The Times They Are A-Changin'," from 1963, takes on its latest new connotations after the 1994 elections.
The "Unplugged" format suits Mr.
Dylan, whose current band -- with John Jackson on guitar, Tony Garnier on bass, Bucky Baxter on pedal steel guitar and mandolin, and Winston Watson on drums -- easily switches between electric and acoustic instruments.
The band isn't entirely unplugged; along with Mr.
Baxter's pedal steel guitar, there's Hammond electric organ by a guest, Brendan O'Brien (Pearl Jam's producer, who also remixed the show's sound).
But Mr.
Dylan has earned the right to bend the rules.


Past and Future Speakers Meet to Eat


Modest Cuts At High Cost
The Republicans have their proposal for a middle-class tax cut.
Not to be one-upped, Representative Richard A. Gephardt of Missouri, the House Democratic leader, offered his plan today.
President Clinton will probably put forward his own tax cut for the middle class in a speech on Thursday night.
The proposals have these things in common: They are frightfully expensive in terms of what they would cost the Government in lost revenue.
They spread the money so thin that they offer most middle-income families less than what it costs to buy a pizza a week.
And most economists, regardless of their politics or ideology, view such tax cuts as a lousy idea.


Director Quits The V. and A. In London
Elizabeth Esteve-Coll has resigned as as director of the Victoria and Albert Museum in London, the museum announced yesterday.
Ms.
Esteve-Coll, who has headed the Victoria and Albert for six years, will leave the museum in September.
Since becoming director of the Victoria and Albert -- and the first woman in charge of a national collection in England -- the 56-year-old Mrs.
Esteve-Coll has been both praised and criticized for transforming the museum from a scholarly cloister to an institution for a broader public.
She has opened eight new galleries in the last six years and was able to increase attendance 23 percent, from 996,476 in 1988 to some 1.35 million for 1994.
"To turn around a great institution and rethink its role has been a difficult task," she said.
"Now someone else can reap the benefits."


Corrections
The Pulse chart in The Metro Section yesterday, comparing office rents in several cities, misattributed the figures.
They were from Colliers International, a real estate company, not Mitchell &amp; Associates.


Flawed Airport Design Is Called Cause of 8 Deaths in Crash
The crash of a charter flight at Sikorsky Memorial Airport on a foggy night in April was largely the fault of the pilot, the National Transportation Safety Board ruled today, but the fiery deaths of eight of the nine people aboard were caused by the airport's flawed design.
The board, meeting in Washington, recommended moving a two-lane state highway away from the airport to allow room for a safety zone beyond one runway, to protect planes that overrun it, and installing new landing lights for the runway.


Not to Forget The Wine
Finding the right wines for a meal this rich can be tricky.
With the oysters, drink Chablis.
Genuine, French Chablis, not the California jug wine by that name.
There is nothing like the flinty bite of a good Chablis to complement the texture and intense flavor of oysters, even cooked ones.
A Chablis Bougros 1991 from the Domaine de la Maladiere is about $24.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article on Saturday about a meeting between representatives of the British Government and the Irish Republican Army misstated the site in some copies.
It was the Parliament Buildings in Belfast, Northern Ireland, not Stormont Castle nearby.


Gingrich First Mastered the Media and Then Rose to Be King of the Hill
It really was just coincidence, but Newt Gingrich and C-Span arrived at the House of Representatives the same year.
Since then, 1979, they have come of political age together, with the media-savvy Republican Representative from Georgia, set to become Speaker in January, knowing instinctively how to exploit the unblinking television eye in the House and revealing himself to be one of the smartest chiefs in the global village.


Pataki Team Weighs Curb On Welfare
Governor-elect George E. Pataki's transition team is reviewing a proposal by a Republican lawmaker that would allow the state to establish sharp new restrictions on welfare benefits to adults deemed able to work.
The plan is intended to circumvent provisions of the State Constitution requiring the state to provide "aid, care and support of the needy." Advocates for the poor have long viewed that clause as a safeguard against the Legislature's slashing of welfare services for the poor.
But under the new proposal, which was developed by the State Senate's Social Services Committee, the Legislature would create a new category of needy people, known as transitionals, who would be eligible for reduced services and cash grants.


Lobbyists Will Rush to Fill House Caucus Void; Anger Creates Power
To the Editor:
It has been noted by others, but the point needs to be made again until the public gets it: Most of the overhaul, shrinking, committee disbanding and reorganization of the House of Representatives for the ostensible purpose of openness, streamlining and money-saving will lead inevitably and not coincidentally to one certain conclusion -- more power to Representative Newt Gingrich, the incoming House Speaker.


Pacific Physician Services Inc.(PPSI,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Hughes Institute Plans New Medical Grants of $80 Million
The Howard Hughes Medical Institute, one of the nation's largest private philanthropies, plans to announce today an $80 million four-year grant to help maintain research at medical schools, which are facing increasingly tight supplies of research money.
The Hughes institute, of Chevy Chase, Md., has now announced grants totaling $166 million to colleges in 1994.
The previous award this year was for $86 million to 62 colleges and universities to help improve science curriculums


In America; Reading, Writing, Reloading
Lee Iacocca once said that if you are manufacturing 50,000 cars a week you had better make sure you are selling 50,000 cars a week or you will soon be up to your hindquarters in cars.
The same can be said of guns.
With so many guns already in circulation, the firearms manufacturers are worried about market saturation.
They need new customers, fresh faces with fresh dollars.
They need young people.
Children.


Richard Patrick Critchfield, 63, Writer on Life in Third World
Richard Patrick Critchfield, an author and journalist who lived and worked among villagers of the third world to tell their story to Western readers, died on Saturday at George Washington Hospital in Washington.
He was 63 and lived in Berkeley, Calif.
He suffered a stroke the week before in Washington, where he had gone to attend a publication party for his latest book, "Villagers," said his agent in New York, Stuart Krichevsky.


Eaton Vance Corp.(EAVN,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Undercover Study Aims At Mutual Fund Sales
The Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation announced today that it had hired a company to make anonymous calls and visits to banks and savings institutions in an effort to determine whether they are adequately disclosing to customers that mutual fund investments are not federally insured.
Employees of Market Trends Inc., a market research company based in Bellevue, Wash., will pose as customers in calling or visiting 3,000 to 4,000 branches of banks and savings institutions around the country, said Alan J. Whitney, a spokesman for the agency.


Yanks Go Back To 7:30 Starts
After experimenting with weeknight home games starting at 7:05 o'clock last season, the Yankees, citing fan discontent with the earlier time, announced yesterday that they would go back to a 7:30 starting time for the 1995 season.


Producer Inflation Moderate; Retailers Post Strong Sales
Inflation at the producer level climbed by half a percentage point in November, while retailers posted very strong sales in the month, the Government announced today.
But most of the increase in the Labor Department's Producer Price Index reflected rising energy prices, particularly gasoline prices, which tend to be volatile and do not always signal broader inflation trends.
Excluding food and energy, producer prices rose one-tenth of a percent in November.
Producer prices are the prices manufacturers and farmers charge for the products they sell to retailers, distributors or other buyers.


A Dish Of Spinach, So Spanish
THIS all-vegetable meal may not make believers out of the hamburger and fries crowd, but it should make it clear that meat is not necessary for appealing, well-seasoned food.
The spinach dish is typical of Spain, but despite the fact that most recipes that use pine nuts call for toasting or sauteing them, pine nuts have more flavor when they are not cooked.
So add them at the last minute.
Many countries combine fried potatoes with red wine; what usually differs is the seasoning.
Try this version with rosemary, but also try it with cumin, coriander or oregano.


Surgeon General Fought Hard for Youth
To the Editor:
As executive director of a nonprofit organization devoted to the education of minority youth and women's issues, I am appalled that "A Surgeon General's Untimely Candor" (editorial, Dec. 10) condones the dismissal of Dr.
Joycelyn Elders.


Norrell Corp.(NORL,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 10


COFFEE TALK WITH: Howard Schultz; By Way of Canarsie, One Large Hot Cup of Business Strategy
THE man at the end of the line is fed up.
"I hate this place," he says.
"It's expensive and crowded and I can't speak the language. What is espresso macchiato, anyway?"
Actually, it's espresso with foamed milk, but no one at Starbucks calls it that.
They also don't use words like "small" or "large" when "tall" and "grande" will do.
But their funny vocabulary aside, the employees at Starbucks, the Seattle-based chain that is rapidly expanding into New York, are known for being cheerful, well mannered and efficient.
Some are so clean cut they look as if they just shoveled a neighbor's walk.
They are in direct contrast to the staffs at New York's home-grown coffee bars, like French Roast in Greenwich Village, where the morning servers seem to have made the supreme sacrifice of stopping in on their way home from the clubs.


Despite War, Famine and Pestilence, the Khat Trade Thrives in East Africa
Every day before dawn, pickup trucks piled with burlap sacks speed through the front gates of Wilson Airport here.
Workers unload their cargo in front of more than a dozen small planes neatly parked by a runway.
Every inch of the planes, which are emptied of their passenger seats, are stuffed with the sacks, even next to the pilot.
The planes, overloaded by hundreds of pounds, lumber down the runway so weighted down that they occasionally crash land in an adjacent game park.


Explosive Mix in Chechnya: History, Hatred and Oil
The Chechen crisis in Russia embroils a mutinous people rebelling against more than a century of domination by governments in Moscow, a contest given wider significance by the enormous potential riches embedded in the oilfields of the Caucasus.
Academic experts and diplomats said yesterday that the Russian Army would almost certainly gain the upper hand over the insurgents, who in the opinion of one expert "might be considered to be the same sort of overwhelmed indigenous people as American Indians."


F.D.A. Finds Most Comply On Labels
The Nutrition Labeling and Education Act of 1993 seems to be working.
The Food and Drug Administration said today that it had looked at 5,000 products and that fewer than 1 percent were not carrying the new labels, which are supposed to provide easily understandable information about the important nutrients inside the package.


Talks With Rebels Seem Fruitless
As Russian tank divisions continued to tighten their grip on a secessionist region of southern Russia today, opposing delegations met here for a second day of talks aimed at find a way out of the deepening conflict.
And in contrast to the repeated gunfire and shelling going on in the breakaway region of Chechnya, less than 20 miles from this small industrial city, the meeting in the art museum here was civilized and cordial.
The delegates, in coat and tie, spent their day at a long conference table adorned by giant red roses.


Looking for Life, Jets Look at 2 Rookies
Yes, the Jets are almost buried for yet another season.
They are 6-8, they have lost their last three games and they need an improbable set of circumstances to occur just to qualify for the playoffs.
In many respects, their season died during that fourth quarter comeback engineered by Miami's Dan Marino at Giants Stadium three weeks ago.
But although Coach Pete Carroll said he will make some slight adjustments, he insisted that there will be no major overhauls made with an eye toward evaluating some of the team's unproven players when the Jets go up against the San Diego Chargers this Sunday.


F.D.A. Eases Rules for Companies To Market Medicines for Children
The Food and Drug Administration has announced that it is easing the rules for companies that want to make their drugs available to children.
The new rules will allow drug companies to publish information about dosages for children without doing full-scale testing of the drugs in those 16 and under.
Dr.
David A. Kessler, the Commissioner of Food and Drugs, said in a telephone interview on Monday that about 80 percent of new drugs did not have information on how to prescribe them for children, "so more often than not, as a pediatrician I can tell you, pediatricians are flying by the seat of our pants" in deciding what drug and dose to use..


Michigan Suicide Bill Advances
The Michigan House of Representatives gave final legislative approval today to a measure that would again outlaw assisted suicide, but then voted to put the ban before the state's voters in November 1996.
And within an hour of the House's vote, the Michigan Supreme Court provided another surprise in the long-running debate over assisted suicide.
Reversing a lower court, it decided that a previous law was valid and that the Legislature had acted correctly in outlawing doctor-assisted suicides.
But that law was temporary, and has now expired.


Samaranch Wants Broader Sanctions for Drug Abuses
Juan Antonio Samaranch, president of the International Olympic Committee, said today that coaches, doctors and trainers should be punished along with athletes who test positive for banned substances.
The head of the Chinese Olympic Committee agreed with Samaranch, acknowledging the possibility that officials were involved in providing muscle-building steroids to 11 Chinese athletes who were banned in a doping scandal after last month's Asian Games in Hiroshima, Japan.


Rabbi Benjamin Morgenstern, 87, Educator
Rabbi Benjamin Morgenstern, an Orthodox Jewish religious leader and educator for many years, died on Friday at Shaare Zedek Hospital in Jerusalem.
He was 87 and had retired to Jerusalem from Brooklyn nearly 20 years ago.
The cause was complications after heart surgery, said Seymour P. Lachman, a family friend and the dean for community development at the City University of New York.


Angels Obtain Smith
The free-agent reliever LEE SMITH, baseball's career saves leader, has agreed to a two-year, $4 million contract with the California Angels, the team said yesterday.
Smith, 37, led the majors in saves with 33 for Baltimore last season.
He had a 3.29 e.r.a. and a 1-4 record. (AP)


Antoine Pinay Is Dead at 102; Aided French Postwar Recovery
Antoine Pinay, a French statesman who played a major role in restoring health to France's economy after the ravages of World War II, died yesterday at his home in St.-Chamond in central France.
He was 102.
News reports quoted local officials as saying he had been weakened by an attack of flu last month and died in his sleep.


Madison Avenue Businesses Work to Improve Community Life
To the Editor:
Re "On Madison Ave.: Stark Reminders of a Different Life" (photo essay, Dec. 7): As president of the Madison Avenue Association, I wish to express dismay about your photographs showing New Yorkers bypassing the homeless on our avenue.


Giuliani to Delay Selling Radio Stations
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani said yesterday that he plans to sell the city-owned television station, WYNC, Channel 31, and to delay plans to sell its two radio stations, WNYC-FM and WNYC-AM.
Since before his election a year ago, Mr.
Giuliani has championed easing the city's financial burden by selling the municipal broadcasting system, the WNYC Communications Group, which consists of the television and radio stations.


Price/Costco Inc.  (PCCW,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 20


Blunting TV News's Sharp Edges
Even the mildest of attempts to control television content are almost certain to produce bitter controversy.
A curtain-raiser of sorts is the skirmish over making newscasts more sensitive to viewers' concerns about graphic depictions of violence -- a strategy that a growing number of local stations are using.


Battle Returns to the Recital Stage
Given all the curious things that have recently happened to Kathleen Battle, it should come as no surprise that the soprano's recital on Monday night at Carnegie Hall was an unconventional one.
Yet the sheer oddity of the whole affair left one in a kind of daze.
There was the shouting match that broke out in the balconies immediately after the concert began; there was the perplexing presence of Ursula Oppens, the formidable new-music specialist, as accompanist; there was the fluctuating quality of the soprano's own voice, alternately beautiful and bland.
Whatever it was, it wasn't dull.
This was Miss Battle's second recital in New York since her abrupt dismissal from the Metropolitan Opera last February.
Her operatic engagements have dwindled markedly in the last few years, and it would seem that the notoriously temperamental soprano is concentrating her energies on solo recitals.
When she sang at Carnegie Hall shortly after the Met incident, her accompanist was James Levine; for this occasion, she collaborated with Miss Oppens, who could not be further from the Met's world.


10-Year-Old Charged With Bias Crime
A white 10-year-old boy has been charged with racially harassing and threatening to kill a 9-year-old black classmate at a school bus stop, the police said today.
The 10-year-old, a student at Bretton Woods Elementary School here, directed racial epithets at the black youth on Oct. 11 as they rode home on a bus, Detective Sgt.
Joseph Zito of the Suffolk County Police Bias Crimes Bureau said.


A Woman Within a Wild Child, As Revealed by Jodie Foster
How fitting that Jodie Foster, in "Nell," should play a free-spirited woman who dances to her own secret music.
Ms.
Foster has carved out just that role for herself in Hollywood, choosing unusual material and largely avoiding the mainstream.
Her independence has been impressive enough to suggest that "Nell," the first film from Ms.
Foster's production company, Egg, would be subtler and riskier than ordinary fare.
And "Nell" is the work of Michael Apted, a thoughtful director ("Coal Miner's Daughter," "Gorillas in the Mist") who understands strong heroines and exotic places.
With its isolated North Carolina setting and its title character, a mysterious young woman raised without any experience of contemporary civilization, "Nell" promises something well out of the ordinary.


Holtzbrinck Buys a Majority Of Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux
The German publishing concern Holtzbrinck has bought a majority interest in Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, the American book publisher's founder said yesterday.
Roger Straus, who founded Farrar, Straus in 1945, said in October that he was planning to sell the prestigious independent publishing house to a larger company.


WCI Steel (WRN,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Jose Leaves the Royals
Keeping FELIX JOSE was apparently going to cost too much, so the Kansas City Royals decided to let him go.
The Royals optioned the outfielder to the minors yesterday, and he exercised his rights and became a free agent rather than report to Class AAA Omaha.


Bank's Head Will Retire Early in 1998
J.
Carter Bacot, the strong-willed chairman of the Bank of New York Company, said yesterday that he would retire in early 1998 and that the bank's board had approved his choice of Thomas A. Renyi to be his successor.
Until now, Mr.
Bacot, 62, had not set a retirement date and had divided management responsibilities among a group of executives, none of whom was a clear heir-apparent.
In an interview in his ornate office on Wall Street yesterday, Mr.
Bacot, who has run the Bank of New York for 12 years, said he had been planning to name a successor for nearly a year.


Small-Scale Bargaining to Tackle the Big Issues
Following a week without negotiations, the two sides in the hockey lockout will attempt a different sort of dialogue today.
A few members of the bargaining committees will meet at what can be informally described as the subcommittee level, without their leaders present.
These representatives of the National Hockey League and its Players Association will discuss the issues that have postponed the season for 75 days and threaten the entire schedule.


U.S. Troops on the Golan? A Hidden Agenda
To the Editor:
There has been a great deal of news media attention to the issue of sending United States troops to the Golan Heights, as well as a full-page advertisement in your paper discouraging the use of such troops (Dec. 7).
Readers need to be made aware of the context of these efforts to mobilize American public opinion against sending troops.


Marshall Industries(MI,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Report Assails Cost Overruns For New Court
A harshly worded United States Senate committee report criticizes the construction of the $1 billion courthouse and office complex at Foley Square as over budget and unnecessarily lavish, including extras like private kitchens and showers, exotic wood paneling and terrazzo tile floors.
The report, to be officially released today, is based on a six-month investigation by the Senate Environment and Public Works Committee.
It looks at courthouse construction across the country, but singles out the Foley Square project, which is nearing completion behind the existing United States Court House, as the country's most expensive courthouse complex and the worst example of "uncontrolled and excessive spending."


Echlin Inc.(ECH,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Tenneco's Plan May Reap $1 Billion
Analysts valued a plan announced yesterday by Tenneco Inc. to sell its chemicals division in a public offering at $900 million to $1 billion, or about $750 million in after-tax proceeds.
Separately, Tenneco said that it planned to buy back up to $500 million of its common shares, or 7.2 percent of its 181.4 million shares outstanding, based on Monday's closing price of $38.50 on the New York Stock Exchange.


Metropolitan Diary
THE place is the Newport Mall in Jersey City where one of the longest lines is for people waiting to have their pets pose for a photo with Santa.
Passing through, Herb Heckman hears a barking dog, followed by an admonishing female voice.
"Why must you bark whenever we come here," the voice says.
"You don't hear anyone else barking, do you?"
. . .
Dear Diary:
My husband and I recently rented the video "Searching for Bobby Fischer." Watching it, I was reminded of my Uncle Nat, who died in 1972.
Uncle Nat was a chess fanatic.


Witnesses Questioned By L.I.R.R. Defendant
Acting as his own attorney, Colin Ferguson cross-examined his first witnesses today at a pretrial hearing on charges that he killed six people on the Long Island Rail Road a year ago.
The 9-millimeter gun and some of the spent shells that authorities say he used, along with photographs of the victims, were among the first pieces of evidence to be presented today by the prosecution.


On the Avenue
On the day of this season's first, tentative snowfall, Central Park was the sad grays and browns of a Bruegel winter landscape.
At Grand Army Plaza the goddess Pomona, bent naked over her bowl, looked colder than ever.
Even the ornament over 57th and Fifth seemed to shiver in the chill, damp breeze.
The sky did not so much promise as threaten more precipitation.
On Fifth Avenue's upper reaches the only sound was that of traffic, and even that was muted.
Along about 65th Street, however, shoppers began to appear, bringing conversation with them.
One solitary Santa showed up too, ringing a bell for the Volunteers of America.


Church and State


Fish Dynasty Calls Columbia Alma Mater
To the Editor:
By what definition is Harvard "the familial alma mater" of the Fish political dynasty, which includes four Hamilton Fishes who have served in Congress (news article, Dec. 6)?
Historically, it is Columbia that has embraced the scions of this archetypal New York clan.


North American Watch Corp.(NAWC,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Herrera at City Ballet
Paloma Herrera, a soloist with American Ballet Theater, is to appear as a guest artist with the New York City Ballet next week.
Ms.
Herrera is to dance the role of Dewdrop in "The Nutcracker" on Tuesday and Wednesday at 6 P.M. and on Dec. 23 at 2 P.M.
She will also dance during the repertory season in January.


Complaints Going To Saatchi's Board
The Saatchi &amp; Saatchi Company P.L.C. said yesterday that its board would meet to discuss complaints from large shareholders about a lucrative proposed option package for Maurice Saatchi, the chairman.
The package, disclosed in a front-page article in The Financial Times, would grant Mr.
Saatchi, a co-founder of Saatchi &amp; Saatchi with his brother, Charles, $7.8 million in three years if the company's stock price doubled during that period.
While the agency company's financial problems have improved in the last year, shareholder pressure led to cost-cutting steps, including a 68 percent reduction in Mr.
Saatchi's annual salary.


Serial Bomber's Logic Is Difficult to Unravel
In late 1956, after 16 years as the Mad Bomber who had terrorized New York City, George P. Metesky finally made the error that gave him away.
Craving a public forum for the grievances that drove him to plant 47 pipe bombs, he wrote to a newspaper, giving enough clues to land him in a jail cell less than a month later.
Walter L. Moody Jr. left a broader trail in December 1989, when he sent four bombs, two of which killed a Federal appeals judge in Alabama and a civil rights lawyer in Georgia.
He was tripped up by his link to a victim and a consistent style of bomb design.


Corrections
An entry in the Addenda listing on the Media Business page on Nov. 28 about the pro bono account of the Inner City Scholarship fund misstated the role of an advertising agency.
Korey, Kay &amp; Partners of New York created a campaign for the fund; it has not been assigned the account.
The account continues to be handled by an in-house agency of the development office of the Archdiocese of New York.


County's Schools Say Get in Line, Behind Them
Local school districts were shouldering their way to the front today in the race to claim shares of the billions of dollars left in Orange County's depleted investment fund.
The scramble, which began after the county said it would sell off the remaining holdings in the fund, will pit the needs of schoolchildren against those of police officers, city bureaucrats and the providers of all services that make a county work.
The fund's value is already estimated to have dropped by more than $2 billion, and forced the county to file for bankruptcy last week.
It remained unclear how the proceeds of the sale would be divided among the many municipalities, government agencies and even individuals who have invested in the fund.


Surprising the Fashion World, to the Last
By all appearances, this was a great year for Alix Gres, the French fashion designer.
There was a retrospective of her work held at the Metropolitan Museum of Art's Costume Institute in September, attended by Yuzo Yagi, the chairman of Yagi Tsusho Ltd., the Japanese company that had bought the rights to her name in 1988 and had sponsored the exhibition.
In Japan, the company was promoting her name anew.
And she was being heralded by fellow couturiers like Yves Saint Laurent, who marveled at the show in an interview in Women's Wear Daily.
Her daughter, Anne Gres (the name is pronounced greh), provided the fashion industry newspaper with a response she said her mother had dictated on Oct. 9.
"Coming from an artist and colleague whom I admire," said an excerpt published on Nov. 1, "I'm greatly touched."


Personal Health; Prostate patients 'learn to hope by sharing.'
MEN are not famous for their willingness to discuss personal problems, especially sexually related problems, even with other men.
Locker room talk tends to be full of bravado, with nary a soul admitting to sexual failings.
But when it comes to dealing with prostate cancer and the aftermath of its treatment, thousands of men in support groups across the country have become surprisingly open about such ego-shattering problems as impotence and incontinence.
Groups Flourish
In just four years, the prostate cancer support movement, founded by concerned patients, has grown from two local groups -- one in Florida and the other in Chicago -- into a national network of hundreds, and soon perhaps thousands, of groups and subgroups.


An Erudite Author In a Genre All His Own
The Mayfair, on the corner of Park Avenue and 65th Street, is "the preferred hotel of the Italian literati," says the publicity director of Harvard University Press, who has arranged an interview with Roberto Calasso to discuss his highly acclaimed new book, "The Ruin of Kasch." And so it appears to be on a rainy December morning.
For one thing, the name on the awning is Mayfair Hotel Baglioni (until last month, it was affiliated with an Italian hotel chain); there are copies of Corriere della Serra and La Stampa on the marble table in the lobby; the sweater-wearing clientele chattering away in Italian could be at the Hotel de la Ville in Rome.
Mr.
Calasso himself, dark-haired and slender in blue suit, blue-striped shirt and blue tie with dots, emanates a distinctly European aura as he sits drinking caffe filtre in a corner.
He fits right in with the Mayfair's pillared and pink-walled Italianate decor.
His English is excellent, though heavily accented, especially when he gets excited, as he does while talking about the "hee-brid form" of his new book, which his English publisher has insisted on labeling "a novel."


GIULIANI PRESSES TO OUST CORTINES AS SCHOOLS CHIEF
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani intensified his campaign yesterday to push the Schools Chancellor, Ramon C. Cortines, to resign, saying that he had no confidence in the Chancellor's ability to bring change to the New York City school system.
The Chancellor said his decision on remaining in the job past next June would be based in part on whether he can be effective in spite of the Mayor's criticism.


Clinton Tax Plan Said to Include Family Credits and Student Help
The White House is preparing to propose about $50 billion in income tax cuts, probably through a mix of tax credits for families with preschool children and new deductions for college and technical education, Administration aides said today.
The proposal is an effort to reclaim middle-class voters who deserted the Democrats in last month's mid-term elections and to fulfill a promise President Clinton made during the 1992 campaign.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.50
8.50
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
4.75
4.75
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
5.43
5.44
3.06
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.67
5.76
3.02
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
6.27
6.37
3.22
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.79
7.81
5.79
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.86
7.85
6.28
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.70
8.69
7.31
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.98
7.01
5.56
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Louis Schultz Named Lintas Unit President
Louis M. Schultz, one of the best-known media executives in advertising, has been named to the new position of president and chief operating officer at Lintas Marketing Communications in Warren, Mich.
Mr.
Schultz, 50, has been executive vice president and media services director at Lintas Worldwide in New York.
He and Ira Carlin, executive vice president and worldwide media director at McCann-Erickson Worldwide in New York, were recently named Media Directors of the Year by Mediaweek magazine.


Hero in Hostage Crisis: History Major From L.I.
As the police tried to piece together the events surrounding a 2 1/2-hour hostage drama here today, one thing was clear: Jason McEnaney, a history major from Hicksville, L.I., played the dominant role in bringing the standoff to a conclusion.
It was Mr.
McEnaney, a 19-year-old sophomore at the State University at Albany, who inched up to within striking distance of a gunman who was holding hostage 35 students in a history class on campus.


Ford Dealer Group Begins Review
The Northwest Ford Car Dealers Association has begun a review on its account, with billings estimated at $10 million to $12 million, after 17 years at Cole &amp; Weber in Seattle.
"There has been a little dissatisfaction over the account management in the past few years," said David Lutes, president at Lutes Advertising in Portland, Ore.
Mr.
Lutes, who was retained to conduct the review, confirmed a report of it this week in Adweek.


Executive Changes
CONSOLIDATED NATURAL GAS CO., Pittsburgh, named Lester D. Johnson vice chairman and chief financial officer and David M. Westfall senior vice president, financial, effective Jan. 1.
OWENS-CORNING, Toledo, Ohio, said that William W. Colville, its general counsel, senior vice president and corporate secretary, would retire at the end of the year.
Christian L. Campbell was named to succeed him.


Uniroyal Tech Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 2


Blood-Testing Concerns Plan $1.79 Billion Merger
National Health Laboratories and Roche Biomedical Laboratories announced a $1.79 billion merger yesterday that would create the largest blood-testing company in the nation.
The combined company, with 39 laboratories and annual sales of about $1.7 billion, would be slightly ahead of Metpath Inc., which analysts estimate has sales of $1.6 billion.
Metpath is owned by Corning Inc., which does not report Metpath's revenues separately.


Dow Gains 30.95 on Price and Factory Data
In unusually heavy trading, the stock market rallied across the board yesterday, defying many analysts' expectations that stock prices would fall.
The Dow Jones industrial average rose 30.95 points, to 3,746.29, while the broader Standard &amp; Poor's 500 rose 4.82 points, to 454.97.
The smaller-company Nasdaq composite index rose 6.18 points, to 725.67.


A 'Tombstone Mentality'?
Critics have accused the Federal Aviation Administration of failing to tighten safety standards until a fatal crash forces the agency to react.
News analysis, page B18.


After Summations in Carjacking Trial, Spectators Fight in Courtroom
Summing up after a turbulent 37-day trial, a prosecutor said today that Edward L. Summers acted entirely alone in stealing a Jeep at the Nanuet Mall on Jan. 3 and killing its teen-age driver, while defense lawyers said the real killer was a Bronx barber and convicted drug dealer named Deno Lloyd.
Then, several hours before the case went to the jury, passions exploded between the families of the accused and those of the two shooting victims, and 11 security officers had to be stationed in the courtroom.
As spectators were leaving, Mr.
Summers's mother, Betty, said she was shoved by Charlotte Nappi, the mother of the surviving victim, Scott Nappi.
Mrs.
Nappi and Rose Falcone, the mother of the slain teen-ager said they were insulted by Mrs.
Summers's telling them "your son died from drugs."


Calendar: Wreaths And Such
Wreaths by Artists  Arsenal Gallery, Fifth Avenue at 64th Street in Central Park; (800) 834-3832.
"The Wreath: Interpretations," by 30 artists using glass, fabric and metal as well as plants, starts on Monday and continues through Jan. 20.
Open Monday through Friday, 9 A.M. to 4:30 P.M.
No charge.


Jefferies Moves to Phillies for $20 Million
GREGG JEFFERIES, the leading hitter on the St.
Louis Cardinals last season, yesterday signed a $20 million, four-year contract with the Philadelphia Phillies.
The 27-year-old free agent, a switch-hitter, has been an infielder with the Cardinals, Kansas City Royals and Mets but will play left field for Philadelphia.
He was the sixth-leading hitter in the National League last season with a .325 average.
Jefferies is guaranteed $3 million in 1995, $5.5 million in each of the next two years and $6 million in 1998.
The Phillies also signed right-hander TOMMY GREENE to a one-year, $2 million contract. (AP)


Refilling Forstmann's War Chest
It will be difficult for Forstmann Little &amp; Company to top 1994.
By Christmas, Forstmann Little, the New York leveraged buyout firm, will spend $2.1 billion to complete the purchase of the Ziff-Davis Publishing Company's stable of computer magazines and the Thompson-Minwax line of paint and wood-care products.
Earlier this year, it cashed in on two previous buyouts, generating bundles of profits for the firm's investors.


How to Keep Tabs On Privatization
To the Editor:
"When Government Plays Entrepreneur" (The Week in Review, Dec. 11) misses the key issue when considering the privatization of public services: responsibility for maintaining control.


Many Tinkers' Flights of Fancy
"AMERICAN artisans turned something ordinary into something extraordinary," Thomas Woodard said.
"These truly utilitarian wire objects glow with a life of their own." He was referring to 50 vintage wire objects that he has put on display in his folk art gallery.
They range from household items, like cake racks, to a folk art rooster (right) and a bird cage in the form of a cat.
"The trend today is away from ostentation," Mr.
Woodard said.
"These are things people can buy and not feel guilty about."


Scholastic Corp.(SCHL,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Kohl Names Abortion Foe To Family Post in Cabinet
With German political parties still struggling four years after unification to reach consensus on a new abortion law to replace one that the courts rejected as unconstitutional, Chancellor Helmut Kohl has given the debate a new twist by naming an opponent of abortion as his Cabinet minister in charge of family policy.
East Germany permitted free access to abortion in the early stages of pregnancy.
After unification, the Government loosened some of the restrictions West Germany had placed on abortion, until the country's highest court stepped in.
Since then abortion has been technically illegal, though not punished.


Revco D.S. Inc.(RXR,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 12


Initiative on Aliens Suffers Its Biggest Setback Yet
A Federal district judge here barred California today from carrying out most provisions of Proposition 187, a decision that could block enforcement of the measure for a year or more.
The judge, Mariana R. Pfaelzer, ruled that the voter-approved initiative, which would deny most government services to illegal immigrants, appeared to conflict with Federal law on health and social services and even with the Federal Government's authority to regulate immigration.


End of a Nuclear Generation
The Tennessee Valley Authority's decision to halt construction of three nuclear plants is the symbolic death notice for the current generation of reactors in the United States.
By the T.V.A.'s reckoning, these were the last nuclear units still under construction in the nation.
The T.V.A. once had the most ambitious nuclear program in the country, with 17 reactors on order.
But as it turned out, the agency built only five nuclear units, of which only three are currently operating.
The reasons for the latest abandonment are the same that curtailed other nuclear construction around the country -- ballooning costs and uncertainty about when plants could finally be brought on line.
Although the T.V.A. had already spent $6.3 billion on the units and they were from 57 percent to 88 percent completed, the authority estimated it could cost up to $8.8 billion more to finish the job.
That was simply too much when it already felt overburdened with debt, some 44 percent of which had been spent on its nuclear program.


As Tours Go, Faldo Prefers PGA to World
The question didn't catch Nick Faldo by surprise, but his reply will certainly shake up a few people in the headquarters of the World Golf Tour.
Faldo, when asked today what he thought of the upstart tour that is attempting to lure the top 30 players in the the world for a $25 million series that would begin play in 1995, shrugged his shoulders and tartly replied: "What World Tour? It isn't going to happen."
Faldo, the No. 3-ranked player in the Sony World Rankings, said he received his first correspondence from the World Golf Tour on Monday when he arrived at the Tryall Club for this week's Johnnie Walker World Championship.
He said someone slid a contract under the door of his villa, and he added that he has yet to speak face to face to any of the principals.


Interactive Cards on the Table


No Headline


A Dream in Harlem Ends at the Gavel
FOR years, Aunt Len's Doll and Toy Museum in Harlem was a fixture where schoolchildren and collectors were welcome and ordinary grown-ups had to persevere to gain entry.
Aunt Len was Lenon Holder Hoyte, a retired public school art teacher who amassed one of the most extensive and varied private collections of dolls and toys in the country.


Oklahoma State Hires a Black Coach
BOB SIMMONS, passed over for the head coaching job at Colorado, is the choice of Oklahoma State officials to lead the Cowboys' struggling football program.
The university president, JAMES HALLIGAN, said yesterday that Simmons, 46, would be appointed to replace PAT JONES tomorrow.
Jones resigned last month after 11 seasons, the final 6 of those losing years.
If approved by the university's regents, as expected, Simmons would become the first black head football coach in Big Eight history and just the fifth black coach at a National Collegiate Athletic Association Division I-A school.


RESULTS PLUS
MEN'S BASKETBALL  Camby Paces UMass  Marcus Camby scored a season-high 30 points as fifth-ranked Massachusetts, playing the uptempo game it prefers, beat Princeton, 88-67, last night at Amherst, Mass.
The 6-foot-11-inch Camby was too much for the defense of the smaller Tigers.
And the slowdown tactics that Princeton Coach Pete Carril uses to stay close to more talented teams didn't work against Massachusetts (4-1).
Princeton (3-2) was led by Rick Hielscher with 20 points and James Mastaglio with 15.
UMass' on-campus winning streak grew to 36 games. (AP) Georgia Tech 86, Georgia 78: In a game matching unbeaten teams, James Forrest of 14th-ranked Georgia Tech scored 8 of his 26 points in a span of 2:14 after visiting Georgia had cut a 23-point deficit to 1 point.
Georgia Tech (6-0) had taken advantage of Bulldog turnovers on its way to a 34-11 lead after 11 minutes had elapsed.
Shandon Anderson led Georgia (5-1) with 21 points. (AP)


British Runner Banned, Will Protest
The former Commonwealth 800-meter champion DIANE MODAHL was found to have taken performance-enhancing drugs and was banned for four years by the British Athletic Federation yesterday.
In a verdict that stunned the British news media and top-name athletes supporting Modahl, a five-person federation disciplinary panel rejected her case that samples had been improperly handled.
Modahl said she will appeal the ruling before an independent arbitration panel to be set up by the federation. (AP)


Radiation Test Secrecy Linked to Lawsuit Fears
Military and nuclear energy officials were motivated by fear of lawsuits and unfavorable publicity in their decision to keep secret many experiments using radiation on humans, Federal investigators have found.
The President's Advisory Committee on Human Radiation Experiments, the panel charged with unearthing the history of all government-sponsored experiments in which radiation was used on humans, has found new documents showing that as early as 1947 public relations and legal considerations, not security concerns, were principal motives in the decision to cover up radiation experiments.


Ault Foods reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


CLASSICAL MUSIC
A Long Time Between Shows, Long Enough for Obscurity  American Symphony Orchestra
Avery Fisher Hall
On Sunday afternoon, Richard Strauss rose from the grave and programmed a concert by the American Symphony Orchestra.
Which is to say, Leon Botstein copied note for note a program that Strauss conducted with the Berlin Philharmonic on Dec. 10, 1894.
The contemporary-minded Strauss had placed two new works, Wilhelm Stenhammar's Piano Concerto in B flat minor and Eugen d'Albert's "Rubin" Overture, alongside Mozart's concert aria "Ch'io mi scordi di te," Wagner's "Meistersinger" Overture and Anton Rubinstein's beloved Second Symphony.


Suffering Soles; Shoes for All Sizes and Styles, Except Those Made of Clay
It's a place where a person tends to move around slowly, making noises like an overweight uncle struggling to get up off the living room sofa.
The groans, the sighs, the tentative wobbles in the name of ambulation.
But for all that, the Eneslow Foot Comfort Center at Broadway and 21st Street in Manhattan manages a pretty cheerful atmosphere.
It's not the grayish, slightly clinical decor, or the familiar half-leathery, half-stale scent of new shoes and old feet.
Maybe it's because misery loves company.
After all, whose feet don't hurt?


5 Youths Accused of Beating and Shouting Racial Slurs at Brooklyn Couple
A black man and a white woman were beaten by a group of black and Hispanic youths who shouted racial slurs during two separate confrontations in Flatbush, Brooklyn, early yesterday, the police said, and the attack was being investigated as a possible bias crime.
The victims were not seriously injured, the police said, but in the second confrontation they were threatened with a knife and possibly a gun.
The attack was recorded on a security camera, and the tape has been turned over to the Brooklyn District Attorney's Office.


Where Lies Paradise? In Life Writ Small
FOR children, doll houses can make the universe seem obedient.
My small cosmos was a converted bookcase, four polished shelves on which I created happier versions of my real-life home.
My restless and dissatisfied mother haunted tag sales to keep changing and cluttering the 1832 Connecticut farmhouse where I grew up.
The very bones of the house were not dependable: plaster sagged, pipes gave out.
Meanwhile, I worked up kitchen, living room and two bedroom tableaus, one scene per shelf, with eclectic furnishings that I made or bought at tag sales, trailing behind my mother.


U.N. Troops Help Rwanda To Strip Camp Of Weapons
In an abrupt departure from its usual role, United Nations forces joined Government troops today to raid a refugee camp in the southwest, seizing weapons and arresting people.
The sweep was approved by Secretary General Boutros Boutros-Ghali just an hour before it began at first light this morning, United Nations officials here said.


From the Street to a Room With a View
After midnight, he would wander the sidewalks, collecting empty cans to pay for his breakfast coffee.
Toward dawn, he would nap at the 79th Street Boat Basin, then wake for another day of futile job-searching.
In Charles Foreste's six years of homelessness, the depression never left him.
He had lived well during the 1980's, running an antiques store and renting an Upper West Side apartment.
But by 1987, Mr.
Foreste could not afford the rent on his store and had to close it.
His mother died the next year, leaving him without any family support.
Shortly afterward, Mr.
Foreste was evicted.


Carl Marzani, 82, 'Loyalty' Case Defendant, Dies
Carl Marzani, a former employee of the Office of Strategic Services and the State Department imprisoned after being convicted of hiding his Communist Party affiliation from Government loyalty examiners, died on Sunday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 82.
The cause was heart failure, said his son Anthony.


Ever Think About the 2.5 Million New Yorkers Who Smoke?; And Then Ban Cars
To the Editor:
I hope that the New York City Council's antismoking legislation passes because then I'll have grounds for a lawsuit to ban automobiles in New York City.


Sports of The Times; Baseball's Best Remedy Is a Repeal
THE newest advice in baseball is the oldest advice in politics: Write your Senators and Representatives.
If you're interested in seeing major league baseball the way it ought be instead of picket lines and replacement players, then you the people should inform Congress that the time has come for it to repeal baseball's antitrust exemption.


At Last, Robinson the Rookie Takes Off
Milwaukee 99, Philadelphia 96
The rookie Glenn Robinson scored a season-high 32 points and Milwaukee withstood a late 12-0 Philadelphia run last night to beat the visiting 76ers, 99-96.
Willie Burton, who had a career-high 53 points one night earlier at home, led the Sixers with 28.
Robinson had 20 points in the first half.
Coach Mike Dunleavy said Robinson, who held out during training camp, is coming along well after a slow start.
"I'm really proud of Glenn," he said.
"There has been so much for him to learn and take in. I feel that he's making great strides." Pacers 81, Hawks 79
Reggie Miller and Derrick McKey scored 12 points each as Indiana fended off an Atlanta rally in Indianapolis.
Mookie Blaylock, who led Atlanta with 23 points, scored 11 in the final period.
With 29 seconds remaining, Blaylock missed a jumper from the top of the key that would have tied the game.
The Hawks got the ball with 6 seconds left, but Craig Ehlo's off-balance jumper missed as time expired.
Hornets 106, Pistons 93
Muggsy Bogues and Hersey Hawkins, each with 18, were among 7 Charlotte players in double figures as visiting Charlotte handed Detroit its fifth straight loss.
Spurs 122, Celtics 110
David Robinson scored 32 points, including 12 in the fourth quarter before fouling out, to lead San Antonio.
The Spurs' Vinny Del Negro added a season-high 28, continuing a blistering 2-game shooting spree in which he has made 17 of his last 19 field goal attempts.
Dominique Wilkins led visiting Boston with 27 points.
Suns 111, SuperSonics 93
For the second time in as many meetings with the Sonics, the Suns hit a franchise-high 12 shots from 3-point range, all but 3 in the first half.
The Suns improved to 9-0 at home with a fourth straight victory.
Blazers 121, Clippers 73
James Robinson's 21 points led a Portland scoring surge and Chris Dudley had a season-high 20 rebounds as the Trail Blazers defeated visiting Los Angeles.
Jazz 103, Timberwolves 95
Karl Malone scored 31 points and Utah held Minnesota to just 8 baskets over the final 16:46 en route to its fifth straight road victory.


Clinton Cliffhanger
In his speech tonight, Bill Clinton faces the most critical point in a Presidency as stuffed with crises as an old-time movie serial.
News analysis, page B16.


Ex-Rep. Glenn Anderson, 81, A Longtime California Official
Glenn M. Anderson, a California politician who rose to the office of lieutenant governor and then served for a quarter-century in Congress, died on Tuesday at the Peninsula Hospital Pavilion in Los Angeles.
He was 81 and lived in the nearby town of Hawthorne.
The cause was complications of Alzheimer's disease, his family said.


National Guard Jet Crashes Into Apartments, Killing 2
A jet approaching the Fresno airport after taking part in military war games crashed into a residential street about two miles away shortly before noon today, destroying an apartment complex and spreading fuel and fire.
The pilot and co-pilot, both civilians, were killed and about 20 people on the ground were injured.
Witnesses said the plane, a Lear jet contracted to the California Air National Guard base in Fresno, was in a low approach to the airport when it crashed onto the street, destroying everything in its wake.


6-Day Weeks for Tracks
Six-day racing weeks will resume at Belmont next spring and continue for most of the year in meetings at Saratoga and Aqueduct, the New York Racing Association announced yesterday as it fleshed out a 286-day thoroughbred racing calendar for 1995.
For the most part, the calendar follows established patterns, with Tuesday designated as the dark day except during holiday weeks.


Comeback Kid's Tightest Corner Yet
President Clinton faces the most critical point in a Presidency as stuffed with crises as an old-time movie serial.
In a speech on Thursday night, for the first time since the seismic election shock five weeks ago, he will tell the nation what he intends to do, especially in the scant year remaining until the political world is caught up in another Presidential campaign.


THEATER
Love Among the Hustlers In a Streetwise Triangle  'Trafficking in Broken Hearts' Atlantic Theater Company
Disregard the sappy title of Edwin Sanchez's play, "Trafficking in Broken Hearts." The 90-minute drama, which opens the new season of the Atlantic Theater Company (336 West 20th Street, Chelsea), is a corrosive, downbeat story of three lost souls connected through the demimonde of homosexual street hustling.


Richardson Electronics Ltd.(RELL,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Man in the News; Chechen Warrior Chief: Soviet Army Credentials -- Dzhokhar M. Dudayev
Dzhokhar M. Dudayev, the flamboyant leader of the breakaway Chechen region, was the first Chechen in the history of the Soviet Union to become a general, commanding a strategic bomber wing at the age of 36.
It was a remarkable rise for a boy whose family was deported in 1944, the year of his birth, to far-off Kazakhstan, along with almost the entire population of the Chechen-Ingush Autonomous District.
Stalin thought they might collaborate with the Nazis to win independence, and given the long history of enmity between the Chechens and the Russians who colonized them, he might have been right.


Orange County's Fatal Error
The bankruptcy of Orange County, California -- the biggest municipal bankruptcy ever -- is turning chaotic.
The county's investment fund, whose contributors include 60 school districts and 11 water districts, is no longer returning principal or interest to its participants.
The cutoff forced the county to suspend highway repairs and tax refunds.
Schools, which were legally required to invest in the fund, health clinics and social service providers may run out of money to pay salaries.
The fiasco raises two questions.
What caused the bankruptcy?
What can prevent similar episodes across the country?


Philadelphia's 'Confection' Open
"FRANK FURNESS designed an environment that was both functional and ideal for making art as well as displaying it," said Gresham Riley, the president of the Pennsylvania Academy of the Fine Arts in Philadelphia.
He was describing the Academy's Museum of American Art, an extravagant neo-Gothic confection built for America's centennial in 1876 and reopened to the public last week after six months and a $3.5 million renovation.
The building earned a major reputation for Mr.
Furness, Philadelphia's most important architect of the post-Civil War era.
The interior boasts colorful English Minton tiles, walls covered with gilded diamond and floral motifs, and polychrome cast-iron columns.


Ever Think About the 2.5 Million New Yorkers Who Smoke?
To the Editor:
Mark Marmor complains (letter, Dec. 8) that the New York City Council sells out nonsmokers by exempting restaurants with fewer than 35 seats from a proposed smoking ban.


AT HOME WITH: Camille O. Cosby; A Private Woman, A Public Cause
CAMILLE O. COSBY, a study in serene elegance, sat poised in front of a darkened television set in the living room of her East Side town house.
It was a rare moment of quiet reflection in an otherwise hectic day.
She had taken Manhattan in little more than an hour, wrapped in a black cashmere shawl over an egg-white silk blouse and cranberry silk skirt.
Her objective was to complete a few errands and be home by the time her youngest child, Evin, 18, arrived home from school.


Robbins &amp; Myers Inc.(ROBN,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Legal Titans Square Off In Big Tobacco Lawsuit
In a much-anticipated court hearing yesterday, prominent negligence lawyers squared off against the tobacco industry, seeking permission from a Federal judge to sue on behalf of the tens of millions of Americans they say are addicted to cigarettes.a
After nearly four hours of arguments in a crowded courtroom in New Orleans, Federal District Judge Okla B. Jones 2d said he was concerned with the size and "manageability" of such a class-action lawsuit and gave the smokers' lawyers until Monday to present a detailed trial plan.
The tobacco companies have until the following Friday to respond to that plan.
Judge Jones said he expected to rule by the end of the year.


Time to Act on Cubans and Haitians in Camps
To the Editor:
For some months, safe haven camps have been organized at Guantanamo Bay Naval Station in Cuba and in Panama for more than 35,000 Cubans and Haitians who have fled their countries (front page, Dec. 10).
Now, the United States Government is obliged to provide a solution to the needs of these Cubans and Haitians for new permanent homes.


Wounded Rap Artist Avoids Jail, for Now
Tupac Shakur, the wounded rap performer convicted of sexual abuse charges, was allowed yesterday to stay free for at least another week for medical reasons, even as the judge in the case sent Mr.
Shakur's co-defendant to jail pending sentencing.
For the second time since his conviction on Dec. 1, Mr.
Shakur, who was shot five times on Nov. 30 in what the police called an apparent robbery, failed yesterday to appear for a court hearing to set a sentencing date.
After short stays in hospitals, he has been convalescing in a secret private residence.


Caucasus Rebels Attack, Downing Russian Copter
Responding to their leader's appeal to fight the Russians "until they die of fear and horror," separatist fighters in the Chechnya republic today shot down a Russian helicopter 25 miles west of the regional capital and attacked the Russian troops ringing the city.
Film taken after the helicopter was shot down showed Chechen soldiers throwing the co-pilot, who may have been alive, into a ditch by the side of the road.
The pilot was killed in the crash.


Garden Q.&amp;A.
Autumn Amaryllis
Q.  What is the autumn amaryllis, and where is it sold? -- Nicholas Doherty, Brooklyn


Political Memo; Racial Questions Prove Persistent for Whitman
New Jerseyans who like her politics and those who don't at least agree that Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman is a master at winning support for her views.
Only in her relations with blacks and some other minorities has the Governor been unable to shake off a persistent chorus of complaints that she is unresponsive to them -- and too responsive to the conservative wing of her Republican Party.
Although the Governor has in the past gone out of her way to appeal to minorities, in the last week and a half she has been under attack on a half-dozen occasions by black ministers, Hispanic community leaders and representatives of the state N.A.A.C.P.
They are upset about a range of issues, including her hiring practices and her appearance on the radio show hosted by Bob Grant, who has been accused of being a racist by many prominent black leaders.


Orval Faubus, Segregation's Champion, Dies at 84
Former Gov.
Orval E. Faubus of Arkansas, whose defiance of a Federal desegregation order in 1957 led to a school crisis in Little Rock and set the tone for the South's white resistance to integration, died yesterday at his home in Conway, Ark.
He was 84.
The cause of death was not immediately announced, although he had acknowledged that he had bone cancer and had had two operations for prostate cancer.


Bridge
Nearly all those who plan to go to the American Contract Bridge League's Spring Nationals, beginning March 31 in Phoenix, face an expensive trip.
The lucky minority are those who finished first or second in their district North American Open Pairs Championships at any of three levels, because the national organization will pay for their trip.


A Brief Pause in the Bosnian War


Euro RSCG Office Gets TV Account
Abbey National, a bank in Milton Keynes, England, said yesterday that it had selected Euro RSCG Wnek Gosper in London to handle its television advertising account, previously at Barker &amp; Ralston in London.
Billings were estimated at $24 million.
Euro RSCG was awarded the account after a three-month review that also included Barker &amp; Ralston and WCRS in London.


Nike in Accord to Purchase Hockey Equipment Maker
Branching out in providing equipment for the feet, Nike Inc. said yesterday that it had agreed to pay $395 million for Canstar Sports Inc., a Canadian company that is a leading manufacturer of ice skates and hockey equipment.
Nike agreed to pay $19.875 for each Canstar share, roughly 60 percent higher than the market price.


GOVERNMENT SETS A SAFETY REVIEW AT EVERY AIRLINE
As investigators began picking up clues to the cause of the second fatal commuter plane crash in six weeks, Transportation Secretary Federico F. Pena today ordered a safety audit of the nation's airlines, and an accelerated timetable for new, stricter safety rules for commuter airlines.
The rules, which would essentially force commuter airlines to meet the same standards as those for major carriers, were first recommended by the National Transportation Safety Board after an American Eagle ATR-72 crashed in Indiana on Oct. 31, killing 68 people.
The crash of an American Eagle Jetstream Super 31 on Tuesday night, killing 15 of the 20 people aboard, increased the pressure for changes.


INSIDE
Alien Law Is Blocked
A Federal judge put California's Proposition 187, denying government services to illegal immigrants, on hold for a year or more.
Page A18.
Owners Set to Play Hardball
Baseball talks broke off, clearing the way for owners to declare an impasse and finally impose the salary cap players have resisted.
Page B23.
State-of-the-Art Whodunit
The Gardner Museum is still missing works valued at $300 million that were stolen in March 1990.
Page C11.
A Leaf With a Past
Scientists in Australia have found a grove of pine trees of a kind that were thought to have disappeared with the dinosaurs.
Page A3.


Economic Scene; Yawns greet a warning about the burning fuse on entitlements.
CONGRESS is required to look five years ahead when it creates the Federal budget.
But nobody is obliged to look to 2025 and beyond, when the all the expensive chickens that have been promised to the huge baby-boom generation -- the free medical care, the comfortable pensions -- come home to roost as the last of the generation hits retirement.
Senators Bob Kerrey and John C. Danforth volunteered to deliver the unpleasant news, agreeing last year to head a group of assembled worthies called the Bipartisan Commission on Entitlement and Tax Reform.
The idea, a concession to Mr.
Kerrey on the eve of the vote on President Clinton's deficit-reduction package, was to sound a very public warning long before Washington faced the choice of breaking promises to tens of millions of retirees, taxing the socks off wage earners or abandoning the pretense of controlling the deficit.


Leo Burnett Makes Andersen's Roster
Arthur Andersen, the worldwide accounting and business-consulting firm, said yesterday that it would formalize its relationship with the Leo Burnett Company in Chicago by adding that agency to its roster.
Burnett, which has handled a marketing project for the last nine months, was named as the first agency to handle Andersen's corporate image advertising.
Billings were not determined.


'Body Count' Safety
Critics have long accused the Federal Aviation Administration of suffering from a "tombstone mentality" in which airline safety standards are not tightened until the publicity of a fatal crash forces the agency to react.
For instance, the agency refused to impose tougher regulations for de-icing aircraft for a decade until the crash of a USAir jetliner at La Guardia Airport killed 27 people in March 1992.
In fact, the National Transportation Safety Board has cited the F.A.A. itself as a cause or factor in 93 crashes that killed 576 people in the last 11 years.


Scholastic Corp.(SCHL,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Jets' 49er-Style Offense Lacks the Substance
With only two games left in the season and facing elimination from the playoff derby, the Jets are still trying to get the hang of their offense.
The heralded 49ers-type attack that looked promising in the summer has produced a series of dropped balls, stuffed runs and wrong-way routes.
And after 14 games there still may be confusion about how all this new-fangled stuff is supposed to be executed and coached.
There even seems to be a gentlemanly difference in philosophy between the offensive coordinator, Ray Sherman, and Coach Pete Carroll.


Strawberry Pleads Not Guilty Over Taxes
Darryl Strawberry waved to onlookers and smiled for the television cameras this morning as he emerged from the Federal courthouse, where he had pleaded not guilty to charges of conspiracy and Federal tax evasion.
Strawberry, the 32-year-old San Francisco Giants outfielder, was arraigned on the charges in a 20-minute session before United States Magistrate Mark Fox, then was fingerprinted and processed by United States marshals, his entire visit to the courthouse lasting just under three hours.
His case, now assigned to Judge Barrington Parker, is scheduled to be heard on May 5.


Family Resort in the Catskills Seeking to Survive
When people plan a benefit -- a dinner, a dance, or maybe a walk-a-thon -- they are usually out to raise money for some charitable cause.
But in the heart of the Catskills, the focus has been on a ski area.
The future of Belleayre Mountain in Highmount, N.Y., is at stake.
Having survived extinction a decade ago, the midsize ski area is competing now in an industry of corporate giants.
At Belleayre, a group of mostly volunteers is fighting against the inevitable wave of attrition.


U.S. Shouldn't Favor Bosnian Refugees
To the Editor:
Re "Fleeing Bosnia, Blocked by America" (Op-Ed, Dec. 9): Julie Mertus fails to understand the situation of the Bosnians who are trying to emigrate to America.
As a Yugoslav immigrant myself, I spent four and a half years in an Italian refugee camp (1958-62) before my parents and I received a United States visa.


Ailey Excerpts in a Bow to Jamison
The Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater loves parties.
On Tuesday night at City Center, the company paid tribute to Judith Jamison, the longtime Ailey star who is celebrating her fifth anniversary as artistic director of the company.
The evening got off to a problematic start with a performance of Ms.
Jamison's "Hymn," which was nearly undone by Anna Deavere Smith's strident narration.
But then came an ingeniously staged suite of excerpts from dances that served as a quick trip through the Ailey repertory and the roster of dancers.


No Headline
"He said, 'Don't worry,  nobody move. You guys are getting held hostage.' Stuff you see in movies." -- LISA CRAMER, a member of an Albany  university class that was held hostage by a rifle wielding student.  [ B1:2. ]


Cardinal to Be Marshal For St. Patrick's Parade
The proud son of an Irish laborer politely accepted the honorary post of grand marshal of the St.
Patrick's Day parade yesterday with a nod to his late father, "who would have been excited because he said I'd never amount to anything."
John Cardinal O'Connor, the outspoken Roman Catholic Archbishop of New York, conceded that his selection as grand marshal might not be as warmly received by his critics -- particularly by a dissident group of Irish lesbians and gay men who have been fighting for years to be allowed to march in the annual parade.


Hospitals Use Bodies of Dead For Practice
A new survey has found that doctors at many teaching hospitals learn techniques by practicing on people who have just died, but rarely ask permission of the patients' families.
The survey of 449 training programs in adult and pediatric critical-care training programs was conducted by two specialists in newborn intensive care, Dr.
Jeffrey P. Burns of the New England Medical Center and Dr.
Robert D. Truog of Children's Hospital in Boston, and a lawyer, Frank E. Reardon, of the firm of Hassan &amp; Reardon in Boston.


Italian Party Breaks Ranks With Premier
One of Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi's coalition partners revolted against the Government in Parliament today, feeding the division within an administration that was supposed to lead Italy into a new era.
Today the federalist Northern League sided with the Communist opposition in an important vote.
The defection came one day after Mr.
Berlusconi spent seven hours being interrogated by magistrates in Milan who are investigating bribes his company paid tax inspectors.


A Walk in a Warehouse


Consumer Prices Rise Moderately
Inflation continued at a moderate pace while a rising tide of goods flowed out of the nation's factories and mines in November, according to Government reports made public today.
Together, they provided new evidence of the American economy's robust health.
Stocks rose as investors interpreted the economic statistics as a signal that a prosperous economy would reward long-term investments while inflation would not significantly erode the returns.
The Dow Jones industrial average rose 30.95 points to close at 3,746.29.  [ Page D8. ]


Transactions
Baseball  American League
CLEVELAND INDIANS -- Traded Mark Lewis, shortstop, to the Cincinnati Reds for Tim Costo, infielder.
NEW YORK YANKEES -- Acquired Jack McDowell, pitcher, from the Chicago White Sox for Keith Heberling, pitcher, and a player to be named.


THEATER
Wide-Eyed Innocence To the Beat of Calypso  'Ballad for Bimshire' Players Theater
"Oh, the hips!" a virginal young woman exclaims in "Ballad for Bimshire," a 1963 musical by Irving Burgie and Loften Mitchell, as her body starts to sway involuntarily.
"I don't think I'm supposed to be doing this, but I like it."


Israeli Soldier Wounded in Knife Attack


Overtime Stands Still And Dunks The Nets
Coach Mike Fratello of the Cavaliers called it "a special play." But Cleveland forward Tyrone Hill claimed there was nothing special about it.
"When you have only three-tenths of a second to play, you think up whatever you can that might work," Hill said.
Whether it was a special play or an act of desperation, the Cavs turned an improbable situation into a victory tonight, thanks to a key basket by Hill just when it appeared the Nets would gather their third straight victory.


JAZZ
With a Sense of Humor And Substitute Lyrics  Clark Terry, trumpeter and fluegelhornist Village Vanguard
Toward the end of his first set on Tuesday night, the trumpeter and fluegelhornist Clark Terry started singing Don Redman's "I Want A Little Girl." Mr.
Terry, one of the few remaining jazz musicians to incorporate a vaudevillian sense of humor in his performances, sang a substitute lyric, "She might not look like a girl in a dirty book, uh, picture book." The alto saxophonist Jesse Davis was supposed to supply obligatos behind him, but Mr.
Davis never made it.
He was laughing too hard.
When Mr.
Terry finished the tune, the audience erupted in applause.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies General Mills plans to split the company in two, dividing its food and restaurant businesses.
Wall Street analysts praised the plan to spin off the restaurant operations to shareholders.  [ Page D1. ] As it completes two hefty purchases, Forstmann Little is now expected to turn to refilling its war chest.
Private investors familiar with the company's plans say it will look for roughly $2.5 billion in fresh capital in January.
Geoffrey C. Bible, the chief executive, will replace R. William Murray.  [ D5. ]
GTE said the Army had canceled a contract for hand-held warfare computers valued at $19 million.  [ D5. ] Amtrak plans to cut more than a fifth of its service.  [ A1. ] The Economy Consumer prices rose moderately in November, while industrial output posted robust growth.
The data, which showed a strong economy with low inflation, suggested the Federal Reserve was unlikely to raise interest rates next week.  [  D1. ] Salomon Brothers planned to start selling Orange County debt today as the California county's financial crisis began to stabilize.
Prices of notes and bills surged.  [ D18. ] Lumber prices tumbled ahead of a report on November housing starts.
Coffee prices fell sharply for a second day.  [ D19. ] The dollar was held down by the German mark, which continued to gain against the French franc and the Italian lira.  [ D19. ] Today's Columns A warning about swelling entitlements was shrugged off by politicians of both parties, who apparently prefer to put off unpleasant fiscal decisions.
Peter Passell: Economic Scene.  [ D2. ] Takeover hopes brightened Universal Health Services's stock as a wave of mergers swept through the hospital chain industry.
But the company still has supporters as it grows through acquisitions of its own.
Market Place.  [ D8. ] Personal finance magazines are growing, even when financial markets are slumping.
Advertising.  [ D20. ]


Commercial Intertech Corp.(TEC,N) reports earnings for Year to Oct 31


METRO DIGEST
MAYOR SEEKS ROLE IN PICKING CHANCELLOR Mayor Giuliani said that although he did not have the legal power to select a new schools chancellor, he wanted the Board of Education to recognize that it had to work with him to pick a successor to Ramon C. Cortines, whom the Mayor has been pressuring to leave.
A1.
NEW YORK CITY  CARDINAL TO LEAD ST.
PATRICK'S PARADE John Cardinal O'Connor, the Roman Catholic Archbishop of New York, accepted the honorary post of grand marshal of the St.
Patrick's Day parade with a nod to his late father, "who would have been excited because he said I'd never amount to anything." B3.


Protecting Children Going to School
ON Dec. 5 at 8:15 A.M., a 14-year-old girl was walking to school on Third Avenue near 84th Street when a black sedan pulled up beside her.
A man got out and told her to get in.
When she refused, he tried to grab her.
The girl threw her umbrella at him and ran the two blocks back to her home screaming for help.
"The guy chased her for at least a block," said Police Officer Judy Gawley, who responded to the police call.
Officer Gawley noted that while the girl passed stores, apartment buildings with doormen and a man selling Christmas trees, nobody came to her aid.
Fortunately, she made it home safely.
"Her parents always told her to be careful, which is probably what helped her out on this occasion," the officer said.


Cubs Sign Young for Half a Season
The Chicago Cubs yesterday signed pitcher ANTHONY YOUNG to a one-year contract.
The 28-year-old right-hander appeared in 20 games for the Cubs last season after being acquired in a trade with the Mets.
He was 4-6 with a 3.92 earned run average.
On Aug. 15, Young had surgery on his right elbow.
He is expected to be ready to pitch by midseason. (AP)


Corrections
An article in The Living Section yesterday about the effect of real-estate costs on the restaurant business misidentified a restaurant in San Francisco that is partly owned by Drew Nieporent.
It is Rubicon, not Postrio.


The Fed's Making War on the Business Cycle; Misplaced Euphoria
To the Editor:
The euphoria over the November figure of 350,000 newly created jobs would be bullish if it were not for a small omission.
New unemployment claims totaled a whopping 317,000, making the net gain a mere 33,000.


Two Rivals And Acme Are Back In Business
For 30 years, two of America's most ferocious rivals have, like the figures on Keats's Grecian urn, remained frozen in time, the one in hot pursuit, the other a blithe step ahead.
Now for the first time since the cartoon "War and Pieces," which was made in 1964, Wile E. Coyote and the Road Runner resume the chase in "Chariots of Fur."
The cartoon, which was directed by Chuck Jones, the Road Runner's creator, is to be shown for the first time, on Saturday at the American Museum of the Moving Image in Astoria, Queens.
It is part of the museum's retrospective program devoted to the work of the 82-year-old Mr.
Jones, "Chuck Amuck: The Cartoons of Chuck Jones." The retrospective runs through Jan. 1.
Elsewhere in the United States, the cartoon is to precede the film "Richie Rich," which Warner Brothers plans to release on Wednesday.


Brookstone
Shares of Brookstone Inc., a retailer of tools and specialized gadgets, fell to a 52-week low of $7, down $5.75, in Nasdaq trading yesterday.
Despite a strong holiday season for the industry, Brookstone said fourth-quarter earnings would be below expectations.


Market Place; In a sea of takeovers, a hospital chain defends its independence.
UNIVERSAL HEALTH SERVICES INC., a small but highly profitable hospital chain, was promoted by analysts as a takeover candidate earlier this year during a flurry of hospital acquisitions.
With Columbia-HCA Healthcare, the nation's biggest hospital group, buying Healthtrust, and National Medical Enterprises merging with American Medical Holdings, investors jumped into Universal Health Services.
But Alan B. Miller, the company's chairman, said he would rather keep his group of 15 general hospitals and 13 psychiatric units independent.
He was burned once before: Humana Inc. ousted him as chief executive of American Medicorp Inc. in a hostile takeover.
At Universal, Mr.
Miller keeps tight control through an elaborate web of four classes of common stock.
And the company is growing through acquisitions of its own.


Stewart Enterprises Inc.(STEI,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Atlantic 10, Here Comes Fordham!
The luncheon was over at Madison Square Garden, a new era had begun, and the last van was leaving for the Bronx.
Fordham University's marriage with the Atlantic 10 Conference had been announced with the deep public conviction that the Rams were making the right commitment, at the right time, for all the right reasons.
The sense of this brave new world was vaguely reminiscent of another marriage with a different partner, when the integrity of the Patriot League was presented with similar pride just a few years ago.
This is the way of college athletics in the 90's, when loyalty to one's conference is defined by the outcome of the most recent board of trustees meeting and the direction of the latest stiff breeze.


A Dreary December for Eagles' Cunningham
Randall Cunningham is one of the National Football League's most gifted quarterbacks, perhaps the best scrambling quarterback ever.
He is also one of the most puzzling, an articulate 31-year-old man who has exasperated coaches and teammates because he has seldom accepted responsibility when things have gone wrong.
And things have certainly gone wrong this season for the Eagles, who have lost five straight games because the offense has gone to sleep.
Still, the Eagles have a 7-7 record, and if they beat the Giants (also 7-7) here Sunday, they will still have a chance to make the playoffs.


Philip S. Foner, Labor Historian and Professor, 84
Philip S. Foner, an eminent Marxist labor historian who won an apology from City College 40 years after a hunt for Communists cost him his position there, died on Tuesday at Hahnemann Hospital in Philadelphia after a long illness.
He was 84.
The cause of death was cardiac arrest, said his daughter Laura.


3Com Corp.(COMS,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Corrections
The Pulse chart in The Metro Section on Tuesday, comparing office rents in several cities, included an incorrect figure supplied by Colliers International, a real estate company, for the average cost of office space in Washington.
The average annual rent for all of Washington inside the Beltway is $32.43 a square foot, not $48.81; the higher figure is the average for offices in one area of the central business district.


N.H.L. Tries a New Tack
While members of their staffs negotiated late last night in the New York area, Gary Bettman and Bob Goodenow took a break from the bargaining talks seeking an end to the National Hockey League lockout.
Bettman, the N.H.L. commissioner, appeared on a panel with his counterparts, Paul Tagliabue of the National Football League and David Stern of the National Basketball Association, discussing "The Future of Major League Sports" at the 92d Street Y.M.C.A.
Goodenow, the executive director of the N.H.L.
Players Association, stayed at home in Toronto, making telephone calls to members of his staff who were in New York for what amounted to a bargaining session between subcommittees.


AT&amp;T Is Awarded Contract To Lay Fiber Optic Cable
AT&amp;T has been awarded a $1.2 billion contract to lay the longest undersea fiber optic cable system, 17,000 miles of cable connecting Britain and Japan, the company said yesterday.
The contract was awarded by Flag Ltd., a consortium that includes Nynex and investors from Japan, Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates.


Transit Aides Flouting Rule On Residency
For 15 years, the Transit Authority has circumvented or ignored a requirement that its managers live in New York City, and as a result more than half of its senior officials reside outside the city, according to an audit released yesterday.
The study, conducted by the inspector general of the Metropolitan Transportation Authority, the Transit Authority's parent organization, found that transit officials had "afforded little more than lip service" to the 1978 residency requirement, issuing dozens of waivers almost as a matter of course.


Mark IV Industries(IV,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


COMPANY NEWS: Life on the Internet; Christmas Spirit Misfires As Santa Gets 'Spammed'
The bad side of Santa Claus's "naughty and nice" data base just swelled by several megabytes, computer experts said yesterday, after unknown Grinches bombarded his North Pole Internet address with thousands of electronic Christmas letters.
"Santa got spammed," said Carl Malamud of Washington, referring to the practice, reviled in cyberspace, of sending out a bulk mailing of unsolicited letters or messages.
Mr.
Malamud, president of the Internet Multicasting Service, manages Santa's electronic mail, cookie recipe, Christmas jingle and volunteer information center on the global network of computers.


Terrence Clancy, 60, a Leader In the California Wine Industry
Terrence D. Clancy, a wine industry executive and vice chairman of the Wine Alliance in Healdsburg, Calif., died on Tuesday at his home in San Francisco.
He was 60.
The cause was heart disease, his family said.


Investigators Find a Name From Bomb
Looking for new leads in their search for a serial bomber who mailed the package that killed an advertising executive on Saturday in New Jersey, Federal investigators today released the name on the return address on the envelope.
Jim R. Freeman, the F.B.I. official in charge of the task force investigating the so-called Unabom case, said that the name, H. C. Wickel, was supposedly that of someone from the economics department at San Francisco State University here.
But there is no evidence that such a person has ever been associated with the economics department or with the university either as a professor, staff member or student, he said.


Bad-Weather Warnings On Commuter Flights
Although traveling by propeller plane remains safer than driving, aviation experts say that taking such planes in foul weather, particularly at night, can be hazardous.
The reasons, they say, include the short hops endemic to commuter flying, the design of the planes, the heavy work loads facing pilots and their generally lower standards of training.


Negotiations Collapse in the Bottom of the Ninth Inning
The wisp of hope that flickered at the baseball bargaining table early this morning blew out this afternoon in the ill wind that sent the players home and the owners to Chicago for a decision on impasse and implementation of a salary cap on Thursday.
When negotiators for players and owners left the bargaining table a few minutes after 2 o'clock this morning, thoughts of progress danced in their weary heads.


Tarpley Suspended for One Game
ROY TARPLEY is in trouble again, this time suspended for one game without pay by the Dallas Mavericks for cursing at Coach DICK MOTTA after he was pulled from Tueday night's loss to the Los Angeles Lakers.
"From where I come from, there's not a good excuse for what was said," the club owner, DON CARTER, said yesterday.
Tarpley must sit out tonight's home game with the Boston Celtics but can return to practice tomorrow.
The 7-footer returned to the club in October after a 3-year ban for violating the league's anti-drug agreement. (AP)


Five Years And $300 Million -- A special report.; The Maddening Mysteries Of the Greatest Art Theft Ever
It was an electrifying tip, the kind of promising break that the F.B.I. had been hoping for since the early hours of March 18, 1990, when a brazen robbery team looted the Isabella Stewart Gardner Museum of treasures valued at $300 million.
Across the world, two American teachers had gone to dine at the mansion of an eccentric Japanese artist and collector.
In a crimson ballroom, gaudily adorned with paintings and statues, one of the visitors, who came from Boston, thought he recognized a familiar work: Rembrandt's "Storm on the Sea of Galilee," one of the missing masterpieces from the Gardner.


Lalas Suspended for Rough Play in Italy
ALEXI LALAS, the first American in the Italian Soccer League, was suspended yesterday.
In Milan, the disciplinary commission suspended Lalas, who plays for Padua, for Sunday's game after he was booked for rough play last Sunday against Cagliari. (AP)


Deputy Tells Of Emotions Of Simpson
Hinting tantalizingly at a confession but curbed by the protections of the clergy-penitent privilege, a sheriff's deputy today described an emotional jailhouse exchange between two former football greats divided by circumstance and Plexiglass.
On one side was O. J. Simpson, who stands accused of two murders.
On the other was Roosevelt Grier, an ordained minister who had come to counsel him.
The deputy, Jeff Stuart, was not allowed to recount what he heard as he sat in the control booth near the jail's visiting area on Nov. 13.
But he could describe what he saw: How Mr.
Simpson, as he spoke with Mr.
Grier, slammed down the telephone on which prisoners talk with visitors and hit the palm of his hand against the counter, though more out of remorse than anger.


Countrywide Credit Industries(CCR,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


The Fed's Making War on the Business Cycle
To the Editor:
Re "Greenspan Hints at Further Rises in Interest Rates" (front page, Dec. 8): Alan Greenspan, the chairman of the Federal Reserve, holds to the conviction that the price of increased economic activity is "inflation," that "inflation" is evil, and therefore it is imperative to abort increases in economic activity.
It is depressing that those who so profess to honor "market theory" have forgotten how the market works.


Seeing Jewelry As Fine Art
"THESE are no mere baubles -- jewelry is now America's most provocative art form," said Susan Grant Lewin, whose new book, "One of a Kind: American Art Jewelry Today" (Harry N. Abrams, $49.50), profiles 54 jewelry artists.
"William Harper, for example, abandoned a career as a painter to do jewelry full time.
Mr.
Harper, whose work is at the Peter Joseph Gallery, 745 Fifth Avenue (at 58th Street), until Jan. 14, is inspired by the paintings of Jasper Johns.
Mr.
Harper's massive, jewel-encrusted brooches (like the one above) combining cloisonne enamel, precious metals and found objects are in the collections of the Metropolitan Museum of Art and the Renwick Gallery in Washington.


Tektronix Inc.(TEK,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 26


15 Dreams Came to End In Crash of Flight 3379
They were typical commuter airline passengers: business executives, college students on break and people visiting relatives for the holidays, traveling from Greensboro, N.C., to the hub at Raleigh-Durham, where they were to catch connecting flights onward.
One talented young passenger had just achieved his dream.
But the lives of 15 of the 20 people aboard American Eagle Flight 3379 ended when the Jetstream Super 31 crashed in rugged woods about three and a half miles from its destination.


Across India, Bitter Fight Is Dividing Ruling Party
After a series of four state elections gave it one of the worst drubbings in its history, the governing Congress Party has moved into bitter internal wrangling that has centered on the leadership of the Prime Minister and on the wide-ranging program of market economic reforms he has led since taking office in 1991.
In the state elections whose results became known over the weekend, the Congress Party was reduced to a rump in two key southern states that it previously ruled, Andhra Pradesh and Karnataka, as well in the small Himalayan state of Sikkim.
In the coastal state of Goa, also among the smallest of India's 25 states, it lost its majority in the state assembly, but appeared likely to hang onto power in a coalition.


National Beverage Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 29


Panel on a U.S. Benefits Overhaul Fails to Agree on Proposals
After 10 months of work, a Federal advisory commission said today that it could not agree on any specific proposals to slow the growth of Social Security, Medicare or other Government benefit programs.
The commission's failure, at its final meeting today, bodes ill for efforts by Congress and President Clinton to deal with the same problems next year.
Since Republicans took control of Congress in the November elections, both parties have been proposing tax cuts for the middle class and have vowed not to make any cuts in Social Security benefits.


Essay; 'And Enjoy This'
Hence, loathed Melancholy!
The whimpering of shell-shocked losers has ebbed, the gloating of sore winners has waned, and the season of the happy Warrior is at hand.
You remember "the happy Warrior of the political battlefield," the sobriquet F.D.R. conferred on Al Smith in a 1924 nominating speech.
The source was Wordsworth's poem of that name, about the "generous spirit . . . Whose high endeavors are an inward light / that makes the path before him always bright."


Silver Wares, With a Balinese Influence
LONG celebrated for his hefty, stylish sterling-silver jewelry, John Hardy has turned to home accessories.
Mr.
Hardy, who was born in Canada and now lives in Bali, has studied ancient Balinese silver-working techniques, like beading, granulation and silver weaving.
He has incorporated these into his designs for hand-hammered sterling salad bowls, teapots and silver-trimmed ice buckets and champagne flutes.
A single craftsman makes each piece in its entirety.
"Everything has a certain integrity that's very Balinese," Mr.
Hardy said.


After Convictions of Kurds, U.S. Presses Turkey on Rights
The Clinton Administration has increased pressure on Turkey to stop human rights abuses after a state security court convicted eight Kurdish members of Parliament last week of supporting an illegal Kurdish separatist group.
In stepping up its criticisms, the Administration is walking a fine line, trying to press Turkey without straining relations to the breaking point.
Long one of America's closest allies in the Middle East, Turkey served as an important staging area for Western troops during the Persian Gulf war and provides a base for Western planes to enforce a no-flight zone over Kurdish territory in Iraq.


Metal Drums Found in Dump Site Near New York City Reservoir
New York City environmental workers have unearthed 10 metal drums from an abandoned dump near a major city-owned reservoir in Westchester County.
But officials examining the dump said yesterday that the city's drinking water did not appear to be at risk.
The investigation began last week after environmental workers found the 55-gallon drums in a former city-owned dump a quarter-mile from the 30 billion-gallon Kensico Reservoir in Valhalla, which sends water to the taps of nearly nine million people in the city and Westchester County.


Topps Co.(TOPP,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 26


Ranking Bus Official Resigns Under Pressure
The top official in charge of New York City's bus service resigned yesterday under pressure from the Transit Authority's president, who said he was dissatisfied with the deteriorating quality of the service.
The official, Velva Edwards, who was appointed to head the authority's Department of Buses two and half years ago, offered her resignation yesterday afternoon and gathered her staff to announce she was leaving.
She did not give a reason and declined to be interviewed by reporters.


Mayor's Office Disbands Advisory Unit on AIDS
After several stormy meetings, Deputy Mayor Fran Reiter yesterday disbanded the group of outside experts who were to help restructure New York City's Division of AIDS Services, which has already proved to be a political land mine for Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani.
Ms.
Reiter said in a letter to the group's members that "protests, discussions of process, non-negotiable demands and grandstanding" by certain AIDS organizations -- she named Housing Works specifically -- had resulted in "unproductive, time-wasting meetings."


Farewell, National Prune Day
The 104th Congress has not yet begun.
But the incoming class of 73 new Republican House members can already claim one small victory for common sense.
Last week the Republican Conference approved a freshman-sponsored resolution to end the embarrassing Congressional tradition of honoring what is trivial and, thus, of trivializing what is honorable.
It is this tradition that has given us empty commemorative events like National Tap Dance Day and Dairy Goat Awareness Week.
This inflationary exercise began innocently enough when Congress designated Mother's Day in 1918.
But Congress's soft spot for commemoratives has since extended well beyond Mom to considering non-occasions like National Good Teen Day, Grapefruit Month and Random Acts of Kindness Week.


New York Is Just Dandy (if You're From Another Country)
New York is falling apart? Mean-spirited? Expensive? A terrifying urban jungle?
Nah. Not, at least, if you're from another country.


A Holiday Light Show


AMTRAK PLANNING SHARP CUTBACKS
Amtrak said yesterday that it would cut more than a fifth of the miles it travels early next year, eliminating some rail passenger routes altogether and laying off about 5,500 workers.
The plan will reduce the frequency of trains in the heavily traveled corridor from Washington through New York City to Boston, and end the service from New York through Vermont to Montreal and from Atlantic City to Philadelphia.
The goal is to eliminate an annual deficit of nearly $200 million by September 1995, and the cuts, the biggest since Congress created the railroad in 1971, are only the first round.
The railroad's board said it will consider more in March 1995.
By next September, "virtually all long-distance Amtrak trains will be less than daily," said a railroad spokesman, Clifford Black.


Accounting Board Yields on Stock Options
Bowing to political pressure and corporate opposition, the Financial Accounting Standards Board backed away yesterday from requiring companies to report as an annual expense the value of stock options given to executives and other employees.
But the board said it would still push for additional disclosures on stock options.
"The board remains convinced that employee options have value and are compensation," said Dennis R. Beresford, the board's chairman, who had often vowed that the board would not back down on the issue.
"However, in the final analysis, the board decided that there simply isn't enough support for the basic notion of requiring expense recognition."


Corrections
An article in Science Times on Tuesday about Dr.
Leonard Adleman, a computer scientist, misstated the affiliation of a colleague, Dr.
Adi Shamir.
He is at the Weizman Institute of Science in Israel, not at Hebrew University.


Catherine Shouse Dies at 98; Founded Wolf Trap Arts Park
Catherine Filene Shouse, the philanthropist and arts patron who was the founder and major benefactor of the Wolf Trap Farm Park for the Performing Arts in Virginia, died yesterday at her home in Naples, Fla.
She was 98 and also had homes in Washington, Easton, Md., and Vienna, Va., where Wolf Trap is situated.
The cause of death was heart failure, said Carol Harford, a longtime friend who is president emeritus of the Wolf Trap Foundation, which presents the park's arts programs under the auspices of the Department of the Interior.


Uniroyal Tech Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 2


CHRONICLE
EDWARD I. KOCH turned 70 on Monday, and on Tuesday, just as they have for the last six years, friends and associates gathered to celebrate.
"When he was the Mayor, we always had a gala benefit around the time of his birthday to raise funds for campaigns," DIANE COFFEY, the chief of staff in the last two Koch terms and an organizer of the party, said yesterday.
"Clearly, in 1989 we didn't need to do that anymore, but we decided to have a party anyway and invited people who had been with the administration some time during its 12 years. That became the nucleus for future parties."


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-15  CARTER MAY GO TO BOSNIA  Former President Jimmy Carter said that he had held talks with Bosnian Serb emissaries and might travel to the Balkans as a private mediator to promote a Bosnian peace settlement.
A1


Giants Assistant Tells Team to Put Up or Shut Up
As the Giants make their run for the playoffs, the defensive coordinator, Mike Nolan, wants to make sure that everyone in his unit is on the same page.
So today Nolan had some honest -- sometimes harsh -- words for some members of his defense who think they should be playing more.
You rarely hear a coach be so blunt publicly.
While Nolan didn't name names, it is clear that at least two of the players he is referring to are linebacker Corey Miller and defensive end Keith Hamilton.
They, in fact, may be the only two.
Both players have complained to him about being taken out of games at crucial times.
Nolan is apparently tired of hearing and reading about what they say.
Clearly, Nolan has reached the boiling point.


Meola Signs With Buffalo Pro Team
TONY MEOLA, the goaltender for the United States World Cup team, signed yesterday with the Buffalo Blizzard of the National Professional Soccer League.
He was a two-time first-team All-American at Virginia.
More recently, he had a tryout with the New York Jets as a place-kicker but failed to make the roster. (AP)


Salomon Will Start Selling Orange County Debt Today
Orange County yesterday began the slow, hard work of rescuing itself from the largest municipal bankruptcy in American history.
In one sign of that effort, Salomon Brothers prepared to auction off the first $1 billion of the bonds that remain in the Southern California county's ill-fated investment portfolio.
In another sign, a Federal bankruptcy judge approved resumption of normal banking services with the Bank of America, the county's commercial bank.
The judge authorized the bank to maintain a $200 million loan agreement so that the county could meet its $16.4 million automatic payroll deposit tomorrow.


Dairy Mart Convenience Stores Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 29


Australians Find Trees of Dinosaur Vintage
In a remote rain forest in Australia, scientists have found a grove of tall conifers that seem to be living fossils from the time of dinosaurs.
They are trees of a kind paleobotanists thought had gone into extinction long ago, and their discovery is being hailed as an important link to prehistoric plant life.
The Royal Botanic Gardens in Sydney announced the discovery yesterday, calling the trees Wollemi pines, after the Wollemi National Park, northwest of Sydney, where they were found growing in a damp gorge.
So far only 23 adult trees and 16 juveniles have been found, making it one of the world's rarest plants.
The tallest tree towers 130 feet, with a 10-foot girth.


Toronto Journal; A Land Apart: A Canadian Looks South Sourly
When American invaders crossed the Niagara frontier during the War of 1812, they came upon the family farm of one of the forebears of the author Robertson Davies and were astonished to find angry youths shooting at them from the farmhouse windows.
"They thought we'd be delighted to lay down the hateful British yoke, but they didn't think they were bringing another kind of yoke with them," said the man some consider to be Canada's greatest living writer.


Persuading a Mother, at Age 90, to Move
I ALWAYS look forward to seeing my mother, even in the winter in Winnipeg, Manitoba, where the temperature can drop to 20 below zero.
I've been particularly happy about it for the last year, because for several years the joy of visiting was not unalloyed, and weather had nothing to do with it.
What did have a lot to do with it was an uneasy conscience, knowing some of my visit would be spent upsetting her.
I knew that I would try, once again, to persuade her to move, and that she would, once again, resist.
We both knew that the subject would resurface.


Hurley Prefers Not to Testify in New Trial
BOBBY HURLEY of the Sacramento Kings does not want to testify again in the misdemeanor retrial of the man accused of causing the accident a year ago that nearly killed him.
The second trial of DANIEL WIELAND, 37, accused of driving without lights on the night of Dec. 12, 1993, when his station wagon collided nearly head-on with a vehicle driven by Hurley, opened Tuesday in Sacramento, Calif.
The first trial in October ended in a hung jury.
But Hurley's lawyer wrote a letter to prosecutors saying his client, the key prosecution witness in the first trial, opposes the case being tried for reckless driving a second time.


Food Giant Will Split Operations
General Mills Inc., the cereal company that during the 1980's became one of the nation's leading restaurateurs, said late today that it would split into two companies when its chairman and chief executive, H. Brewster Atwater Jr., retires next June.
The General Mills name and its food products, including Cheerios, Hamburger Helper, Betty Crocker cake mixes, Gorton's seafoods and Yoplait yogurt, will remain in the company's headquarters in Minneapolis and be run by Stephen W. Sanger, who is currently president.


After Year of Despair, Tobacco Farmers Enjoy Prospect of Better Times
This time last year, tobacco country was awash with doomsayers, and John Collett, a tobacco farmer for three decades, felt little but gloom.
Manufacturers were cutting domestic tobacco leaf purchases in favor of less expensive imports.
Lawmakers and health experts were pressing for tough new restrictions on smoking.
To finance its health care overhaul, the Clinton Administration was proposing a steep tobacco tax increase that could raise the cost of cigarettes to $4 a pack.


Measurex Corp.(MX,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 27


NATO and U.N. Call Meeting on Bosnia
Top Western generals and United Nations commanders will hold an emergency meeting next week to try to bolster the faltering peacekeeping efforts in Bosnia, Western officials said today.
The meeting, which will be held on Monday and Tuesday in The Hague, will be attended by Gen.
John M. Shalikashvili, the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, and other top allied commanders.


Corrections
A notice on the Health page yesterday with an article about prostate cancer support groups omitted the telephone number for one source of information on Us-Too groups, the Prostate Cancer Support Network.
It is (800) 828-7866.


Federal Agency Siding With Players
The major league baseball team owners have yet to suffer a setback at the bargaining table, but today, for the second time in less than a week, a Government agency sided with striking players as the four-month-old labor war escalated.
The latest Government action came when the National Labor Relations Board informed the 28 clubs and the union that, absent a settlement, it intends to issue a complaint against the owners.


Faubus Legacy in Arkansas: Millions for Desegregation
For Arkansas, the legacy of the 1957 desegregation crisis at Central High School and former Gov.
Orval Faubus's role in it is now measured less in terms of the racial trauma it once symbolized and more in terms of the bottom line: $180 million and running.
That is the figure the state has paid to the Little Rock School District, to which Central belongs, and to two neighboring Pulaski County school districts involved in a 1982 lawsuit, which was sparked by the fallout from the incident 37 years ago at Central.


Americans Like G.O.P. Agenda But Split on How to Reach Goals
Americans say they now trust the Republicans in the new Congress more than President Clinton to make good decisions on major social issues.
But most remain uninformed about the Republicans' "Contract With America" and they are leery of Newt Gingrich's proposals on orphanages and a Constitutional amendment on school prayer, according to the latest New York Times/CBS News Poll.
While there is broad public support for substantial change and, in general, for limiting the welfare system, balancing the Federal budget and allowing organized prayer in schools, that support splinters on the details of how to achieve these goals.


Topps Co.(TOPP,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 26


Corrections
An article on Nov. 22 about the electoral defeat of religious conservatives on the school board in Vista, Calif., misstated action taken by the board on a government-financed breakfast program.
The board declined to expand the program; it did not curtail it.
The article also referred imprecisely to the board's action on prayer.
The board introduced a prayer before its own meetings, but not for classrooms.


Sports of The Times; The Attitude Check Begins With Riley
LET'S hypothesize that Ernie Grunfeld swings a deal late tonight.
He trades Anthony Bonner and Hubert Davis for the physical shooting guard Pat Riley says the Knicks sorely need.
We'll even give the player a name.
Call him Otis Elevator.
Now, tomorrow morning, Elevator walks into the Knicks shoot-around at America West Arena in Phoenix.


Tektronix Inc.(TEK,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 26


Ennui as Inspiration In the History of Fiction
BOREDOM The Literary History of a State of Mind  By Patricia Meyer Spacks  290 pages.
University of Chicago Press. $24.95.
What can there possibly be to say about boredom, which is surely one of the oldest of human emotions, certainly one of the least useful of feelings and simple enough to define as the state of mind arising from the absence of anything to arrest the attention?


The Fed's Making War on the Business Cycle; Cost to Consumers
To the Editor:
To innoculate against inflation, the Federal Reserve is using counterproductive medicine.
Alan Greenspan, the Fed chairman, is reported (front page, Dec. 8) as giving an unusually clear signal that the Federal Reserve will continue raising interest rates to forestall inflation.


Corrections
A picture from the Allsport agency in some editions on Dec. 4, with an article about the fight between Riddick Bowe and Larry Donald, was transmitted in error.
It showed two other boxers, Greg Harrington and Hasim Rahman.


Low-Tech Sci-Fi Is Not an Oxymoron
In a surging sci-fi present of Internets and juggernaut "Star Trek" projects, "Earth 2" is so technically modest that it seems to want little more than a friendly chuck under the chin.
And NBC may well oblige if the new Sundays-at-7 series continues to orbit in a steady survival pattern against CBS's aged smash-hit "60 Minutes."
"Earth 2" crammed the bulk of its disarmingly basic special effects into its two-hour premiere more than a month ago.
The time is 200 years in the future and what's left of devastated Earth's population lives on giant orbiting space stations.
But the lack of fresh air and water is threatening to end all life in a couple of generations.


Personal finance magazines are profiting from concern over financial markets.
IT seems most unlikely that 1994 will go down in history as a great year for the financial markets.
Stocks, as measured by the Standard &amp; Poor's 500 index, are down close to 3 percent thus far, while the price of the 30-year Treasury bond has dropped so much that its yield, which moves in the opposite direction, is up nearly one-fourth.
Nevertheless, the four leading personal finance magazines -- Money, Kiplinger's Personal Finance magazine, Smart Money and Worth -- all turned in good performances for the year and have realistic expectations for further growth in 1995.
Why?


The Yankees Make a Deal for an Ace in McDowell
The Yankees made a stunning trade late last night that could stabilize their starting rotation next season and beyond when they made a deal for the former Cy Young Award winner Jack McDowell from the Chicago White Sox for Keith Heberling, a minor league pitcher, and a player to be named later.
Because of myriad uncertainties raised by the labor disagreement in baseball and the possibility of the owners' implementation of a salary cap today, McDowell is technically not a member of the Yankees and is still a free agent.


CHRONICLE
Father-and-son doctorates from Hofstra for Melvin and Mario Van Peebles A gathering of comrades from three Koch administrations.
Now they can be called Dr.
Dad and Dr.
Son: MELVIN VAN PEEBLES and his son MARIO VAN PEEBLES are to receive honorary doctorates of humane letters at the Hofstra University commencement in Hempstead, L.I., on Sunday morning.
"When Mario was about 12 years old and working for me, someone asked what he wanted to be when he grew up," Melvin Van Peebles recalled the other day.
"He said, 'I want to be like my dad.' "


Carter Says He May Travel To Bosnia as Private Envoy
Former President Jimmy Carter said tonight that he had held talks with Bosnian Serb emissaries and might travel to Bosnia soon as a private mediator to promote a peace settlement.
Mr.
Carter said he would consider making the trip if the Bosnian Serbs took the immediate steps promised today by their leader, Radovan Karadzic, as an inducement to persuade the former President to act as a negotiator.


Giuliani Presses Board for Role In Selecting Schools Chancellor
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani said yesterday that although he did not have the legal power to select a new schools chancellor, he wanted the Board of Education to recognize that it had to work with him to pick a successor to Ramon C. Cortines, whom the Mayor has been pressuring to leave.
In spelling out what he wants to happen if Mr.
Cortines chooses not to stay, Mr.
Giuliani was asking the board to give him a major role in selecting a new head of the school system, even though the law leaves that decision solely to the board.
He was asking the board to recognize what has often been a political reality, that a mayor's power over the schools is broader than his two appointments to the seven-member board.


Philip Morris's President to Succeed Chairman
R.
William Murray, the 59-year-old chairman of the Philip Morris Companies, will retire and be replaced on Feb. 1 by Philip Morris's chief executive and president, Geoffrey C. Bible, the company announced yesterday.
The promotion of Mr.
Bible, 57, which was announced at a regular board of directors meeting, "was not a big surprise," said Emanuel Goldman, a securities analyst with Paine Webber.
"He came from the tobacco business, then headed international foods," Mr.
Goldman said.
"He's sharp, a good businessman, and this is a plus for the company."


COMPANY BRIEFS
EMERGY WORLDWIDE, Palo Alto, Calif., the global logistics service unit of Consolidated Freightways Inc., bought six Boeing 727 jets from UAL Corp.'s United Airlines.
Terms were not disclosed.


Accused Killer Asks Search for 'Real Killer'
Colin Ferguson, who has denied charges that he killed six people on a Long Island Rail Road train a year ago, asked the court today for money to hire a private investigator to "find the real killer."
"I need the funds to locate witnesses and for an investigator to obtain the identity of the actual Caucasian gunmen," said Mr.
Ferguson, who is acting as his own attorney.


Evolution as Spiritual Free-for-All
It has always been easy to spot Moses Pendleton's distinctive touch within the creative commune that has called itself Pilobolus for 25 years.
While his fellow choreographers there have never been short on imagination, they have rarely matched the unbridled fantasy that identifies Mr.
Pendleton's independent work in Momix, the troupe he founded in 1984.
"Passion," the single work that opened Momix's three-week season at the Joyce Theater (175 Eighth Avenue, at 19th Street, Chelsea) on Tuesday night is a typical Pendleton mix of irreverence and sincerity, the grotesque and the pure.


On Trial: Turkey's Kurdish Policy
A Turkish court has sentenced eight Kurdish members of Parliament to prison for doing what representatives in a democracy are supposed to do -- speaking out in behalf of their constituents.
Washington was right to protest this gross injustice.
It is a stain on Turkey's human rights record.
Even worse, it is a blow to Turkish democracy.
It violates the principle of parliamentary immunity that is essential to representative government.
It also threatens to polarize Turkish politics by driving Kurdish dissent out of normal political channels and into the violent arms of Kurdish separatists.


Rabbi Benjamin Morgenstern, 87, Educator
Rabbi Benjamin Morgenstern, an Orthodox Jewish religious leader and educator for many years, died on Friday at Shaare Zedek Hospital in Jerusalem.
He was 87 and had retired to Jerusalem from Brooklyn nearly 20 years ago.
The cause was complications after heart surgery, said Seymour P. Lachman, a family friend and the dean for community development at the City University of New York.


Gunman Terrorizes Students in Campus Siege
Thirty-five students at the State University here showed up this morning for the last day of class in the History of Ancient Greece, expecting the usual fare, bloody but distant: wars, empire, Alexander the Great.
Instead, the police said, they were held hostage for two and a half hours by a rifle-wielding psychology student who ranted about a microchip in his brain, threatened to kill the students and demanded to speak to President Clinton, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo, members of Congress, the university president and financial-aid officials.
The standoff ended when a 19-year-old sophomore from Long Island lunged at the gunman, who shot and wounded him before others in the class wrestled him to the ground.


3Com Corp.(COMS,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Time Warner's TV Plan Is on Display in 5 Homes
Time Warner Inc., put on a glittering display today of its vision for television in the future, with the backing of two local families who happily pronounced it wonderful.
After two years of preparation, Time Warner showed its experimental "Full Service Network," an interactive video system linked by fiber optics that allows people to order movies at any time, do on-line shopping and play video games.


People
*
Jack H. Irving, executive vice president at Saatchi &amp; Saatchi Advertising, New York, was named to the additional new post of director for media.


First Accord By New York With a Union On Workfare
The Giuliani administration has reached an agreement with New York City's largest municipal union to set up a pilot program under which some people receiving welfare payments would be required to work in some school jobs, like crossing guard and cafeteria server, administration officials said yesterday.
Senior administration officials and leaders of District Council 37 of the American Federation of State, County and Municipal Employees met yesterday to begin to work out details of the pilot program, which would involve an unspecified number of people receiving home relief welfare grants.


Perry Drug Stores Inc.(PDS,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Travelers Frightened, But Flying
The crash of an American Eagle commuter aircraft on Tuesday night, the second in as many months, set off ripples of concern, fear and resignation at airports and travel agencies yesterday, but led to few cancellations.
For the most part, travel agents said the reaction to the crash near Raleigh-Durham International Airport in North Carolina was considerably more muted than the rush of calls they received after the USAir crash in Pittsburgh on Sept. 8, in which 132 lost their lives on a Boeing 737-300 jet.


Journal; The Key to the City
On New Year's Eve, thousands of revelers, tourists and scoundrels will once again gather in Times Square to watch the ball drop, and millions more will watch on TV.
Why?
The ball is but a bauble, the neighborhood a has-been.
Its gaudy signs aside, the intersection of Broadway and 42d Street has long been an urban blank, sparsely populated by fast-food and electronics outlets and the last remaining peep shows.
No matter.
Crowds pour into the former crossroads of the world anyway, and not just on New Year's.
Even in a coma, Times Square remains an alluring international symbol of the racing, racy Gotham pulse; those of us who work there still catch a whiff of that adrenaline along with the other odors greeting us at the subway exit each morning.


'How Social Change Should Look'
"YOU spend a ton of time at the office, why not make it like home?" asked Peter Wormser, an architect, in his bid to design the new 10,000-square-foot offices of the Ms.
Foundation for Women.
Working in a tight space on the top two floors of a 1929 Art Deco building at 120 Wall Street, with an even tighter budget of less than $48 a square foot, Mr.
Wormser juxtaposed hard industrial materials like distressed raw steel, brass mesh and ribbed glass with fir, maple and warm desert colors.
The at-home feel is complemented by art, currently a show of paintings and sculptures by artists who are women -- including Elizabeth Murray, Ida Applebroog and Katherine Hu Fan -- and their daughters.
The comfortable furniture was designed by, among others, Frank Gehry and the late Norman Cherner.


The Last Shall Be First
The new Republican majority has pledged that term limits will be a top priority in the next Congress.
Yet it seems improbable that career politicians such as Strom Thurmond, a Senator since 1954, will step aside simply because their party has promised Congressional turnover.
It also seems unlikely that restrictions on Congressional candidates -- beyond those of age and residency specified by the Constitution -- will pass judicial muster.
Yet change is possible.
Members of Congress are free to adopt any internal system of governance they wish, as long as it is administered consistently.
To get the effect of term limits without the unpleasantness of terminating anyone's career, they could simply give the most legislative authority to the newest members.


Schedule Provides No Relief for Knicks
Unless the Knicks play better basketball than they have recently, the rest of the week could be a losing proposition.
New York (11-7) will open a three-game road trip Thursday night against the Sacramento Kings, followed by games against the Phoenix Suns on Friday and the Portland Trail Blazers on Sunday.
The way the Knicks are playing, an 0-3 trip is not out of the question.


Stewart Enterprises Inc.(STEI,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


World News Briefs; Iranian Rejects Call To Guide Shiite Muslims
Iran's supreme religious leader, Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, today rejected official efforts to promote him as the leading spiritual guide of the world's Shiite Muslims, but he said he still intended to exercise leadership over Shiites outside Iran.
The Council of Theologians in Qum, the religious capital of Iran, named Ayatollah Khamenei as one of seven successors to the previous spiritual guide, or Marja Taqlid, the Grand Ayatollah Ali Araki, who died last month.


Man Killed in Club Stampede Carried $1,715 in His Pocket
One of the victims of the stairway stampede at an Elizabeth, N.J., club on Dec. 3 was carrying $1,715 at the time he was killed, the authorities said yesterday.
The cash, which included some $100 bills, was found in a pants pocket of one of the three young men trampled in a crush of young people fleeing from a second-floor dance floor at El Balcon after a fight erupted, the Union County Prosecutor, Andrew K. Ruotolo, said.
He declined to identify which of the young men was carrying the cash; he did say the victim was also carrying a cellular phone and two pagers.


New Contracts for Morris and Schilling
The Cincinnati Reds reached agreement yesterday with first baseman HAL MORRIS on a $3.3 million contract, the Philadelphia Phillies signed right-hander CURT SCHILLING and the Cleveland Indians claimed left-hander DENNIS COOK on waivers from the Chicago White Sox and signed him to a one-year contract.
Morris, 29, led the Reds in hitting (.335) and five other categories this year.
Schilling, who signed a one-year, $2.3 million contract, started 11 games last season, his third with the Phils.
He won only twice and spent over two months on the disabled list with elbow and knee problems after going 16-7 in 1993.


Moscow Distorts Conflict in the Caucasus
To the Editor:
The news media are facilitating a Russian genocide on the indigenous nations of the North Caucasus.
I have been following the news from the region on cable television, through reports of the Interfax news agency and on the internet, as well as in your newspaper and in Associated Press articles.


Strong Profit at 3Com Lifts Its and Rivals' Stock Prices
Shares of the 3Com Corporation soared to a record high today after the company posted better-than-expected financial results.
The surge in 3Com led a rally in the shares of other computer network-equipment companies.


Art in Review
Ellsworth Kelly
Matthew Marks  522 West 22d Street  Chelsea  Through Jan. 29
The tall, wide windows of Matthew Marks's new Chelsea gallery make an ideal frame for Ellsworth Kelly's paintings in an impressive inaugural show.
Mr.
Kelly's gift for both simplifying and complicating abstracted forms is justly renowned, and such transformations are the essence of the three series here.
Much of the work is monumental in scale and formed from pairs of overlapping shaped canvases, a configuration with distinct sculptural implications.
In "Yellow Relief With Blue" (1991), a thin vertical emerges from behind a large semicircle like a handle from a folded fan.
In "Green Relief With Blue" (1993), one monochromatic panel appears to be slipping aside to reveal another in a gracefully supportive pas de deux.


So Orange County Didn't Want to Raise Taxes; Help the Working Poor
To the Editor:
Governor-elect George E. Pataki proposes a 25 percent tax cut for New Yorkers.
If the Republicans believe that we can afford this, why not give the entire tax cut to the working poor -- those who earn less than $30,000 a year?


Robert Metzger, 55, Decorator Known for Drama
Robert Howard Metzger, one of the contemporary interior decorators who epitomized an opulent, elegant style, died yesterday at New York Hospital.
He was 55 and lived on the Upper West Side and in Water Mill, L.I.
The cause of death was pneumonia, said Michael Christiano, his business partner since 1976.


Mildred Orrick, 88, Women's Fashions Designer
Mildred Orrick, a designer who gave women's fashion a natural, informal look for more than three decades, died on Dec. 9 at her home in Elliston, Va., where she had lived for the last 20 years.
She was 88.
The cause was cancer, said her daughter Sarah Orrick of Washington.


Judge Assails Lawyers for Leslie Fay
A Federal bankruptcy judge ruled yesterday that Weil, Gotshal &amp; Manges, one of the country's largest and richest law firms, had damaged its client, the Leslie Fay Companies, by not disclosing several potential conflicts of interest when it applied to the court for permission to repesent Leslie Fay.
But the judge declined to disqualify the law firm from continuing to represent the company, which is struggling to emerge from bankruptcy, because, she said, it would cause Leslie Fay even further harm.


Katmandu Journal; The Himalayas' Siren Call: 11 Die on a Mountain
"On the mountain, joy and sorrow are close companions," said Fritz Marz.
"Fate decreed this time that the outcome would be sorrow."
Mr.
Marz, a former president of the German Alpine Federation, was speaking at a memorial service for 11 mountain climbers who fell to their deaths in central Nepal in November in one of Himalayan mountaineering's worst accidents.


A Chance to Slow Plutonium Traffic
As part of its effort to halt the spread of nuclear arms, the U.S. has stopped producing plutonium for military purposes and is seeking a worldwide cutoff of the military production of nuclear material.
Yet vastly more plutonium is generated as spent nuclear fuel in civilian power plants.
Some of it is being reprocessed for use as fuel for commercial reactors, when in fact low-enriched uranium will do.
Plutonium can be used in bombs; its reprocessing needs to be curtailed.
Washington can begin that effort now.
It is renegotiating a 1958 agreement with Euratom, the European Union's atomic energy agency, which is due to expire at the end of next year.
Under that arrangement, U.S. companies have supplied the Europeans with low-enriched uranium for use in their power plants.
Yet Washington has repeatedly waived its own requirements that prohibit the spent fuel generated from that uranium from being reprocessed into plutonium and shipped to others without U.S. approval.


Tandy Toward the Finish, With a Flourish
Jessica Tandy's graceful presence in one of her final roles gives "Camilla" a valedictory grandeur.
Though this is by far the lesser of two new films dedicated to Tandy's memory (the other is "Nobody's Fool," opening next week), it's the one that gives this great, unforgettable actress the more substantial showcase.
"Camilla" spends an awful lot of time admiring Tandy in the title role, but that admiration is deserved.
She moves enchantingly through an otherwise treacly film that wouldn't work without her.
Tandy, who died in September at the age of 85, approached this film with daring and surprising ease.
While "Camilla" reveres its heroine, hers is hardly a standard great-lady role.
Not every octogenarian actress would be game for skinny-dipping, fishing, violin playing and a wonderfully tender bedroom scene with her real-life husband.
When Tandy and Hume Cronyn finish the film with a courtly scene on a beach at sunset, they provide a gallant, heartbreaking flourish.


G.O.P. Picks New Senator To Respond To President
The spokesman chosen to deliver the Republican response to President Clinton's address tonight may be at once the party's freshest and most familiar face: Fred D. Thompson of Tennessee, the lawyer turned movie actor turned brand-new Senator.
It was Mr.
Thompson who rolled to a big victory in his home state from behind the wheel of a leased pickup by preaching that Congress was more the problem than the solution.
In his debut tonight from Capitol Hill, part of his job was to try to convince Americans that under new Republican leadership, that message need no longer apply.


Songs That Can Add a Merry Beat to Christmas
Here are reviews of Christmas CD's by pop critics of The New York Times.
The CD's range in price from $6.98 to $16.98. (An introduction appears on page C1.) John Prine
"A JOHN PRINE CHRISTMAS" (Oh Boy).
The country-folk singer and songwriter John Prine has always had a streak of sardonic humor.
And in "All the Best," a Christmas greeting to a divorced partner, he muses, "Love's like a Christmas card/You decorate a tree/You throw it into the yard." The centerpiece of the eight-song collection is a mostly spoken monologue of Christmas memories in which Mr.
Prine recalls poring over a Montgomery Ward Christmas catalogue as a child and later being given his first guitar, a Silvertone Kentucky Blue.
Among the nonoriginals, the high point is a country-rock "I Saw Mommy Kissing Santa Claus" that's gruff enough to keep it from being terminally cute.
STEPHEN HOLDEN


GYMNASTICS: A Gymnast's Toughest Balancing Act; Shannon Miller Juggles School, Social Life and Sports With a New, Mature Assurance
Since she won five medals in gymnastics as a 15-year-old at the 1992 Summer Olympics, Shannon Miller has grown.
She has grown into a two-time world champion and she has also grown 4 inches and gained 20 pounds in a sport that remains a race against the clock, the body clock.
The maturing of her body since the Barcelona Games has shifted Miller's center of gravity and brought a transformation in her performance from a pipsqueak with a rubber-band body to a young woman of confidence, power and sophistication.
And that's just the problem.


Songs That Can Add a Merry Beat to Christmas
Here are reviews of Christmas CD's by pop critics of The New York Times.
The CD's range in price from $6.98 to $16.98. (An introduction appears on page C1.) Elvis Presley
"IF EVERY DAY WAS LIKE CHRISTMAS" (RCA).
This CD collects the entirety of Elvis Presley's two holiday records ("Elvis's Christmas Album" from 1957 and "Elvis Sings the Wonderful World of Christmas" from 1971) and adds four alternate versions of songs.
For some performers, that would be enough of a retrospective.
But not for Presley.
Some CD's of "If Every Day Was Like Christmas" have been specially packaged to include a pop-up wintertime picture of Presley's Graceland estate.
This kind of kitsch pretty much sums up the uninspired songs from 1971 on the collection (with the exception of the rhythm-and-blues jam "Merry Christmas Baby").
The earlier numbers, however, are true gems, with the King wailing and crooning, rocking and testifying through yuletide songs like "White Christmas," "Blue Christmas," "Santa Claus Is Back in Town" and the collection's heart-tugging title track.
NEIL STRAUSS


Home Video
If you're still poking around for scarce Mighty Morphin Power Rangers items and you own a computer with a CD-ROM drive, you might want to consider the "Mighty Morphin Power Rangers" disk.
Then again, PC Data, a research organization in Virginia, ranks the title as the best-selling children's entertainment CD-ROM of the year, so you might find some stores out of this item, too.
The disk, which is for Macintosh, Power PC and Windows, is distributed by Paramount Home Video.
About 15 percent of its sales have been in video stores, relatively few of which carry CD-ROMs, but in some ways the Power Rangers CD-ROM has ties to the videocassette.


Man Guilty On All Counts In Carjacking
In an emotional climax to a roiling trial, a jury today found Edward L. Summers guilty of shooting a Rockland County teen-ager to death in a snow-covered field and wounding the teen-ager's best friend so he could steal their Jeep Wrangler.
After deliberating for nine hours over two days, the jury of eight men and four women sent a powerful statement, finding Mr.
Summers guilty of all 23 counts of murder, kidnapping, armed robbery, grand larceny and lesser crimes that he had been charged with at the start of the 38-day trial.


Even When It's Near 90, Els Stays Cool in the 60's
When the sun came up high on the island today, burning with the promise of some serious tropical heat, Ernie Els smiled that crooked smile of his.
No golfer likes heat more than this man.
The higher the mercury rises, the lower he goes under par.
It is almost a mystical thing, calling him back to his home of Johannesburg, or bringing to mind the sauna that was Oakmont last June, where he won the United States Open.
So, with the sun beating down and the temperature hovering near 90, Els blazed his way around the Tryall Club in the first round of the $2.5 million Johnny Walker World Championship.
With an ease that is becoming a trademark, he shot a round of 64 that tied the course record on the par-71 layout and gave him a three-stroke lead over three players.
During one stretch, he birdied eight of 10 holes.


This Year, Software From Santa
Like millions of other children, Marcelo Garzo, who is 10, can't wait to see the presents waiting for him under the tree on Christmas morning.
And like a lot of his friends, what he hopes he'll find there is a lot of software for his home PC.
The surge in sales this year of a new crop of home computers -- equipped with faster CD-ROM players, rich sound and higher-powered microprocessors than those of earlier years -- has created a boom in software for the home as well.
Households with children 17 or younger are expected to spend $1.8 billion on software this year -- about 40 percent of it in the last quarter, according to the Link Resources Corporation, a market research company in New York.


Sooners May Consider Schnellenberger
Louisville Coach HOWARD SCHNELLENBERGER surfaced yesterday as a leading candidate for the vacant football job at Oklahoma.
Several news media outlets in Louisville and Oklahoma reported that Schnellenberger visited yesterday with DONNIE DUNCAN, the athletic director, DAVID BOREN, the university president, and the search committee.
Schnellenberger, 60, is 54-56-2 in 10 seasons at Louisville.
Before Louisville, Schnellenberger coached at Miami and led the Hurricanes to the 1983 national championship. (AP)


On Stage, and Off
'What's Wrong'? Too Much
"What's Wrong With This Picture?" has its answer: the critics didn't like the Jewish mother ghost story starring Faith Prince, and the public didn't buy tickets.
It opened on Broadway on Dec. 8; it closes on Sunday.
"We decided that the best thing to do was return the 25 percent that's left of the capitalization to the investors," said David Stone, the lead producer, whose first production, "Family Secrets," has run for 15 months off Broadway.


Christmas in a Quirky Texas Town Where 1+1=22
If your Christmas holidays have a way of turning out badly, take heart.
Things are worse in Tuna, Tex., the state's third-smallest hamlet, where good cheer, always in short supply, is threatening to dry up altogether.
The annual lawn display competition, sponsored by radio station OKKK, is being sabotaged by someone known only as the Christmas Phantom.
The Smut Snatchers are trying to have "Silent Night" banned on the ground that decent people don't sing about "round, young virgins." And if the electric company makes good on its promise to shut off the juice, the Tuna Little Theater's production of "A Christmas Carol" (by Charlie Dickens) will close before it opens.


USA Today Names New Top Editor
USA Today, one of the country's most widely circulated newspapers, appointed a new top editor yesterday in a move that was seen as a bid to increase the paper's reach globally.
Separately, USA Today's owner, the Gannett Company, received an endorsement of its growth prospects from one of Wall Street's savviest investors, Warren E. Buffett, in a move that caused its stock to surge.


The Kline Puzzle: A Definite Classic Long Neglected
FRANZ KLINE'S works of the 1950's and early 60's are classics of the New York School: think of the postwar period in America and what comes to mind are Jackson Pollock's drips, Willem de Kooning's women and Kline's great architectonic abstractions, his images of crisscrossing black lines against white backdrops.
So why is it that "Franz Kline: Black and White, 1950-1961," which opens today at the Whitney Museum of American Art, is the first exhibition of his work to be presented by a museum in New York City in 25 years?
Kline, who died of a heart attack in 1962 at the age of 51, isn't a forgotten man, to be sure, and there have been museum shows outside New York.
But he has been given less attention than contemporaries (Clyfford Still is one example) whose art isn't so durable or influential.
The first major book on Kline came out only several years ago.


How an Exotic East Shaped Fashion
Since the days of the old silk route from China, Westerners have been enthralled by the fabrics, food and furnishings of the Far East.
For its current exhibition, "Orientalism: Visions of the East in Western Dress," the Costume Institute of the Metropolitan Museum of Art has focused on the fashion aspects of this fascination.
Starting with a man's Chinese velvet cape made in Portugal in the late 16th century, the exhibition ranges through almost five centuries.
It ends with contemporary styles by Jean-Paul Gaultier, Giorgio Armani, Gianni Versace, Oscar de la Renta and others.
Only two modern Asian designers are included, both from Japan.
Hanae Mori uses a calligraphy print for evening gowns with a calm, classic look.
Issey Miyake, who has always been more concerned with developing new fashion paths than with revisiting old ones, is responsible for three experimental designs, all in his new pleated fabric.


Songs That Can Add a Merry Beat to Christmas
Here are reviews of Christmas CD's by pop critics of The New York Times.
The CD's range in price from $6.98 to $16.98. (An introduction appears on page C1.) Tony Bennett
"SNOWFALL: THE TONY BENNETT CHRISTMAS ALBUM" (Columbia).
A big orchestra backs Tony Bennett in a group of well-chosen songs, including "My Favorite Things," "The Christmas Song," "Santa Claus Is Comin' to Town," "White Christmas" and "Winter Wonderland." The arrangements, by Robert Farnon, are even a bit modern; Mr.
Bennett sings the material as he should, loose and swinging.
It's a jazz version of Christmas, redolent of ease and sophistication.
PETER WATROUS


Pictures From a Spy Camera at an East German Exhibition
The man in charge of all the files left by the East German secret police has strongly rejected suggestions that they be destroyed or sealed.
"We are hearing appeals for an approach to the past which reminds us of West Germany in the 1950's," the official, Joachim Gauck, said here on Friday.
"The total silence about Nazi crimes in those years created one generation that refused to face the truth and another that struck out with excessive violence against the rule of law. We don't want this to happen again.


Clinton Campaign Ordered to Repay U.S. More Than $1 Million
The Federal Election Commission ruled today that the 1992 Clinton Presidential campaign committee had to repay the Treasury more than $1 million in Federal matching funds because some of its expenses did not qualify for the money.
The sum to be repaid is far less than the record $4 million repayment that the commission's auditors had recommended, and Lyn Utrecht, a lawyer for the Clinton campaign committee, said she was pleased with the decision.


Moore Makes the Pro Bowl
The Jets had something to cheer about today and they greeted the news on the practice field with whoops.
Rob Moore became the first offensive player on the team since 1988 to be voted to the Pro Bowl squad.
The wide receiver's 70 catches tie him for fifth in the American Conference, where he is also among the leaders with 929 yards and 6 touchdowns.
But Mo Lewis, who seemed destined for the Pro Bowl earlier this season, did not make it.
The linebacker, probably the Jets' top performer, was deeply disappointed.
He declined to talk about it.


Henshaw Gets Credit for Calmly Taking Brown Through the Tough Times
He is, most of the time, calm and at ease.
The Giants' offensive coordinator, George Henshaw, has the demeanor of a billionaire Wall Street executive who is making the big deal for the 50th time.
He knows the stakes are big, but he doesn't let the pressure rattle him.
That is, of course, only part of what Henshaw is about.
"He can get pretty fired up," said quarterback Kent Graham.
"On the field he can get going. There is a misconception that he is only just this laid-back guy. He can get on you when you need someone to get on you. He has a good feel for when to get on you and when to support you. Over all, he is pretty calm. It's kind of a quiet intensity. He's great to work with."


Songs That Can Add a Merry Beat to Christmas
Here are reviews of Christmas CD's by pop critics of The New York Times.
The CD's range in price from $6.98 to $16.98. (An introduction appears on page C1.) Judy Collins
"COME REJOICE! A JUDY COLLINS CHRISTMAS" (Mesa).
Judy Collins's angelic soprano twinkles like a star atop an evergreen on this wonderfully atmospheric holiday album.
In addition to familiar carols, the collection includes three originals, "Song for Sarajevo," "Come Rejoice" and the Celtic-flavored "All on a Wintry Night." "Away in a Manger" is prefaced by a reading from the Book of Luke.
On four songs, Ms.
Collins is joined by the St.
Thomas Boys Choir.
At once nostalgic, joyous and inspirational, "Come Rejoice!" is Ms.
Collins's best album in years.
Its liner notes include the singer's richly sensuous remembrances of childhood Christmases.
STEPHEN HOLDEN


Police Sergeant Arrested
An off-duty police sergeant was suspended after being arrested last night in Brooklyn on a charge of patronizing a prostitute, a misdemeanor, the police said.
The sergeant, Steven Contino, was arrested at 10 P.M. at the intersection of Atlantic Avenue and New York Avenue, on the border of Crown Heights and Bedford-Stuyvesant, after soliciting an undercover police officer who was posing as a prostitute, said Detective Andrew McInnis, a police spokesman.


Woman Reports Rape At L.I. Mall Garage
A Christmas shopper was raped yesterday in a parking garage at the Roosevelt Field Shopping Center, the police said.
The 37-year-old woman was approached by two masked men, one of whom put a knife to her throat as she unlocked her car, a few feet from an unmanned security post inside the first level of the three-tier garage.
After they fled on foot, the victim drove to her home and called the police.
Article, page B6.


No Headline
"If you can't be in an academic environment and sit next to someone of the opposite gender and learn just because you're sitting next to someone of the opposite gender, then you have a problem. It's natural for men and women to be together, and abnormal for them not to be. If that offends, that's too bad. They wouldn't be there if their parents didn't like each other." STEVEN SERLING, who won the right to study biology at Texas Woman's University.  [ A32:6. ]


Corrections
A picture caption in some copies on Tuesday about preparations for a winter solstice celebration at the Cathedral of St.
John the Divine misstated the timing.
The events began yesterday and continue through tomorrow; the celebration is not on Monday.


On My Mind; Lean and Very Mean
They were born in a land where work and hope were rights, not dreams, and for the rest of their lives it gave them a spring in their walk.
They did not claim the earth, just that part of it they could earn with their muscle and brain.
They believed good steady work, wages moving up, was their part ownership in their own society.
They believed that next year would be better than this one, if not always for them, then for sure for their children.
Generally they turned out right, so the children believed it too, generation after generation.


Airline Tells of Balky Engine Before Crash
Officials of American Eagle, the commuter carrier whose small twin-engine plane crashed here on Tuesday, killing 15 people and injuring 5, said today that just hours before the fatal flight the aircraft's left engine would not start and had to be repaired.
Marty Heires, a spokesman for American Eagle, said that the incident involving the plane occurred just before it made a 2:50 P.M. flight from Raleigh to Greensboro.
The engine was quickly repaired, he said, and the plane took off and landed without incident.


At a Mostly Female University, a Fight to Keep It Thus
Steven Serling, a 35-year-old airline mechanic and military veteran, did not set out to become the male counterpart to Shannon Faulkner, the woman who is fighting for a place at The Citadel, the all-male, state-supported military college in South Carolina.
He only wanted a degree in biology.
But after Mr.
Serling was told that he could not get one from Texas Woman's University, the local public institution of higher learning he wants to attend, he threatened to sue, contending that the university was engaging in sex discrimination.
Last week the university's board, saying it wanted to avoid a protracted legal battle, relented and opened all of the programs to men at T.W.U., the nation's largest predominantly female university.


For the Bar Exam, Thinking Gets You Nowhere
To the Editor:
I just learned I was among the thousands who passed the New York bar examination.
To prepare, I enrolled in a standard prep course that boasts a proven record of high pass rates.
Here are a few excerpts from this summer's lectures:


Songs That Can Add a Merry Beat to Christmas
Here are reviews of Christmas CD's by pop critics of The New York Times.
The CD's range in price from $6.98 to $16.98. (An introduction appears on page C1.) Various Artists
"THE COOLEST CHRISTMAS" (Oglio/Columbia).
This grab-bag of Christmas novelties bounces through pop eras, ignoring coherence but coming up with a fine assortment.
It includes Eartha Kitt's gold-digging "Santa Baby," the Ventures' instrumental "Sleigh Ride," the Cocteau Twins musing over "Frosty the Snowman" and the unlikely duo of David Bowie and Bing Crosby crooning "The Little Drummer Boy." Anyone looking for Brenda Lee's "Rockin' Around the Christmas Tree" or Guy Lombardo's "Auld Lang Syne" will find it in this collection.
JON PARELES


Herman Liebert, 83, Librarian And Expert on Samuel Johnson
Herman W. Liebert, a bibliophile, author and librarian emeritus at Yale University, died on Tuesday at his home in Prospect, Conn.
He was 83.
The cause was respiratory failure, said his son, Frederick P. Liebert.


Songs That Can Add a Merry Beat to Christmas
Here are reviews of Christmas CD's by pop critics of The New York Times.
The CD's range in price from $6.98 to $16.98. (An introduction appears on page C1.) Various Artists
"GIANT COUNTRY CHRISTMAS VOL. 1" (Giant).
This compilation opens with Carlene Carter's "Rockin' Little Christmas," a rocking tune that features a fine guitar solo by its co-writer, Al Anderson.
"Blue Christmas," by Clay Walker, follows, with blues riff and pedal steel, and Dennis Robbins sings a rock-styled "Santa's on Vacation," about finding Santa on a beach, relaxing.
The "Working Elf Blues," by Daron Norwood, is another rocking tune that starts with the words, "I work for a fat man in a long white beard, he's got rosy red cheeks and he dresses weird," Indisputably a classic.
PETER WATROUS


RESULTS PLUS
N.B.A.
Ceballos Thwarts Rockets  Cedric Ceballos scored a season-high 36 points last night, helping the Los Angeles Lakers hold off Houston, 97-94.
The Lakers, 3-0 on this road trip, have won 10 of their last 12 games.
Ceballos scored 8 points over the final eight minutes when the Rockets threatened, falling short when Robert Horry missed a 3-pointer at the buzzer. (AP) Nuggets 101, Heat 99: Rodney Rogers hit a game-winning 8-footer with three seconds left for Denver, which overcame 29 turnovers and a 20-point deficit at Miami. (AP)


New President at Smith


Ondieki Refuses to Race the Chinese
LISA ONDIEKI, the 1992 winner of the New York City Marathon, said last night that she would not compete against Chinese runners because she believes they use drugs.
Ondeiki won a 10,000-meter race in 31 minutes 47.11 seconds at an international meet in Melbourne, Australia.
The Australian runner's personal best is 31:11.72.
The world record is 29:31.78, set last year by WANG JUNXIA of China.





Giuliani Plans Inducements To Revive Wall Street Area
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani proposed tax breaks and zoning changes yesterday to bolster the sagging real estate market of Wall Street and the rest of lower Manhattan.
The inducements are intended to encourage new housing and offices in the area and stop any further exodus of businesses.
Despite the fame of Wall Street and high-profile sites like the World Trade Center, lower Manhattan's vitality has been drained by outdated office buildings and a lack of housing that leaves streets barren after dark.


Diner's Journal
Same Place, New Face
The restaurant that used to be the Chefs Cuisiniers Club has been completely transformed.
"It still has the same owners and the same chef," said a woman on the telephone, "but Alva is a completely different restaurant."
It certainly is.
The restaurant, owned by Charles Palmer of Aureole and Fernando Saralegui, formerly of Raoul's, was once light and airy.
It is now a darkly mysterious space with light bulbs popping out of the obscurity and honoring their inventor.
Up front there is a cozy bar with a chalkboard listing pleasantly casual dishes.
In the back there are comfortable booths.


A Bittersweet Visit By an Ailing Santa
Since this particular Santa doesn't come around much anymore, the red suit had to be taken out of storage, the beard and wig restyled.
He needed a new black belt and, most important, he had to meditate a few hours to get back into character: last time, when asked how he arrived, he said the No. 2 train, causing great consternation.
This year, Mark Woodley as Santa took a car service to the State University Health Science Center in the Flatbush section of Brooklyn.
There was no visible indication that many of the 100 or so shrieking children that greeted him had H.I.V., the virus that causes AIDS.
Each sat on his lap, discussing pressing matters like loose teeth and toys.


Songs That Can Add a Merry Beat to Christmas
Here are reviews of Christmas CD's by pop critics of The New York Times.
The CD's range in price from $6.98 to $16.98. (An introduction appears on page C1.) Houston Person
"CHRISTMAS WITH HOUSTON PERSON AND FRIENDS" (Muse).
The album starts with Etta Jones singing a wish to Santa: "Santa, baby, '54 convertible, light blue, I'll wait up for you, dear." The rest of the album is part serious, part tongue in cheek.
Grady Tate sings, too, and Houston Person plays some rough-toned solos.
PETER WATROUS


From Japan, Paintings To Go, but With Charm
The art critic Soetsu Yanagi (1889-1961), who put together New York's first public collection of Japanese folk art in the 1930's, once defined the folk-art genre as based on functionality, anonymity, repetition and ordinariness of subject matter.
His description exactly fits the works in "Otsu-e: Japanese Folk Paintings From the Harriet and Edson Spencer Collection" at the Japan Society, though in terms of pure visual pleasure there is nothing ordinary about them.
The broad-stroked outlines and eye-catching colors of their lively figures may be far removed from the poise of classical Japanese style, but they have a high-spirited, slapdash charm of their own.


Rules on Lending to Poor Blocked
The Justice Department sided with the nation's banking industry today against the Clinton Administration's banking regulators, blocking plans to step up enforcement of laws aimed at increasing lending in poor neighborhoods.
The official statement of the Administration's legal policy does not affect separate laws against racial discrimination that the Justice Department has vigorously enforced.
But the legal opinion represents another blow to President Clinton's 1992 campaign pledge to make it easier for poor people to borrow money and revive their neighborhoods without Federal aid.


Traveling on Half a Tank
If critical traditions count for anything, Jim Carrey can look forward one day to being discovered by the French film establishment and canonized as the new Jerry Lewis.
There are moments all through his newest movie, "Dumb and Dumber," when the rubber-faced actor with a chipped front tooth, his hair in bangs and his cough-drop eyes ablaze with maniacal mischief, is almost a dead ringer for Mr.
Lewis on one of his hyperactive jags.
Mr.
Carrey's version of Mr.
Lewis, it should be noted, adds hefty dashes of sex and scatology in a 6-year-old's style.
The funniest scene in the movie involves a powerful laxative, a broken toilet and some graphically colorful sound effects.


Incendiary Device Burns 2 Teen-Agers On a Subway Train
Two teen-agers on a subway train in Harlem were burned yesterday, one seriously, when an incendiary device that one of them was carrying set a book bag on fire, the transit police said.
"It's a device that is intended to cause a fire," said Albert W. O'Leary, a spokesman for the transit police.
"It had a battery, wires and a timer."


Songs That Can Add a Merry Beat to Christmas
Here are reviews of Christmas CD's by pop critics of The New York Times.
The CD's range in price from $6.98 to $16.98. (An introduction appears on page C1.) Frank Sinatra
"THE SINATRA CHRISTMAS ALBUM" (Reprise).
The 13-song collection, recorded between 1963 and 1975, brings together for the first time all the holiday material Frank Sinatra recorded during his Warner Brothers/Reprise years.
The best performances -- "Have Yourself a Merry Little Christmas" and "Whatever Happened to Christmas" (a little-known Jimmy Webb torch song) -- are outweighed by the kitsch.
Five songs feature the bland choral arrangements of Fred Waring and the Pennsylvanians.
On three others, the singer is joined by his children, Tina, Nancy and Frank Jr.
Among the presents offered to him on the revised family version of "The 12 Days of Christmas" are golf clubs and a lavender necktie.
STEPHEN HOLDEN


Fernandez Signed for $3 Million By Yanks
The uncertainty is obvious, the confusion is constant and the answers about the future are still unclear, but the Yankees continue to trudge through the murkiness that baseball has heaped upon itself, shaping a team they hope performs together next season.
Yesterday, even before owners decided to delay imposing new work rules for another week, they signed the veteran infielder Tony Fernandez in a transaction that was much simpler than their trade with the Chicago White Sox for pitcher Jack McDowell late Wednesday night.
While McDowell is in limbo as some form of free agent that must still be determined, Fernandez is definitely a Yankee after signing a two-year, $3 million contract, perhaps to be the starting shortstop.
Fernandez's signing suggests that the Yankees would rather give 20-year-old Derek Jeter more seasoning at shortstop at the Class AAA level.


Mexico Sets Up a Panel to Respond to Rebels
The Government has formed a multi-party legislative commission to resolve the conflict with rebels in Chiapas and to ease tensions that have reached their highest level.
Chiapas, a poor southern state, has been on alert since rebel leaders warned earlier this week that "war is imminent." The Mexican Army has responded by intensifying patrols and fortifying checkpoints.


Text of Clinton Speech Proposing Series of Tax Breaks for the Middle Class
Following is a transcript of President Clinton's speech in Washington last night, as recorded by The New York Times:
My fellow Americans, ours is a great country with a lot to be proud of.
But at this holiday season everybody knows that all is not well with America, that millions of Americans are hurting, frustrated, disappointed, even angry.


Jacques Delors Says No
Jacques Delors, who has spent the past decade presiding over construction of the European Union, had a good chance of moving on to an even more prestigious job next spring -- president of France.
Despite public disenchantment with his Socialist party, polls showed him the front-runner to succeed his friend and fellow Socialist, Francois Mitterrand.
But last Sunday Mr.
Delors announced that he would not be a candidate, shocking political insiders and scrambling the presidential race.
Mr.
Delors will be missed -- especially by the Socialists and those favoring a more federal Europe, two causes now bereft of a popular champion.
But his departure could administer a healthy jolt to French political culture, at a time when cynicism, corruption and displays of raw ambition have dangerously alienated voters across the spectrum.


So Orange County Didn't Want to Raise Taxes; A Think-Twice Rule
To the Editor:
The crux of Bruce Ackerman's argument in "Gingrich vs. the Constitution" (Op-Ed, Dec. 10) is that a House of Representatives rule to require a three-fifths vote to increase taxes, even if rationalized under the power of the House "to determine the rules of its proceedings," is unconstitutional.


French Socialists' Plight: Scaring Up a Candidate
Two days after Jacques Delors refused the Socialist nomination for next spring's presidential elections, Bernard Tapie stepped forward this week and, with his customary panache, reassured the French left that not all was lost.
The self-made millionaire-turned-politician said he regretted that Mr.
Delors, who retires next month as head of the European Union's Executive Commission, had decided not to run.
But he insisted that the left still stood a chance if it could agree on a program and then pick a respected outsider as its candidate.


The Cohorts Of David Smite Rabin
These are rough times for the biblical King David in his capital, Jerusalem.
But because of David and questions about his moral character, times could prove even rougher for the Government of Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin.
The Government faced a motion of no-confidence today, brought by several religious and rightist parties after Foreign Minister Shimon Peres said during a parliamentary debate that he disapproved of some things that King David had done.


Politics Shouldn't Rule On Federal Judgeships
To the Editor:
Only uncharacteristic shortsightedness would lead Senator Orrin Hatch, the new chairman of the Judiciary Committee, to thwart confirmation of the President's nominations to the lower Federal courts (At the Bar, Dec. 9).
An obstructionist strategy will hurt the President now, but it will also hurt the Republicans later and, worse than that, it will hurt the country.


Rowland Asks for Help But Tables Are Turned
Governor-elect John G. Rowland was working the crowd at a luncheonette in Shelton, seeking views about how he should govern when Alderman Dave Parkins seized the moment to offer some advice.
"Sewage-treatment plant," Mr. Parkins said. "Think expanded sewage-treatment plant."


Art in Review
Josef Albers, Naum Gabo and Jackson Pollock  'Prints of the 1940's and 1950's'
Brooke Alexander Editions  476 Broome Street  SoHo  Through Dec. 23
This beautiful show brings together somewhat unfamiliar work by three artists who worked in New York in the postwar years.
So closely is Josef Albers identified with his influential "Homage to the Square" that his lively, varied prints can't help but come as a surprise.
There are plenty of straight lines to be seen, but organic curves predominate, from the woodcut titled "Encircled" (1933), with its jazzy Art Deco arabesque, to the drypoint titled "Nippon" (1942), its squiggly lines looking like threads dropped across a page.


For Elderly, a Phone Link to Loved Ones Far Away
Ann Kaufman is 91, and so she says she has trouble with words.
She can never seem to find the right one, and she has lost some altogether.
"I'm old," she said. "I have the privilege to forget words."


Art in Review
Norman Lewis
A.F.T.U./Bill Hodges Gallery  24 West 57th Street  Manhattan  Through Jan. 21
Thanks to several shows in recent years, the work of Norman Lewis is becoming better known.
This group of paintings from the late 1940's and early 50's highlights a transition for Lewis (1909-1979), when he turned from images of figures to pure abstractions.
The works are composed of dense, interlocking planes floating in the center of the canvases, like Cubist compositions, although the more obvious links are to Klee, Feininger and Tobey. (All of them, like Lewis, showed at the Willard Gallery in Manhattan.)


Songs That Can Add a Merry Beat to Christmas
Here are reviews of Christmas CD's by pop critics of The New York Times.
The CD's range in price from $6.98 to $16.98. (An introduction appears on page C1.) Various Artists
"HAVE A NICE CHRISTMAS: HOLIDAY HITS OF THE 70's" (Rhino).
Kitsch and intentional humor are almost indistinguishable on this collection, whether it's Melanie's earnest, pennywhistle-backed plea for figgy pudding in "Merry Christmas" or Wayne Newton's desperately hep disco-era "Jingle Bell Hustle." As it seesaws from dated drug humor to transparently phony wholesomeness, it's a 1970's time capsule, less for listeners than for all-out trivia collectors.
JON PARELES


Starks Finds Range, Knicks Find Intensity
The Knicks traveled here, wondering about their chemistry and their confidence, and they left with an impressive victory.
Starting an important three-game trip with an emphatic statement, the Knicks defeated the Kings, 94-84, tonight at Arco Arena.
The victory was significant because the Knicks (12-7) did it without Charles Oakley, who sat out the game with a painful dislocated right toe.
His status for Friday night's game in Phoenix was uncertain.


Giuliani Plans Inducements To Revive Wall Street Area
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani proposed tax breaks and zoning changes yesterday to bolster the sagging real estate market of Wall Street and the rest of lower Manhattan.
The inducements are intended to encourage new housing and offices in the area and stop any further exodus of businesses.
Despite the fame of Wall Street and high-profile sites like the World Trade Center, lower Manhattan's vitality has been drained by outdated office buildings and a lack of housing that leaves streets barren after dark.


MAYOR IS PLANNING TO TRIM PROGRAMS THAT ASSIST POOR
The Giuliani administration yesterday began planning sharp reductions in health and welfare benefit programs for the poor as a key part of its strategy for handling next year's $2 billion budget gap.
In a year-end letter sent to all commissioners, Abraham M. Lackman, the Mayor's Budget Director, said that after a year that saw $2 billion worth of reductions in the municipal work force, the administration's second fiscal plan would rely less on staff and agency cuts and place "more emphasis" on "cutting entitlement programs and mandates."


City Subways Need City Managers
Half the highest-ranking officials of New York City's Transit Authority live outside the city, in transparent evasion of the agency's own residency rule.
That's outrageous enough.
But now the authority's president, Alan Kiepper, is backing a phony reform -- a proposal that would let them live as far away as New Haven, Conn.
The transit system's parent agency, the Metropolitan Transportation Authority, is considering a new rule to let employees live anywhere in the wider area served by the Long Island Rail Road and Metro-North.
That may satisfy the suburbanite brass, but it is unsatisfactory for the city, which needs transit leaders in touch with daily transit realities.


Songs That Can Add a Merry Beat to Christmas
Here are reviews of Christmas CD's by pop critics of The New York Times.
The CD's range in price from $6.98 to $16.98. (An introduction appears on page C1.) Various Artists
"A CONCORD JAZZ CHRISTMAS" (Concord).
It's a perfect meeting: a record label that specializes in smooth, elegant jazz looks back to a period when Christmas music was taken a bit more seriously than it is now.
Rosemary Clooney sings a slow "Christmas Time Is Here," as if she really means it.
Eden Atwood sings "Let It Snow, Let It Show, Let It Snow" to a funk rhythm.
The instrumental pieces -- Ken Peplowski's "Have Yourself a Merry Little Christmas," Scott Hamilton's "Christmas Love Song" -- have a cool virtuosity to them.
The music may be for Christmas, but the performances work just as well in August.
PETER WATROUS


A Warrior's Continuing Battles
He is in a cold sweat because of viral pneumonia and a mutiny he never saw coming.
Ever since a Ping-Pong ball rolled out with his team's logo on it at an N.B.A. draft lottery, Don Nelson has lost his credibility, health and perhaps his seat on the Golden State Warriors' bench.
He spent a lifetime fishing for a young, strapping pivot man, finally reeled in a whale and then, after an intrepid struggle, threw Chris Webber back.
Nelson is from the University of Red Auerbach: players are to please the coach, not vice versa.
But he is now in the middle of a refresher course that may be the end of basketball as he knows it.


Republican Rome Inspires Republicans
To the Editor:
Peter Passell notes (Economic Scene, Dec. 8) that official poverty rates are based on the assumption that an income three times as large as the basic food budget would put people above the poverty line.
This criterion is interesting compared with that used by Cato the Censor in the second century B.C.


Yeltsin Extends His Deadline for Rebels' Surrender
With Russian troops surrounding the capital of a Caucasus region and secessionists there threatening an all-out war, President Boris N. Yeltsin backed off tonight and extended his deadline for the rebels' surrender by two days.
In a statement addressed to the people of the secessionist region, Chechnya, Mr.
Yeltsin said he would set aside his deadline and give forces loyal to the local leader, Dzhokhar M. Dudayev, until midnight Saturday to disarm.
He also offered to send a higher-level delegation to resume failed cease-fire talks, on the condition that Mr.
Dudayev led the Chechens' delegation.


This Day, Their Daily Bread


Carter's Bosnia Effort Provokes Skepticism
Jimmy Carter's offer to be peacemaker in Bosnia met with skepticism today among the European allies, the United Nations, NATO and even within the Clinton Administration.
Although President Clinton decided not to stand in Mr.
Carter's way, the main concern shared by officials on both sides of the Atlantic is that Mr.
Carter's efforts could complicate the current international negotiations to end the 32-month-long war and fail to move the warring parties closer to peace.


Many Cities In Crackdown On Homeless
A growing number of American cities are approving ordinances that restrict the movement of homeless people and reduce services to help them, a new study by an advocacy group for the homeless has found.
A review of legal actions in 49 cities by the National Law Center on Homeless and Poverty, which was made public here on Wednesday, shows that 62 percent of the cities have passed or enforced measures against panhandling in the last year.
More than a quarter have passed or enforced ordinances that restrict access to public places, and almost 1 in 4 have conducted police sweeps of homeless people.


INSIDE
U.S. Inquiry of Dime Savings
Federal officials are investigating the Dime Savings Bank for possible fraud in its home-mortgage business during the late 1980's.
Page D1.
Yeltsin Steps Back a Little
President Yeltsin extended his deadline by two days for the surrender of secessionist forces.
Page A16.
No Charges in Rape Inquiry
Queens prosecutors rejected charges that a police officer raped seven male van drivers.
Page B1.


Corrections
The list of winning lottery numbers in The Metro Section yesterday included incorrect results in some editions for two Connecticut drawings Wednesday night.
Corrected numbers appear in the box today, on page B8.


U.S. Signs Agreement to Help Haiti Revitalize Its Economy
Haiti's Government signed an agreement with the United States today as part of a Clinton Administration plan to revitalize the Haitian economy.
Under an initiative announced on Wednesday by the White House, the United States will provide technical and financial aid to Haiti so businesses can return to the Caribbean nation.


Nets Trying to Brush Off What Is Hard to Forget
It took just three-tenths of a second for the Nets to somehow find a way to lose a game they thought they'd won Wednesday night.
How long it takes to recover mentally from that stunning loss is anybody's guess.
"We blew the game against the Lakers, and it took three or four games to get over that," Nets Coach Butch Beard said today.
"I'm hoping it doesn't take three or four games to get over this one."


JUDGE THROWS OUT JUDGMENT AGAINST HUGHES IN BIAS CASE
A California Superior Court judge in Los Angeles yesterday threw out an $89.5 million judgment in a racial discrimination case against the Hughes Aircraft Company on the grounds of "excessive damages and insufficiency of the evidence." In October, a jury awarded two former Hughes employees $9 million in damages and $80 million in punitive damages, making the judgment one of the largest ever in a discrimination case.
The jury found that Jeffrey Lane, a former Hughes engineer, had been denied promotions and pay raises because he was black and that his supervisor, David Villalpando, had been forced to quit because he had complained to management about discrimination against Mr.
Lane.
But Judge Malcolm H. Mackey, in reversing the verdict in Hughes's favor and ordering a new trial, said "the evidence does not demonstrate that Hughes's actions were unfair." Ian Herzog, a lawyer in Santa Monica who represented Mr.
Lane and Mr.
Villalpando, said he would appeal.
Hughes is a unit of the General Motors Corporation.


Songs That Can Add a Merry Beat to Christmas
Here are reviews of Christmas CD's by pop critics of The New York Times.
The CD's range in price from $6.98 to $16.98. (An introduction appears on page C1.) Natalie Cole
"HOLLY AND IVY" (Elektra).
The year's most elegantly produced and arranged pop Christmas collection, "Holly and Ivy" is an ambitiously conceived album for a singer whose deft "pop meets jazz meets soul" performances are as frustratingly detached as they are technically proficient.
The selections include a big-band "Jingle Bells," a bluesy "Merry Christmas Baby," a billowing gospel version of "Joy to the World" and an arrangement of "Silent Night" that suffocates the carol in modernist mannerisms.
In addition to familiar material, the collection includes two contemporary Christmas ballads, "No More Blue Christmas" (by Michael Masser and Gerry Goffin) and Carroll Coates's "Song for Christmas." Grand but chilly.
STEPHEN HOLDEN


Two Starters on the Bench Reassess Status With Jets
They went home after practice Wednesday refusing to believe what had happened to them -- that they were benched.
Strong safety Brian Washington and fullback Brad Baxter, starters since 1990 for the Jets, could still not come to grips today with having been dropped from the starting lineup for Sunday's game against the San Diego Chargers.


Songs That Can Add a Merry Beat to Christmas
Here are reviews of Christmas CD's by pop critics of The New York Times.
The CD's range in price from $6.98 to $16.98. (An introduction appears on page C1.) Mariah Carey
"MERRY CHRISTMAS" (Columbia).
Mariah Carey ricochets among three approaches on "Merry Christmas." There are gospelly versions of familiar carols like "Silent Night," dramatic ballads like her own "Miss You Most (at Christmas Time"), and uptempo imitations, with chimes, of Phil Spector's 1963 Christmas album, like "Santa Claus Is Comin' to Town." Regardless of backup, Ms.
Carey oversings, glutting songs with her vocal tics -- like sliding down from the note above the melody note -- and turning expressions of devotion into narcissistic displays.
JON PARELES


Showdown Over a Chancellor; Cortines Has Wide Support, but Giuliani Might Still Win
As Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani continues to press for the ouster of Schools Chancellor Ramon C. Cortines, the Mayor stands all but alone, abandoned even by those who have supported his efforts to streamline city government and eliminate waste at the Board of Education.
Mr.
Cortines has the support of many parents, teachers and administrators, a majority of the Board of Education, all five Borough Presidents, the Speaker of the City Council and some prominent business leaders.


Irish Farm Owner, a Centrist, Is the New Prime Minister
A combination of centrist and leftist parties ended a month of political confusion and invective today by electing John Bruton, the head of Ireland's second strongest party, as Prime Minister.
Mr.
Bruton, a wealthy 47-year-old farm owner who leads the centrist Fine Gael party, was elected with the support of the Labor and Democratic Left parties, giving Ireland a Government for the first time since mid-November when Albert Reynolds resigned as Prime Minister.


It's Goodbye to Rivers To End Logjam at Point
Pat Riley promised that the hammer would fall soon. Today, it fell on Doc Rivers.
Rivers, one of the team's most respected players, was waived after efforts to trade him were unsuccessful.
The Knicks also released Ron Grandison, trimming their roster to 13 players, one over the limit.


Harold Zimman, Olympic Leader, Dies at 78
Harold O. Zimman of Marblehead, Mass., a publisher who became a behind-the-scenes leader in the American Olympic movement, died Wednesday night at the Beverly (Mass.) Hospital.
He was 78.
The cause of death was heart failure, his son Joshua said.
He had suffered from acute heart problems for several years, and they prevented him from attending the 1992 Olympic Games in Barcelona, Spain, only the second Olympics he had missed since 1952.


Clinton Outlines a Plan for Tax Breaks
Bracing for battle with a Republican Congress and striving to win back a disgruntled electorate, President Clinton tonight sketched a blueprint of middle-class tax breaks, smaller government and new incentives for education and training for the second half of his term.
In a 10-minute televised address to the nation from the Oval Office, the President returned to the winning themes of his 1992 campaign, presenting himself as the champion of hard-working ordinary Americans.
He sounded what amounted to the opening notes of his 1996 re-election effort in remarks aimed as much at reshaping himself as the Government he wants to continue to lead.


Songs That Can Add a Merry Beat to Christmas
Here are reviews of Christmas CD's by pop critics of The New York Times.
The CD's range in price from $6.98 to $16.98. (An introduction appears on page C1.) Various Artists
"CHRISTMAS BLUES" (Savoy Jazz).
When Jimmy Butler vows, "I'll sprinkle my snow upon your tree and hang my mistletoe on your walls," the rollicking rhythm-and-blues band behind him suggests he won't stop with decorating.
"Trim Your Tree" is part of this rambunctious collection from the late 1940's and early 50's, including Charlie Parker's be-bop "White Christmas" and bluesy novelty songs from performers both well known (Esther Phillips, the Ravens) and nearly forgotten (the Marshall Brothers, Felix Gross).
The voices are audacious, the songs forthright and irreverent.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League
CLEVELAND INDIANS -- Agreed to terms with Dennis Cook, pitcher, on a one-year contract.


Press Secretary Said To Resign Officially
The White House press secretary, Dee Dee Myers, has officially told President Clinton that she will leave her job as his chief spokeswoman at the end of the year as expected, The Washington Post reported tonight.
Ms.
Myers, who worked for Mr.
Clinton in his Presidential campaign, survived a move by the White House chief of staff.
Leon E. Panetta, to replace her earlier this year, but it was expected that she would probably leave by the yearend.
Ms.
Myers did not return a telephone call left with the White House switchboard tonight.


McGovern vs. Nader, by Mail, on Changing Civil Justice System
Tort reform, a rubric covering a dozen initiatives to reduce the time and money spent in pursuit of civil justice, has barely affected the justice system.
"No fault" auto insurance laws, designed to assure swift out-of-court compensation for minor injuries, have generally been ineffective in reducing legal fees and court backlogs.
Federal limits on product liability have gained support in Congress over the last decade, but only minor changes benefiting manufacturers of small aircraft have run the full legislative process.
Changes in medical malpractice laws were a casualty of the stalemate over health insurance.


Songs That Can Add a Merry Beat to Christmas
Here are reviews of Christmas CD's by pop critics of The New York Times.
The CD's range in price from $6.98 to $16.98. (An introduction appears on page C1.) Various Artists
"THE JOY OF CHRISTMAS PAST" (GRP).
Recorded between 1948 and 1968, this compilation captures a fairly extraordinary assortment of jazz and pop stars attacking Christmas tunes.
It's two decades worth of classic Christmas.
Louis Armstrong sings "Christmas Night in Harlem" (listen to how he sings "everybody will be lit up like a Christmas tree" for a definition of double meaning), "Christmas in New Orleans" and "What a Wonderful World." Duke Ellington performs "Silent Night, Lonely Night"; Mel Torme does "The Christmas Song"; Ahmad Jamal performs "Snowfall" and Peggy Lee sings "Ring Those Christmas Bells" and "Peace on Earth/Silent Night." It's all from a more optimistic, sweeter era.
PETER WATROUS


CHRONICLE
RONALD O. PERELMAN, the cigar-loving billionaire, may be handing out stogies with pink "It's a Girl!" cigar bands.
He and PATRICIA DUFF have a daughter.
The baby was born on Tuesday at New York University Medical Center, whose medical school's dermatology department is named after Mr.
Perelman.
The child is Ms.
Duff's first, and the sixth for Mr.
Perelman, who is the chairman of Revlon and on Forbes magazine's list of the country's richest people.
His other children are from two previous marriages, which ended in divorce.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-21  CHINA STALLS INDUSTRY REFORM  The reform of state-owned industries has been frozen in China, deferred by fears of worker unrest, the absence of a social safety net for the unemployed and a debate over the control of production.
A1  OFFER BY CARTER PROVOKES DOUBT  Jimmy Carter's offer to be peacemaker in Bosnia met with skepticism among the European allies, the United Nations, NATO and even in the Clinton Administration.
A3


Judge Urges Mayor and Council to Resolve Budget Dispute
The City Council and the Giuliani administration went to court yesterday to resolve their budget standoff, but instead got a private urging from the judge that they work out their differences among themselves, lawyers for both sides said.
In the courtroom, Justice Fern Fisher-Brandveen heard the arguments that both sides have been publicly brandishing for weeks.
The Council's lawyers charged that the Mayor had ignored the legislative branch of government by ignoring its budget cuts.
The Mayor's lawyers, in turn, contended that the Council's attempt to override the Mayor's budget plan was illegal.


Pataki Fills 3 Key Positions For His Administration
Governor-elect George E. Pataki filled three jobs to complete his inner circle today, announcing the appointment of an old friend, a chief aide to his mentor in the Legislature and a former press secretary to Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato.
The new appointments are Bradford J. Race Jr., the old friend, to secretary, or chief of staff; James G. Natoli, the chief aide, to director of operations, and Zenia Mucha to director of communications.


Songs That Can Add a Merry Beat to Christmas
Here are reviews of Christmas CD's by pop critics of The New York Times.
The CD's range in price from $6.98 to $16.98. (An introduction appears on page C1.) Various Artists
"MIXED NUTS" (Epic Soundtrax).
"Mixed Nuts" is a surprisingly listenable soundtrack to the Steve Martin vehicle of the same name.
It mixes holiday nuggets by Dr.
John ("Mixed Nuts"), Eartha Kitt ("Santa Baby") and Carly Simon ("The Night Before Christmas") with two decent slices of theme music from the film and a mildly amusing song by the comic Adam Sandler.
There are far better Christmas compilations, but few better pop Christmas soundtracks.
NEIL STRAUSS


Corrections
A brief sports article in some editions yesterday about the National Hockey League labor situation misstated the location of a panel discussion including Gary Bettman, the league's commissioner.
It was at the 92d Street Y, not the Y.M.C.A.


Corrections
A theater review on Saturday about Tennessee Williams's "Suddenly Last Summer," by the Hartford Stage Company, misstated the number of black actors in the cast.
Lisa Arrindell Anderson, in the role of Catherine Holly, is one of the show's two black performers.
The other is Myra Lucretia Taylor, who plays Sister Felicity.


Plan Announced to Save Prints of Man's Prehistoric Ancestor
Some 3.5 million years ago, a volcano in what is now Tanzania erupted, scattering fine-grained ash over the Serengeti plain.
Rain followed.
Then across the plain covered with damp ash walked two individuals, possibly accompanied by a third, smaller figure, headed due north.
They left a trail of footprints that hardened and remained preserved under a covering of more ash and silt until their sensational discovery by paleontologists in 1977.
Durable as they had been, the fossil footprints, the earliest indisputable evidence of upright walking by human ancestors, are now endangered.


Man Who Tackled Rail Suspect Is Questioned, by Suspect
Colin Ferguson came face to face today with Kevin Blum, the man who tackled him a year ago on a Long Island Rail Road train and halted a shooting rampage.
Mr.
Blum, 43, making his first public comments on the shootings, was called as a witness for the prosecution at a pretrial hearing on charges that Mr.
Ferguson killed six people and injured 19 others on the 5:33 out of Penn Station.


The Music Almost Tells the Tale
"It is the power of music to carry one into the mental state of the composer," asserts Ludwig van Beethoven, dazzlingly impersonated by Gary Oldman in Bernard Rose's brash biographical film "Immortal Beloved." "The listener has no choice. It is like hypnotism." Thanks to its hugely effective use of Beethoven's most thrilling, tumultuous music, this film exerts much the same hypnotic power.
If the accomplishments that inspire awe here are Beethoven's rather than Mr.
Rose's, that's not surprising.
Nor is it accidental: this film maker is so well attuned to his subject that he deliberately subjugates his imagery to the film's soundtrack.
But Mr.
Rose contributes a passionate enthusiasm for the music and an eagerness to fathom the forces that brought about its creation.
At its best, his film almost brings those forces to life.


Woody Allen Revisits A Venue of Long Ago
Forget science fiction.
The year's neatest time warp pops up on Sunday in a Woody Allen movie called "Don't Drink the Water," a slapstick return to the 1960's, when the cold war raged and squid and rabbit were still considered exotic delicacies.
The television movie, starring and directed by Mr.
Allen, is based on his 1966 play of the same name.
The play starred Lou Jacobi and Kay Medford.
A movie version was made in 1969 with a monumentally miscast Jackie Gleason.
It's not as if Mr.
Allen is new to television.
He once wrote for Sid Caesar, and back in 1964 he even subbed for Johnny Carson for a week as guest host of the "Tonight" show.
But this is his first major television performance since a "Woody Allen Special" for Kraft Music Hall in 1969.


Songs That Can Add A Merry Beat To Christmas
Most pop songs are disposable; some Christmas songs seem to be eternal.
The annual harvest of Christmas albums occupies a zone in between.
A lucky few will survive to be hauled out every year along with the ornaments; the others will probably be forgotten by New Year's Eve.
Performers in search of a perennial place on the airwaves add contemporary trappings to familiar songs, or come up with new songs about the season, with sentiments from loneliness to reverence to mistletoe-enhanced lust.
There are Christmas blues and Christmas raps, Christmas rockers and Christmas weepers.
Christmas albums always reveal a healthy crop of corn, even as they provide a chance to hear exactly which recent styles have been absorbed by mainstream pop fabricatos.
Yet now and then, through the commercial tinsel, a hint of the season's faith or a touch of its benevolence can be gleaned.


Star Fades for Natural Gas Autos
What ever happened to natural gas vehicles?
After the oil crises of the 1970's and the clean air laws of the 1980's, the consensus among environmentalists, petroleum executives and state and Federal officials was that the United States would reap economic and environmental rewards from converting millions of vehicles to natural gas.


Brooklyn Jail Will Be Closed
The City Correction Department said yesterday that it would close its jail near the old Brooklyn Navy Yard next week and transfer 400 inmates to its sprawling complex on Rikers Island.
The Brooklyn jail, formerly a Navy brig, reopened in October to accommodate an increase in prisoners after having been closed for eight months.
Officials said that to save money they might continue to open and close the jail as the total of inmates fluctuates.
The number of prisoners usually declines in summer and winter, officials said.


COMPANY BRIEFS
EATON CORP., Cleveland, acquired a 51 percent stake in Mallory Controles Ltda., Brazil's leading supplier of controls for major appliances, with an option to buy the rest of the company.
Terms were not disclosed.
H &amp; R BLOCK INC., Kansas City, Mo., resumed a program suspended in early September to buy back as many as 10 million of its shares.


Songs That Can Add a Merry Beat to Christmas
Here are reviews of Christmas CD's by pop critics of The New York Times.
The CD's range in price from $6.98 to $16.98. (An introduction appears on page C1.) Kenny G
"MIRACLES: THE HOLIDAY ALBUM" (Arista).
This No. 1 album offers pleasant seasonal mall music with a mystical New Age gloss.
Nine of the 11 cuts are familiar holiday favorites played mostly on soprano saxophone (the star switches to tenor sax on two numbers) and set against glittering keyboard string settings.
Ornamented with jazzy frills, the instrumental solos are ringingly melodic and feature Kenny G's trademark vibrato.
"Silver Bells" is flavored with gospel, and "Greensleeves" has a light jazz pulse.
"Miracles" and "The Hanukkah Song," two originals composed with the album's arranger, Walter Afanasieff, distill generic seasonal moods.
STEPHEN HOLDEN


Two Political Lovebirds On Opposing Bandwagons
"Speechless" suggests that if James Carville and Mary Matalin didn't exist, someone would have had to invent them.
And invent them as adorable, wisecrack-lobbing lovebirds, as if the American political process weren't already screwball enough.
This comedy makes some funny observations about campaign follies, as when a candidate finds himself trapped at a podium with nothing but song lyrics on his Teleprompter ("Someone's in the kitchen with Dinah . . . ") and is forced to recite them as meaningfully as he can.
But it's less adroit with the love affair between its main characters, a television sitcom writer enlisted to help the Republican camp (Michael Keaton) and a feisty, idealistic Democrat (Geena Davis).
Ron Underwood, the director of "City Slickers," once again compromises appealing actors and an entertaining premise with a needless overlay of mush.


Woody Allen Revisits A Venue of Long Ago
'60 Minutes'  CBS, Sunday at 7 P.M. (Channel 2 in New York)
The remains of the nuclear power plant at Chernobyl, enclosed in a 24-story shield of concrete and steel built after the 1986 explosion, are known as the sarcophagus to scientists monitoring the effects of the 180 tons of melted nuclear fuel inside.
Radiation levels are still too dangerous to permit anyone to live within 20 miles of ground zero, but they have gone down enough for a group of Western journalists, including Steve Kroft, a "60 Minutes" regular, to put on protective garb for a 40-minute tour.


Songs That Can Add a Merry Beat to Christmas
Here are reviews of Christmas CD's by pop critics of The New York Times.
The CD's range in price from $6.98 to $16.98. (An introduction appears on page C1.) Kofi
"A VERY REGGAE CHRISTMAS" (Atlantic).
Kofi, the lead singer and dancer of the Odomankoma Kyerema Cultural Troupe from Ghana, has taken Christmas carols as exercises in deft arranging.
He uses bouncy reggae bass lines and adds gimmicks above them: percussive dancehall rapping, percolating electronics and choral-harmony African syllables, brand-new melodies between verses of familiar ones, even a soca version of "Hark! the Herald Angels Sing." The buoyant singers include Kofi, Bebe Winans, the dancehall rapper Daddy Freddy and members of Take 6, and the music makes the most of its own slickness.
JON PARELES


In an Ailey Premiere, Moving and Mugging Take On a Cartoonlike Esprit
The first premiere in the Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater's season comes under a new rubric: The Alvin Ailey Women's Choreography Initiative.
Brenda Way's clever if cartoonlike "Scissors Paper Stone" thus inaugurates a project to which Judith Jamison, herself a choreographer, is particularly devoted.
Ms.
Jamison, the company's artistic director, may be telling us something we don't yet perceive: namely that female choreographers need extra opportunity.


Overhaul of China's State Industry at a Standstill
One year ago, China's Communist Party leadership presented a broad program to restructure, sell or put into bankruptcy thousands of state-owned industries whose heavy losses and inefficiency threatened the country's economic expansion.
Endorsed by the paramount leader, Deng Xiaoping, the plan was heralded as a path to fulfillment of China's ambition to create a "socialist market economy" in which free-market forces would guide decision-making.
Execution of the plan by 2000 became a national priority.


Inside Art
New Organizer for the Biennial
The 1995 Biennial at the Whitney Museum of American Art looks as though it will be a less ideological affair than the abrasive exhibition two years ago, which was much maligned for its political and social bent.
When the the museum announced its plans for the coming Biennial this week, it was clear that a more traditional esthetic was at work.
The show, which opens March 15 and runs through June 25, is being organized by Klaus Kertess, the adjunct curator of drawings at the Whitney, with John G. Hanhardt, the museum's curator of film and video; the critic Jerry Saltz served as Mr.
Kertess's consultant.


Ruling Favors Cross-Country Coaches
An attempt to have two of New York's most successful high school cross-country and track coaches dismissed has been rejected by THOMAS SOBOL, the state education commissioner.
Wednesday's ruling means the husband-and-wife coaching team of LINDA and ARTHUR KRANICK can stay at Saratoga Springs High School.
WILLIAM and CAMILLE KARL, whose daughters ran for Saratoga Springs, accused the Kranicks of giving heavy doses of vitamins to their team without parental consent during the 1992-93 school year, implementing harsh training schedules and discouraging runners from taking prescription medicine. (AP)


For Children
'Pierrot and Pirouette'
The Ballroom  253 West 28th Street  Chelsea  (212) 371-6695  Recommended ages: 6 and up  Through Dec. 30
Any children's play with a French title is bound to make you think "ooh la la." This modernized fairy tale, presented by the New York Family Theater Festival, is done with mime, ballet, clowning and recorded music.
The story is a blend of happiness and melancholia, with the sadness (there is a death at the end) possibly upsetting sensitive children.
But at a recent performance, there wasn't a tear in sight among a sizable birthday contingent of 6- and 7-year-old boys and girls.


Songs That Can Add a Merry Beat to Christmas
Here are reviews of Christmas CD's by pop critics of The New York Times.
The CD's range in price from $6.98 to $16.98. (An introduction appears on page C1.) Jerry Jeff Walker
"CHRISTMAS GONZO STYLE" (Rykodisc).
"Christmas Gonzo Style" proves that Jerry Jeff Walker, the modern-day Texas cowboy singer and guitarist, does take a day off from singing about drinking and rambling.
Other than asking for "a girlie with big red lips, drumstick thighs and butterball hips" for Christmas on "Here Comes Santa Claus," and having Frosty the Snowman chased by a traffic cop, Mr.
Walker delivers gentle, down-home and at least partly faithful versions of holiday standards like "Jingle Bells," "Rudolph the Red-Nosed Reindeer" and "The 12 Days of Christmas." NEIL STRAUSS


Winter at the Track Will Be More Exotic
On the theory, or at least the hope, that if you give the fans what they want, they'll come, New York racing officials have revamped the Gulfstream simulcast program for the 1995 Aqueduct winter season and added a second triple and a second pick-three to the track's menu of exotic wagers beginning Jan. 1.
"That's what the customers want," said Steve Crist, the New York Racing Association's new marketing director, who announced the changes at a news conference at Aqueduct race track with the association's new president, Kenny Noe Jr.


METRO DIGEST
MAYOR PLANS INCENTIVES FOR WALL STREET
Mayor Giuliani proposed tax breaks and zoning changes to bolster the sagging real estate market of Wall Street and lower Manhattan.
A1.
GIULIANI SEEKS CUTS IN AID FOR POOR
The Giuliani administration began planning sharp reductions in health and welfare benefit programs for the poor as part of its strategy for handling a $2 billion budget gap.
A1.


Songs That Can Add a Merry Beat to Christmas
Here are reviews of Christmas CD's by pop critics of The New York Times.
The CD's range in price from $6.98 to $16.98. (An introduction appears on page C1.) Donna Summer
"CHRISTMAS SPIRIT" (Mercury).
Earnestness reigns on Donna Summer's Christmas album, which concentrates on the religious side of the holiday.
Backed by orchestras and choirs or small pop-jazz groups, she shows off the creamy voice that her disco hits never revealed.
But she works so hard to instill songs with devotion and fervor that any hint of joy is lost.
Her Christmas sounds like overtime, not a holiday.
JON PARELES


Last Chance
Here is a sampling of shows and exhibitions in New York City that are to close soon: Closing This Weekend  "DURANG DURANG," Manhattan Theater Club, Stage 2, City Center, 131 West 55th Street.
Short theater pieces by Christopher Durang in which he takes on his fellow playwrights Tennessee Williams and Sam Shepard.
Through Sunday.
Performances: today at 7:30 P.M.; tomorrow and Sunday at 3 and 7:30 P.M.
Tickets: $30.
Information: (212) 581-1212.


Songs That Can Add a Merry Beat to Christmas
Here are reviews of Christmas CD's by pop critics of The New York Times.
The CD's range in price from $6.98 to $16.98. (An introduction appears on page C1.) Graham Parker
"GRAHAM PARKER'S CHRISTMAS CRACKER" (Dakota Arts).
On this short album of three worthwhile new songs and their demo versions, Graham Parker, a wry, sandpaper-voiced English rock singer, provides a respite from holiday mirth.
On "Christmas Is for Mugs" (mugs is English slang for suckers), he chronicles getting ripped off by tree vendors and other merchants, ending with the threat, "If I see St. Nick tonight there will be a scene of gore/I'll put a match into the fire and make the chimney roar." Elsewhere on the album, he performs a duet with Nona Hendryx to describe the perfect "Soul Christmas," one in which the musicians Booker T and the MG's, Al Green and James Brown are house guests.
NEIL STRAUSS


Wandering Within the Idioms of Glasgow
HOW LATE IT WAS, HOW LATE
By James Kelman
374 pages. W. W. Norton &amp; Company. $21.
How to describe James Kelman's new novel, "How Late It Was, How Late"?
Think of one of Nathanael West's black comedies without the humor, combined with one of David Mamet's obscenity-laced plays without the poetry, combined with one of Samuel Beckett's novels without the philosophical subtext, and that should give you a pretty good idea of what this year's winner of the Booker Prize in Britain is like.


Smith College Makes History In Naming Its Next President
Smith College, known as one of the more conservative of the top women's colleges, and as the alma mater of Nancy Reagan and Barbara Bush, yesterday became the first of the nation's prestigious Northeastern institutions to name a black educator as its president.
The moment was not lost on the president-to-be, Ruth Simmons, a Harvard University graduate and the youngest of 12 children of a Texas sharecropper, who is now vice provost of Princeton University.
Before accepting the post at Smith, she repeatedly and bluntly asked the trustees, "Is Smith ready for this?"


So Orange County Didn't Want to Raise Taxes
To the Editor:
For the last 12 days the most incredible story has captured the pages of The New York Times.
It comes from that bastion of Republican conservatism, Orange County, California.
That citadel of Republicanism and of supposed fiscal responsibility now finds itself in the position of filing for bankruptcy.


Financial Merger Is Scuttled
The proposed merger of the Morgan Stanley Group and the S. G. Warburg Group collapsed today, scuttling plans by the companies to create one of the world's most powerful investment banks.
The talks foundered after Warburg's independently run fund management subsidiary, Mercury Asset Management, held out for a better deal and Morgan Stanley refused to pay its price.


Woman Was Raped in Garage At Shopping Mall, Police Say
A 37-year-old Long Island women who went Christmas shopping at the Roosevelt Field Shopping Center Wednesday afternoon was raped at knife point in a mall parking garage by one of two masked men who tried to rob her, the police said today.
The victim, who was carrying packages, was approached from behind in a well-lighted area near Macy's as she unlocked her car door, said Andrew Kenny, assistant chief of the Nassau County Police Department.


Unicef Optimistic About Saving More Children From Disease
Although children worldwide face new risks from civil war, poverty and AIDS, the United Nations Children's Fund said today that it was optimistic that developing nations were winning the battle against some traditional childhood afflictions like polio and iodine deficiencies.
In a report, "The State of the World's Children 1995," Unicef said more than 90 percent of the children in the developing world live in countries that are making significant progress toward reducing malnutrition, preventing diseases and spreading literacy.


Bills' Kelly Won't Play Again This Season
The ligaments in JIM KELLY's left knee are stretched but not torn and the Bills quarterback will not need surgery, the team said yesterday.
However, Kelly will miss the rest of the regular season and the playoffs should the Bills (7-7) make it that far.
The Bills initially reported that the injury was to Kelly's anterior cruciate ligament, but in a statement Coach MARV LEVY said it is actually the lateral collateral ligament, which is on the outside of the knee and a more serious ailment. (AP)


U.S. Fraud Inquiry Into Dime's Mortgages
Federal officials are investigating the Dime Savings Bank for possible fraud in its home-mortgage business.
The inquiry, which is being directed by the United States Attorney's office in Concord, N.H., is apparently seeking to determine whether Dime's executives knew during the late 1980's that documents were falsified to allow unqualified borrowers to get loans.


In Besieged Separatist City, People Brace for the Worst
Residents scrambled to stock up on supplies in this besieged city today as explosions echoed to the north, where Russian troops were massed on a ridge just a few miles away.
Slipping as they hurried along snowy and icy streets that have not been cleared all season, Chechens were filling sacks with flour and rice and buying candles and batteries.


Bidding for a Comeback
President Clinton had no choice but to go on television sometime before the holidays.
Otherwise he risked being entirely marginalized in the legislative combat that begins on Jan. 4 when the Gingrich-Dole whirlwind hits Congress.
As the rumblings from the House Democratic leader, Richard Gephardt, suggest, Mr.
Clinton also faces a crisis of anxiety within his own party.
At a minimum, his speech probably showed Democrats that he had the stomach for the difficult task of self-rejuvenation.
Given the size of that task, a speech of only 10 minutes did not bespeak much in the way of confidence, but the President looked more focused than he has in recent weeks.
Mr.
Clinton must be nagged by a sense of lost opportunities.
In 23 months, he has skidded from initiator to imitator.
But the speech could be a toehold from which he can step forward with purpose and direction for the difficult two years ahead.


Prof. Philip Morris Hauser, 85, Leader in Population Research
Prof.
Philip Morris Hauser, a demographer and a leading expert on urban affairs, died on Tuesday at Montgomery Place, a retirement home in Chicago.
A lifelong resident of Chicago, he was 85.
He suffered a long series of illnesses, including cancer, according to the University of Chicago, whose Population Research Center he founded in 1947 and headed until 1979.
He was the Lucy Flower Professor Emeritus of Urban Sociology at the university and a past chairman of the department of sociology.


Marlins' Destrade Returns to Japan
ORESTES DESTRADE, released by Florida on May 25, signed a one-year contract last week to rejoin the Seibu Lions.
He left the Lions after the 1992 season to join the expansion Marlins.
Destrade led the Pacific League in homers from 1990 through 1992. (AP)


Arrest of Financier, Accused of Stealing, Shakes Barcelona
People in Barcelona were accustomed to seeing Javier de la Rosa, a maverick financier, met by investment bankers, Middle Eastern sheiks and Government ministers as he stepped from his Mercedes-Benz limousine.
But on Oct. 18, he stepped into the arms of the police, who arrested him on suspicion of stealing the assets of his company.
The arrest shook the labyrinthine streets and grand boulevards of Barcelona.
Mr. de la Rosa's rise was intertwined with that of this city of 1.7 million.


Stocks Advance on Signs of Little Inflation
In the fourth advance of five sessions, the stock market rose again yesterday in unusually heavy trading, helped by further signs of a moderately growing economy with little inflation.
Computer networking stocks especially benefited because they are seen as thriving in an economy where business executives, prime customers for computers, do not fear inflation.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Consumer products dress up to cash in on the Christmas spirit.
IT'S beginning to look a lot like Christmas in the unlikeliest places: supermarket cereal aisles, the shelves of pet-supply shops and discount stores' soft-drink sections.
Many big consumer marketers are dressing their everyday products in holiday garb, festooning them with wreaths, fir trees, mistletoe and enough red and green to illuminate all the traffic lights in Manhattan.


CHRONICLE
Goodness gracious, great calls of fire!
JERRY LEE LEWIS has started a "900" telephone line to help pay off a $560,000 debt to the I.R.S., the Associated Press reported.
KERRIE MCCARVER LEWIS, the rock 'n' roller's wife, said over the line that they were "trying to pay the tax man so we can die happy."


How Are Talks Going? Shhh! It's All a Secret
The secret subcommittees in the hockey dispute finished two days of clandestine talks yesterday and plan to take today off.
They are tentatively scheduled to resume negotiations tomorrow, again probably without Gary Bettman or Bob Goodenow in the room.
"Real cloak-and-dagger stuff," said a union person, whispering on condition of anonymity.
"But it's a positive sign they are still talking."


Art in Review
Collier Schorr
303 Gallery  89 Greene Street  SoHo  Through Dec. 23
The subject of Collier Schorr's photographs is a thin teen-age boy, standing shirtless in a field.
His slouching pose projects an adolescent sexual bravado, which Ms.
Schorr underscores with close-ups of his torso.
The seductiveness shifts gears slightly when he appears with the arm of a person outside the picture frame -- sex unknown -- stretched across his shoulder.
And it shifts again when a color print reveals that he is wearing lipstick and face powder.


About-Face by Clinton
For the first two years of his Presidency, Bill Clinton insisted that reducing the Federal budget deficit was his highest calling.
Tonight, he reversed course.
What is most important is not the details of what he proposed: a variety of tax breaks designed mostly for political appeal and a seemingly pain-free method of raising the revenue to pay for them.
The Republican Congress is no more likely to adopt this President's budget offerings than Democratic Congresses were likely to accept President George Bush's.


Songs That Can Add a Merry Beat to Christmas
Here are reviews of Christmas CD's by pop critics of The New York Times.
The CD's range in price from $6.98 to $16.98. (An introduction appears on page C1.) Ben Keith and Friends
"SEVEN GATES" (Reprise).
Johnny Cash and Neil Young lead a singalong on "The Little Drummer Boy," and Mr.
Young pipes up on "Greensleeves" during an album that might be called "Christmas in the California Canyons." But the best tunes on the album are the instrumentals.
Ben Keith, a longtime fixture in Mr.
Young's country-leaning bands, plays steel guitar with a mixture of swagger and languor, dreaming woozily through "It Came Upon a Midnight Clear," "Away in a Manger" and "Silver Bells." Elsewhere, however, he succumbs to children's choirs and orchestral bells, turning ponderous.
JON PARELES


For the Poor, A Legal Assist In the Cleanup Of Pollution
For years, Olivia Barros has fought illegal dumping in her neighborhood -- even in her own backyard.
The campaign she and her neighbors waged in the Dorchester section here resulted in the city's carting away five truckloads of trash in 1988, but the garbage always returned.
Her backyard is clean now, but trash is still strewn on two vacant lots nearby.
A car seat, a rusted snowplow, tires, plastic oil containers and several 55-gallon oil drums remain within sight of the neat, blue three-decker house in which Mrs.
Barros lives with her husband, Jose, and their five children.


Accounts
*
Roberts Pharmaceutical Corp., Eatontown, N.J., to Dugan Farley Communications, Upper Saddle River, N.J., to handle advertising for two cardiovascular products, Ethmozine and Nitrodisc, previously handled by C.&amp; M. Advertising, Woodbridge, N.J.
Billings were estimated to exceed $3 million.


Songs That Can Add a Merry Beat to Christmas
Here are reviews of Christmas CD's by pop critics of The New York Times.
The CD's range in price from $6.98 to $16.98. (An introduction appears on page C1.) Neil Diamond
"THE CHRISTMAS ALBUM, VOL. 2" (Columbia).
Neil Diamond doesn't lose his pugnacity just because he's singing about Christmas; in his "Winter Wonderland," rowdy children knock down the snowman.
Mr.
Diamond's swaggering, self-congratulatory growl bullies its way through arrangements from big band to reggae to orchestral ballad to saxophone-driven rhythm-and-blues; whether or not he's singing in tune, he demands the spotlight.
For pure hubris, it's hard to beat his version of Handel's "Hallelujah" Chorus, in which he shouts down a whole choir.
JON PARELES


Battles and Orgies, Observed by a Zen Eye
One of many phantasmagoric scenes in "Temptation of a Monk," Clara Law's visually striking reverie of China during the Tang Dynasty, follows a group of Buddhist monks as they forsake their austere monastic life for a night of sensual abandon in a nearby town.
Inside a flickering candlelit pleasure dome, they are plied with wine and meat by aggressive prostitutes who wear bizarre, towering headdresses.
Within minutes, the monks have broken most of the 10 prohibitions that were solemnly taught them by a 10-year-old holy man.
Midway in the orgy, General Shi (Wu Hsin-kuo), a warrior who has disguised himself as a monk, is led by his sometime lover Princess Scarlet (Joan Chen) into an inner sanctum with a bathing pool.
As they begin to make love, they are joined by drunken monks and prostitutes laughing and thrashing around wildly.
The revels are cut short when the child monk reveals that there is a 10,000-tael reward for Shi's arrest and removal to the imperial capital.


Songs That Can Add a Merry Beat to Christmas
Here are reviews of Christmas CD's by pop critics of The New York Times.
The CD's range in price from $6.98 to $16.98. (An introduction appears on page C1.) Alvin and the Chipmunks
"A VERY MERRY CHIPMUNK" (Chipmunk Records/Sony Wonder/Epic).
The Chipmunks become backup singers for country-rocking Patty Loveless and Alan Jackson, for the ballads of Celine Dion (in French) and James Ingram and for an electronically resuscitated Gene Autry.
Kenny G gives Alvin a saxophone lesson.
But the truest artistic expression on the album may be "A Comes Before B," in which Alvin complains about the competition from Barney, Bart Simpson and Beavis and Butt-head.
He ought to worry; the shtick is wearing thin.
JON PARELES


Judge in Simpson Case Delays Hearing on Domestic Violence
Critical arguments over who was beating whom in the stormy marriage of O. J. and Nicole Brown Simpson, and whether the jury should hear anything on the subject, were postponed today after defense lawyers angrily asserted that prosecutors yesterday "dumped" on them an 85-page motion on the issue and 1,044 pages of related material, denying them adequate time to prepare.
Judge Lance A. Ito has yet to rule on when a still more critical hearing, on the admissibility of DNA evidence, will be held.
However he decides, it now seems clear that testimony in the Simpson case will not begin on Jan. 4, as defense lawyers had requested.


Corrections
A caption in this week's Television section, with tomorrow's highlights on page 45, misidentifies an actor in the movie "Fort Apache" (1948).
He is Henry Fonda.


World News Briefs; Nations Sign Agreement To Protect U.N. Workers
An agreement to protect United Nations workers moved a step closer to becoming a formal treaty today when a dozen countries signed it.
The agreement, which was adopted last week, requires members to protect United Nations workers and to arrest those responsible for crimes against them.


Market Place; Stratton Oakmont still disputes S.E.C. settlement's terms.
CHILDREN who were not yet born when the Securities and Exchange Commission started investigating Stratton Oakmont, a Long Island brokerage firm, are now potty-trained and in nursery school.
Young adults who were first-year law students when the S.E.C. first sued the brokerage firm, accusing it of abusive sales practices, have passed the bar and are finishing their clerkships.
And yesterday morning, lawyers for the S.E.C. and Stratton Oakmont in New York boarded early-morning air shuttles to Washington to haggle in court over whether the brokerage firm, which specializes in the cheap, highly speculative and thinly traded securities known as penny stocks, should be required to comply with an out-of-court agreement it reached with the S.E.C. last February to settle a lawsuit filed in early 1992, after an investigation that began in early 1991.


Critics Honor 'Pulp Fiction' And 'Quiz Show'
"Quiz Show," Robert Redford's thoughtful, elegant examination of the television game-show scandals of the 1950's and how they signaled a loss of innocence in American life, was voted the best film of 1994 by the New York Film Critics Circle.
Voting yesterday at the offices of the Newspaper Guild of New York, the group gave its awards for direction and screenwriting to "Pulp Fiction," Quentin Tarantino's audacious crime drama with its interwoven stories.
Roger Avary wrote that film with Mr.
Tarantino, its director.


Black Caucus Has New Leader
Representative Donald M. Payne, Democrat of New Jersey, was elected chairman of the Congressional Black Caucus on Wednesday at a time when the caucus is threatened by a Republican plan to eliminate its public money.
Mr.
Payne, the first black Congressman elected from New Jersey, vowed to maintain the caucus, which was formed in 1971 to back legislation benefiting African-Americans.


Sprint's Share Price Plunges 12%
Shares of Sprint, the nation's third-largest long-distance carrier, plunged 12 percent yesterday in a frenzy of trading a day after the company disclosed that fourth-quarter earnings would be lower than expected.
The unexpectedly severe reaction -- Sprint's stock dropped $3.875 a share, to $26.875, and was one of the most heavily traded on Wall Street -- sent the company's top executives scrambling to soothe stock analysts and halt the slide.


Songs That Can Add a Merry Beat to Christmas
Here are reviews of Christmas CD's by pop critics of The New York Times.
The CD's range in price from $6.98 to $16.98. (An introduction appears on page C1.) Various Artists
"NAVIDAD EN LAS AMERICAS" (Walt Disney).
Just because there's no snow in the tropics doesn't mean Luis Enrique can't turn "Blanca Navidad (White Christmas)" into peppy salsa.
"Navidad en las Americas" is an Anglo-friendly collection of Christmas songs in Spanish, English and (from Brazil's Xuxa) Portuguese.
The album includes heartbroken Mexican rancheras (Pedro Fernandez, Lucha Villa), slick Latin pop (Veronica Castro, Ricky Martin, Chayanne), Latin jazz (Tito Puente's inventive version of "The Little Drummer Boy"), even Placido Domingo singing a Spanish carol with orchestra.
With selections from many of the hemisphere's major hit makers, the music stays amiable, though rather tame.


Corrections
An article yesterday about the F.B.I.'s hunt for a mail bomber who most recently killed a New Jersey advertising executive referred incorrectly in some copies to the name that investigators said was on the outside of the latest mail bomb.It was H. C. Wickel, not H. C. Wickle.


No Shift Seen In Serb Policy In Bosnia
Serbs in Bosnia did not appear tonight to have kept the promises that their leader made to former President Jimmy Carter in an invitation to Mr.
Carter to visit Bosnia and try to restart peace talks, United Nations officials here said.
"There is no evidence that the Serbs have fulfilled any of the six points," said a United Nations military force spokesman here, Thant Myint-U, adding that the Serbs continue to restrict movement by United Nations military personnel and aid convoys.


Prosecutor Rejects Rape Cases Brought by Male Van Drivers
After a 21-month investigation, District Attorney Richard A. Brown of Queens issued a report yesterday concluding that seven immigrant van drivers working in the Rockaways had falsely accused a male police officer of raping them.
Mr.
Brown said Officer Reggie Rivera would not be prosecuted because the rapes never took place.
The drivers, all of whom are black immigrants working in the illicit van trade on the Rockaway peninsula, had a strong motive to defame Officer Rivera because he had issued thousands of tickets to van drivers and represented a direct threat to their livelihood, the report said.


Songs That Can Add a Merry Beat to Christmas
Here are reviews of Christmas CD's by pop critics of The New York Times.
The CD's range in price from $6.98 to $16.98. (An introduction appears on page C1.) Various Artists
"JOYFUL CHRISTMAS" (Columbia).
A modern gospel version of Christmas, the album features Lou Rawls, Patti LaBelle, Nancy Wilson and Commissioned, a group that sounds like the Winans.
It's glossy pop, synthesizer-based, with soaring gospel voices.
Patti LaBelle sings "Away in the Manger"; Oleta Adams sings a stately "O Come All Ye Faithful"; D. C. Talk performs "We Three Kings" to a Go-Go rhythm, and Peabo Bryson ends the album with "Silent Night." PETER WATROUS


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.50
8.50
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
4.75
4.75
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
5.69
5.46
3.03
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.53
5.67
3.01
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
6.18
6.27
3.21
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.80
7.79
5.80
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.87
7.86
6.30
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.72
8.70
7.34
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.98
6.98
5.58
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Computer Admissions Test Found to Be Ripe for Abuse
The Educational Testing Service, which administers the nation's leading standardized admissions test for graduate schools, boasted when introducing a new computerized version a year ago that the test was nearly infallible.
But a company that coaches students got suspicious last summer that the new version was easy to cheat on.
The company, Kaplan Educational Centers, started hearing the same questions over and over from students they were coaching who had taken the test at various times.
The implication was clear: The testers were recycling some questions.
If this was so, an enterprising student could memorize the questions and share them with friends taking the test later, or improve his results by taking the test again, or put the questions on the Internet, or sell them.


Apparent Virus May Be a Cause Of Fatal Cancer in AIDS Patients
Breaking a long spell of grim news on the AIDS front, a team of New York City scientists yesterday announced a finding that could have a significant effect on the course of the disease for gay men should its preliminary findings be confirmed.
Scientists at Columbia University said they had found strong evidence of an apparent newly detected virus that, they said, might cause Kaposi's sarcoma in people with AIDS.
Kaposi's is the most common cancer affecting gay men with AIDS, and one of the principal causes of death among that group.
For unknown reasons, gay and bisexual men with AIDS are 20 times as likely to develop Kaposi's sarcoma than hemophiliac men with AIDS.


Songs That Can Add a Merry Beat to Christmas
Here are reviews of Christmas CD's by pop critics of The New York Times.
The CD's range in price from $6.98 to $16.98. (An introduction appears on page C1.) Various Artists
"CHRISTMAS AT MOUNTAIN STAGE" (Blue Plate Music).
"Mountain Stage" is public radio unplugged, featuring folky performers who idealize the rural.
These live recordings include unaccompanied songs by the Roches (including their impeccably harmonized, Noo Yawk-accented "Winter Wonderland"), Kathy Mattea's pristine "Christ Child Lullaby," an autoharp solo of "Silent Night," a bell choir ringing out "We Three Kings" and some down-home recitations.
It's gentle, sweet and cloying in more than small doses.
JON PARELES


Baseball's Owners: Wait Till Next Week
Keeping their ultimate weapon holstered for the second time in 16 days, major league baseball club owners voted today to delay for another week their declaration of a labor impasse and implemention a salary cap.
If there is no resolution of the strike, Bud Selig, baseball's acting commissioner said, "next Thursday or Friday morning at 12:01 A.M., the implementation process will begin." The owners' 25-3 vote today gave the executive council, which Selig heads, the authority to declare an impasse and implement the clubs' final offer, the salary cap they proposed Nov. 17.
The decision was contingent on the union's agreement to postpone two deadlines dealing with player contracts.
Donald Fehr, the union chief, said from New York he would recommend to the players' executive board that the union agree to the postponements.
Although Selig and John Harrington, chairman of the negotiating committee, emphasized that the owners acted solely in the interest of negotiating an agreement with the players, the decision raised the possibility at least that the owners became concerned that if they had acted today, they would have been declaring an impasse in the talks prematurely.
When the clubs' negotiators left Rye Brook, N.Y., on Wednesday, they were in the middle of perhaps the most promising period of the talks since negotiations began in earnest six months ago.
If the owners had declared an impasse today, they might have strengthened the union's challenge of the move before the National Labor Relations Board.
An employer can declare an impasse in talks any time he chooses, but he has to be prepared to defend the action in the face of a union challenge.
The owners initially had scheduled the meeting to act on implementation for Dec. 5, but they emerged from a bargaining session in Leesburg, Va., on Nov. 30 and announced they had agreed to postpone the meeting for 10 days to give negotiations additional time to work.
At the time, it appeared they had acted at the urging of Bill Usery Jr., the mediator.
But some management people since have suggested that the owners themselves wanted to delay the meeting and the vote.
Although Usery said last week that implementation would be "very, very unfortunate," Harrington said today that the mediator had not asked the owners to delay their vote again.
"He just asked us not to do anything or say anything that would preclude continuing collective bargaining in the spirit we had conducted collective bargaining," Harrington said at a news conference at the O'Hare Hilton.
"I think he will be surprised at this move."
Selig did not identify the three clubs that voted no.
However, Peter Angelos of the Baltimore Orioles was on record as saying he would oppose implementation, and the Toronto Blue Jays and the Los Angeles Dodgers or the New York Mets were believed to be the other two clubs with negative votes.
Obviously, the overwhelming majority of owners are eager to implement the salary cap if the two sides are unable to reach agreement on a new collective bargaining contract.
But they also don't want to put themselves at risk legally.
Taking the positive approach, Selig said: "If there's a scintilla of a chance to have a meaningful solution at the table, you've got to try it. If you fail, you try again."
Fehr said it was positive that the owners were willing to continue negotiations without a salary cap in place.
But he added, "I can't tell you what it will lead to."
He said the union would hold internal meetings this weekend, then be prepared to resume negotiations on Monday.
The talks, he said, could be held in Washington, Usery's home turf.
Reacting to Harrington's characterization of the owners' move as an olive branch, Fehr said, "I hope it turns out to be one."
As to what might have happened to change the atmosphere, he said: "There were some discussions that seemed to be of a more constructive tone. And I think everybody agrees on that."
Talks had been stalled on the union's refusal to accept a salary cap or a luxury tax on payrolls that could act like a cap.
The owners removed their latest tax proposal, the one they made last Sunday in reply to a players' proposal 24 hours earlier, from the table Tuesday in Rye Brook.
"We're back to a salary cap," they told union negotiators.
But during a bargaining session late Tuesday night into early Wednesday morning, the clubs' representatives, for the first time, indicated that they might have some flexibility on the way they would tax payrolls.
That idea caught the players' attention, and the two sides returned to the table Wednesday afternoon in a more hopeful manner.
But while the union offered seemingly conciliatory ideas on elements of the owners' revenue-sharing plan that is linked to a salary cap, it did not produce a proposal the owners' negotiators said they expected and were waiting for.
The management team ended the talks at that point and flew here for today's meeting.
"On the way in," Harrington related, "we reviewed all the alternatives that were available to us. We met again this morning at 9 o'clock. The committee concluded on a unanimous basis to make the recommendation we made to the full ownership. It was done in the spirit of opening one more window of opportunity."
Harrington said the owners' willingness "to walk through those doors of deadlines and open them again should show we're dead-set to negotiate a resolution of this dispute."
The two deadlines in question deal with clubs' salary arbitration offers to retain rights to their free agents plus the players' responses and the tendering of contracts to unsigned players on clubs' 40-man rosters.
The arbitration offer deadline was Dec. 7 and the response deadline on Monday.
On Nov. 30, those were pushed back to Dec. 17 and 23.
Clubs must tender contracts to unsigned players by Dec. 20.
The new deadline for and tenders is Dec. 23.
The deadline for players response to arbitration offers most likely will be Jan. 4.
But the arbitration offers will become immaterial if the clubs implement a salary cap.
In all of his talk about the clubs' fervent desire to negotiate a new system rather than implementing one, Selig sounded one ominous note.
"If the union really wants to reach an agreement," Selig said, "we're going to give it more time, but it must address our central issue -- establishing a relationship between revenues and salaries."


For Emotionally Troubled, Help in Finding Their Way
Andrew Trontz sat with his hands folded in a kitchen at the Brooklyn Bureau of Community Service.
Tapping his thumbs nervously, he focused his gaze on his moving hands and lifted his head only when spoken to.
Mr.
Trontz, 34, a tall, broad-shouldered man wearing a blue polo shirt and jeans, was talking about how he arrived at Project Moving On, a bureau-sponsored rehabilitation program that prepares emotionally disabled adults for independent living.


CHRONICLE
Balzac wrote in a white monk's robe.
MOLLY PEACOCK writes in a blue bathrobe, every day before breakfast.
Yesterday, she wrote a poem about creative urges and then, changing from the robe into something festive, attended a reception in her honor at the Harvard Club.
After three terms as president of the Poetry Society of America, Ms.
Peacock, the author of four books of poetry, is retiring.
But she will still help choose works for Poetry in Motion, the program that puts poetry on New York subways and buses.


Navy Acts Against 10 Male Instructors in Sex Harassment Case
In perhaps the worst sexual harassment episode in the military since the Tailhook incident, the Navy plans to court-martial four male instructors and has already punished six others for pressuring female students for sex.
The case, made public by the service at a news conference on Wednesday, involves 16 young enlisted women who were learning to operate the Navy's computer and telephone networks at the Naval Training Center in San Diego.
Investigators found that the 10 male instructors, all enlisted men who had served in the Navy 6 to 12 years, made unwanted sexual comments to the women, and in some cases grabbed them, at various times from March 1993 to this September, when an inquiry was ordered.


Also of Note
Critics' choices of some other Manhattan art shows: RENE SANTOS, "Suspension of the Law," Grey Art Gallery and Study Center, 33 Washington Place, Greenwich Village. (Through tomorrow.) A poignant retrospective of an artist whose polymorphous image-mongering placed him in the thick of early 1980's Pictures Art -- visible here are surprising parallels to the work of David Salle, Eric Fischl and Troy Brauntuch -- but who died too young to form a mature style.
ABE FRAJNDLICH, Leica Gallery, 670 Broadway, at Bond Street, East Village. (Through Wednesday.) Surrealist-tinged portraits of celebrities, artists and photographers, including Billy Wilder, Roy Lichtenstein, Minor White and Imogen Cunningham, all done with a leavening of wit.


Italian Leader Asks Vote of Confidence After Coalition Revolt
Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi called today for a parliamentary vote of confidence in his Government on Wednesday to establish whether a revolt by one his coalition partners meant that his Government was, in effect, dead.
The decision was made after one of the pillars of the Government alliance, the separatist Northern League, ignored coalition unity on Wednesday to vote with the opposition Popular Party and the Party of the Democratic Left, or former Communists, in favor of a television oversight board.
The issue is sensitive for Mr.
Berlusconi, whose ownership of three of Italy's largest and most popular private television channels has been a source of frequent criticism.


Search for Bodies Ends in California Crash


Trevino Wins Year-End Senior Honor
LEE TREVINO, who won six tournaments in a year curtailed by neck surgery, was voted Senior PGA Tour player of the year yesterday for the third time.
Trevino, 55, had surgery in October.
He increased his career titles to 24, tying him with MILLER BARBER for the most in Senior Tour history.
Trevino earned $1,202,569 in 1994, fourth on the money list, his best year as a senior. (AP)


Girl Dies From Neck Injury After Fall Down Stairs at School
An 11-year-old Brooklyn girl has died from neck injuries she received when she fell down a flight of stairs at her junior high school last week, the police said yesterday.
The girl, Ayodell Smith of 175 Hawthorne Street in Crown Heights, was declared brain-dead last Friday at Kings County Hospital, Ellen Borakove, a spokeswoman for the Medical Examiner's Officer, said.
She was placed on life-support systems so she could donate a kidney, and was removed from the systems Wednesday night, Ms.
Borakove said.


Judge Upsets Conviction of Rabbi's Wife
A Brooklyn judge yesterday threw out the conviction of a Hasidic rabbi's wife on charges that she conspired with her husband and others to help a Jewish teen-ager hide from his family for two years.
Her husband has been convicted of kidnapping in the case.
"I feel the evidence was legally insufficient," Justice Thaddeus E. Owens of State Supreme Court in Brooklyn said in dismissing the wife's conviction.
On Nov. 9, a jury had convicted the woman, Malka Helbrans, of conspiring to kidnap the teen-ager, Shai Fhima Reuven.


Abroad at Home; To Make Peace Is to Choose
Fifteen months after Yitzhak Rabin and Yasir Arafat met on the White House lawn, the hopes they raised have nearly vanished.
The Israeli-Palestinian conflict seems back in the category of the intractable.
Terrorist murders have embittered the atmosphere.
The extension of Palestinian rule beyond Gaza and Jericho, a crucial promise of the Declaration of Principles signed at the White House, has not taken place.
Chairman Arafat and his Palestinian Authority have lost much ground to Hamas and its fundamentalist opponents of the peace accord.


Justice Department Blindly Faults New York's Court System
To the Editor:
Joyce Purnick's politician-bashing in the Dec. 8 Metro Matters column, about the Justice Department's attack on the New York State court system, disregards the consequences of what Justice is up to.


Ogilvy Loses Officer To Foote, Cone Unit
Harry Reid, chief operating officer at Ogilvy &amp; Mather Worldwide in New York, is joining Foote, Cone &amp; Belding Communications as president of its Foote, Cone &amp; Belding International operations.
Mr.
Reid, 50, who has spent 23 years at Ogilvy, will succeed Craig R. Wiggins, who had served as president of Foote, Cone International in New York for the last five years.
Mr.
Wiggins, 49, has been named to the new position of vice chairman at Foote, Cone, responsible for worldwide mergers and acquisitions; he will remain in New York.


S.E.C. Begins to Investigate Orange County Board's Role
The Securities and Exchange Commission's investigation into the Orange County, Calif., bankruptcy has shifted to the county's elected board of supervisors, even as the agency's chairman suggested that voters should throw the five-member board out of office.
The S.E.C., late on Wednesday, subpoenaed records of the supervisors that relate to the sale of bonds by the county.
But county officials said today that a letter to the board from the S.E.C. assured them that the request for documents "should not be construed as an indication by the commission that any violations of the law have occurred."


Assisted-Suicide Ban Upheld in New York
New York State's criminal prohibition against assisted suicide was upheld yesterday in Federal District Court in Manhattan.
A legal challenge had been filed by three patients with terminal illnesses, who have since died, and their physicians.
Their lawyers said they would appeal the ruling, by Federal Judge Peter K. Leisure, to the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit.


Songs That Can Add a Merry Beat to Christmas
Here are reviews of Christmas CD's by pop critics of The New York Times.
The CD's range in price from $6.98 to $16.98. (An introduction appears on page C1.) Nancy LaMott
"JUST IN TIME FOR CHRISTMAS" (Midder).
Nancy LaMott is a model of unaffected sweetness in a cabaret field crowded with poseurs, and her spare, intimate Christmas album projects the same aura of cleancut nostalgia as her live performances.
Outstanding cuts include a witty "Santa Claus Is Comin' to Town" in which the a cappella quintet Hudson Shad buzzes around her like Santa's helpers, and a wistful "I'll Be Home for Christmas." On "Baby It's Cold Outside," she parries with Michael Feinstein.
Two contemporary songs by up-and-coming theatrical songwriters -- Lynn Ahrens and Stephen Flaherty's "All Those Christmas Cliches" and David Zippel and David Friedman's "Just in Time for Christmas" -- feature a tasty string quartet.
STEPHEN HOLDEN


Sports of The Times; Phils Spend While Clubs Poor-Mouth
WE don't know if there will be reputable baseball in April but the owners are playing games in December.
The most insulting thing the owners are doing goes far beyond threatening a salary cap at the players and then backing off for a week, as they did yesterday afternoon in Chicago.
The delay might even turn out to be statesmanlike, if you can imagine that from this bunch.
In the meantime, the really despicable thing the owners are doing is conducting business as usual.
They are bleating that they must have an artificial limit on salaries, but on Wednesday the Philadelphia Phillies had the nerve, the gall, the chutzpah, to sign Gregg Jefferies for $20 million for four years.


U.S. and California Sign Water Accord
California and the Federal Government signed an agreement today on how to protect the water and the wildlife of the San Francisco Bay and its vast inland delta, resolving stubborn conflicts that for years had divided the region's farmers, city dwellers and conservationists.
Concluding a year of negotiations that had continued right up to a final court-ordered deadline, the two sides produced a far-reaching pact and turned a confrontation between a recalcitrant state and a determined Federal overseer into a compromise embraced by all sides.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
Morgan Stanley and S. G. Warburg broke off merger talks after a deal could not be reached with Warburg's independently run fund-management subsidiary.
The dashed deal is a big setback for Warburg of Britain, which had sought an American partner to elevate it to the ranks of global banking powers.  [ Page D1. ]


Songs That Can Add a Merry Beat to Christmas
Here are reviews of Christmas CD's by pop critics of The New York Times.
The CD's range in price from $6.98 to $16.98. (An introduction appears on page C1.) The Vault-Keeper
"TALES FROM THE CRYPT: HAVE YOURSELF A SCARY LITTLE CHRISTMAS" (The Right Stuff).
Making up tasteless versions of classic holiday songs is a well-worn tradition among children.
This CD, based on the horror-story television series "Tales From the Crypt," tries to do all the work this year with parodies like "We Wish You'd Bury the Missus" and " 'Twas the Fright Before Christmas." The music is provided by a small orchestra of keyboards, strings and sleigh bells, and the show's host is the Vault-Keeper, an animatronic skeleton with a voice somewhere between that of Robin Leach and Carol Channing.
Fourteen gleefully gory send-ups is a little too much for a single album, and not every song works, but lines like "drape the hearth with chunks of Barney, fa-la-la la-la, la-la la-la" and "juggle bills, juggle bills, can't get through the stack" salvage the CD.
NEIL STRAUSS


The Spoken Word
THE POETRY PROJECT, St.
Mark's Church, 131 East 10th Street, East Village.
"Deck the Halls With Lots o' Xanax," a reading of holiday tales of disaster by Darius James, Todd Colby, Elinor Nauen, Mario Mezzacappa, Dina Gan and Jeff Butler.
Tonight at 10:30 P.M.
Contribution, $6.
Information: (212) 674-0910.
LECTURE, 92d Street Y, at Lexington Avenue.
David Leeming, who was an assistant to James Baldwin, will discuss his biography of the writer.
Sunday at 11 A.M.
Tickets: $15; includes light brunch.
Information: (212) 996-1100.


Two Women Join Crew of America
AMY LYNN FULLER and ANNA SEATON-HUNTINGTON were named yesterday to the America
all-female crew that will compete for the 1995 America's Cup.
The two will both serve as grinders on the team.
Fuller, 26, was a silver medalist in rowing in the 1992 Olympics and has spent the last five years on the United States national rowing team.
Seaton-Huntington, 30, was a bronze medalist in women's pairs in the 1992 Olympics.


Restaurants
For a while it looked as if winter would never come.
Some people thought this was a good thing and contemplated canceling their cruises.
But those who had been looking sadly at their sleds perked up at the first frost, and the serious eaters among us started to smile.
Others may dream about a white Christmas, but we welcome winter as the start of the steak season.
A real eater, of course, can consume a hunk of red meat on any appropriate occasion.
But it tastes best when you can come into a warm room, your cheeks still singing with the cold.
You shed layers of clothing and slip into a dry martini before eating a steak with lots of appetite and lots of potatoes.


Songs That Can Add a Merry Beat to Christmas
Here are reviews of Christmas CD's by pop critics of The New York Times.
The CD's range in price from $6.98 to $16.98. (An introduction appears on page C1.) Trisha Yearwood
"THE SWEETEST GIFT" (MCA).
With only three Christmas warhorses ("Let It Snow," "The Christmas Song" and "Away in a Manger") on her album, Trisha Yearwood wraps her big, tremulous voice around honky-tonk Christmas songs from the 1950's and more recent ballads that envision Jesus' birth as a domestic event.
The honky-tonkers, like "Reindeer Boogie" and her version of "Let It Snow," are best, but she brings warmth without overplaying sentiment in the ballads.
JON PARELES


A Segue From Blue Lines to Punch Lines
Mike Bossy is on the telephone to Paris and thousands of Montrealers are listening in.
"Do you have Pop Tarts for breakfast?" he asks.


Where a Joyful Season Raises Its Voice in Song
Here is a sampling of musical presentations planned for the holiday season at churches and concert halls in New York City.
All are free unless otherwise noted; churches accept donations.
This selection, compiled by Alex Ross, represents what caught this critic's eye and excited his expectations.


Blue Sky Is Spotted On Nighttime Flight
Somewhere over the contiguous 48 in the dead of night Wednesday, a group of major league owners found a way to see progress in what they had only hours before characterized as the ashes of failed negotiations with the striking baseball players.
These owners, who make up management's negotiating team, had been left haggard by protracted talks that had ended earlier that day.
Still, they had enough stamina to reach a decision.
And that decision was to ask fellow owners for implementation of a salary cap.
The clubs, in a 25-3 vote, did that yesterday.
But the clubs also listened to the committee when it asked for a week's time to reinvest in the talks in hopes of keeping the implementation from becoming a reality.


Rider Slips By And Game Slips Away
Isaiah ider was jumping jubilantly into the arms of Greg Foster tonight, having run all the way across the court after hitting one of the wildest penetration baskets north of Chicago Stadium.
The menacing glare.
The smile.
The shot.
Oh, the pretty, pretty shot, a spin move in the lane and then a high loft over Derrick Coleman, banking off the glass with two seconds left to tie the game despite being fouled.
And then the free throw for the victory.


George G. Vest, 64; Led Philanthropy
George G. Vest, a tax lawyer and philanthropist, died on Tuesday in Norwalk Hospital.
He was 64 and lived in New Canann, Conn.
The cause was a pulmonary embolism, the family said.


Bombing Victim Honored as Loving Family Man
Thomas J. Mosser, the advertising executive killed by a serial bomber last week, was remembered today not as a master of Madison Avenue or as a victim of a bizarre criminal, but as a caring father who loved touch football and golf, homemade spaghetti sauce and pretty candles.
At a funeral Mass at Notre Dame Church here, Mr.
Mosser's family and friends spoke of small details of his life that still made them smile.
His 13-year-old daughter, Kim, recalled how much he enjoyed gathering his family around the piano to sing Christmas carols.


Transactions
Baseball  National League COLORADO ROCKIES -- Agreed to terms with Mike Kingery, outfielder, on a one-year contract.
LOS ANGELES DODGERS -- Signed Rudy Seanez, pitcher, to a two-year contract and Al Osuna, pitcher, to a one-year contract.
Acquired William Brunson, pitcher, from the Cincinnati Reds for Ben VanRyn, pitcher.
MONTREAL EXPOS -- Named Pat Kelly manager; Bo McLaughlin pitching coach; and Alex Ochos trainer of Harrisburg of the Eastern League; Doug Sisson manager; Stan Fansier pitching coach; and Lee Siagle trainer of Albany of the South Atlantic League; and Dave Machemer coordinator of minor-league field operations.
PITTSBURGH PIRATES -- Agreed to terms with Dave Clark, outfielder, on a two-year contract.
Basketball  Nationalal Basketball Association KNICKS -- Activated Charlie Ward, guard, from the injured list.
Football  National Football League GIANTS -- Placed Thomas Lewis, wide receiver, on injured reserve.
JETS -- Activated Fred Lester, fullback, off their practice squad.
Placed Tuineau Alipate, linebacker, on the practice squad.
TAMPA BAY BUCCANEERS -- Placed Courtney Hawkins, wide receiver, on injured reserve.
Signed Tyree Davis, wide receiver, off their practice squad.
Canadian Football League SHREVEPORT PIRATES -- Re-signed Alex Mash, defensive lineman.


Sports of The Times; The Quakers Climbing Out Of Ivy Tower
I couldn't understand why Howard was so upset.
I mean, this was great news: His alma mater, the University of Pennsylvania, had upset the mighty Michigan Wolverines.
Not in squash, not in lacrosse, not in swimming.
The Quakers had beaten Michigan in men's basketball -- and they had done it in Ann Arbor.
The Quakers' next stop would be New York's Madison Square Garden on Dec. 27 for the ECAC Holiday Festival.
A prime-time stage if ever there was one.
Penn has won two consecutive Ivy League basketball championships and last year became the first Ivy League team since 1984 to win a game in the National Collegiate Athletic Association tournament.


WNYC Foundation Opposes Station Sale
The nonprofit foundation that operates New York City's broadcasting system issued a statement saying it strongly opposes Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani's recently announced plan to sell the city-owned television station, WNYC-Channel 31, arguing that it is an important cultural institution.
The foundation has been trying to develop a plan to assume control of the station and two municipal radio stations.
Article, page 27.


A Tone on Ill-Fated Plane Warned of an Emergency


Following (Not Really) The Schools Chancellor
GENERALLY speaking, public figures do not get sufficient credit for not doing some of the things they could have done.
Consider Schools Chancellor Ramon C. Cortines.
He could have let me spend a day watching him go about his business.
He didn't.
Hooray for him.
In point of fact, I would have been happy had the Chancellor acceded to my request to spend time with him as he wrestled with the question of whether to quit, as Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani wants him to, or to stay in a job he has performed with ascetic purposefulness.


Trying a Jump-Start at Hoffritz
After months on the brink of collapse, Hoffritz, an old name in specialty retailing, has been given a reprieve.
It remains to be seen if the company that was forced into bankruptcy proceedings last August really has much of a future, but a group of investors injected up to $500,000 into the company last week, providing Hoffritz's few remaining stores with some much-needed merchandise and maybe a full-fledged second chance.


Gingrich Foresees a World Without Public Broadcasting
If incoming Speaker Newt Gingrich has his way, Barney and Big Bird and "All Things Considered" and "Morning Edition" will disappear from the publicly financed airwaves permanently.
Speaking on his weekly television program on the National Empowerment Network last week, Mr.
Gingrich took aim at another layer of what he considers the liberal media.
The Georgia Republican said he planned to "zero out," or eliminate financing for, the Corporation for Public Broadcasting, which finances public television and radio stations around the country and provides seed money to start programs like "Sesame Street."


A Democrat Throws Stones
Losing candidates are supposed to accept the blame for their defeat and then maintain a dignified silence.
I accept the blame, but as a victim of the so-called slaughter of the innocents -- reform-minded Democratic freshman of the 103d Congress who were defeated for re-election -- I cannot stay silent.
I am angry.
Not at the voters who chose someone else to represent them; that is their privilege.
Not at the Republicans, who were simply doing their job in our adversarial, two-party system.
I'm not even angry at the special interests.
I fought them hard, and I cherish the victories I helped achieve.


A Prudent Turnabout
Senator Frank Murkowski has come back from North Korea a convert.
Before his trip to Pyongyang, he seemed ready to block the necessary funding for the painfully constructed deal under which North Korea agreed to freeze and then dismantle its nuclear program.
Now the Alaska Republican, who will head the Senate subcommittee on East Asia, says that meeting the North's needs could lead to a nuclear-free Korea.
That is a welcome change.
He and his fellow Republicans have made a sport of questioning the Administration's nuclear diplomacy with North Korea.
Mr.
Murkowski and friends apparently believed that by showing skepticism now, they would wind up on the high ground if Pyongyang ever reneged on the deal.


Under Half Of City Buses Run on Time
The New York City Transit Authority acknowledged yesterday that fewer than half of its buses run on time, and officials in charge of buses admitted that for years, performance statistics have been misleading at best.
The announcement came just two days after the head of the bus division, Velva Edwards, resigned under pressure and 18 months after the Transit Authority president, Alan Kiepper, began a campaign to reverse what he sees as a slide in bus service.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article in Business Day on Thursday about the bankruptcy of Orange County, Calif., referred incorrectly to $198 million in the county's securities held by Kemper Financial Services' money market mutual funds.
The securities have plunged in price, but they are not in default.
In addition, the article misstated the number of Kemper money market funds holding the Orange County securities.
It is five, not six.


Corrections
An article yesterday about Senator Fred D. Thompson of Tennessee referred incorrectly in some editions to public opinion polls on the popularity of Senator Bob Dole, the Republican leader.
His popularity has not fallen since the November election; polls have shown that only about one-quarter of Americans hold negative perceptions of him, about the same fraction as before.


To Judge a College, Check Out the Dorms
To the Editor:
I marveled at Emily Kelton's mature perspective (Op-Ed, Dec. 10) on getting into college.
She tackles a very stressful situation with great humor.
What she did not tackle is the why -- why getting into a prestigious school is deemed so important.


N.F.L. Asks for Investigation
The National Football League has asked Federal authorities to investigate investments made by two former N.F.L.
Properties presidents in an affiliate of the league's former official trading card company.
"The decision was made by the special properties committee appointed by Commissioner Paul Tagliabue and the properties executive committee," said Joe Browne, a league spokesman.
"The 30 clubs were informed this week."


Jeffrey Feldman, 32, Top Bridge Player
Jeffrey K. Feldman, an executive with an investment firm who was one of Connecticut's leading bridge players, died on Wednesday in Greenwich Hospital.
He was 32 and lived in Norwalk.


Emotions Come Out Swinging, Then Go
Doug Varone cast his eye upon human frailty and pathos in the four choreographically expressive pieces that his troupe, Doug Varone and Dancers, presented on Wednesday night as part of the 92d Street Y Harkness Dance Project at Playhouse 91.
Watching "Possession" was like staring into the windows of an apartment building and glimpsing strangers involved in emotional situations that obviously matter much to them, although they remain enigmatic to onlookers.
In this new work to a recording of Philip Glass's Concerto for Violin and Orchestra, states of attraction and rejection are suggested by the ways dancers rush together, coil around one another, grandiloquently fling their arms about in gestural assertions and then vanish offstage as if into other rooms.


Bad Examples Abroad
To the Editor:
In "Fleeing Bosnia, Blocked by America" (Op-Ed, Dec. 9), Julie Mertus writes: "The Embassy's counselor for refugee affairs, Caryl Courtney, told me that the immigration officer hoped to make the trip this fiscal year, but added that 'there may not be enough money in the budget -- the per diem adds up.' "


Philip Morris Names Heads For 2 Units
In a move interpreted as further evidence that a spinoff of its nontobacco businesses was unlikely, the Philip Morris Companies named new heads of its tobacco and food divisions yesterday.
The move followed an announcement on Wednesday that Geoffrey C. Bible would become chairman, in addition to his roles as chief executive and president.


G.E. to Buy Its Stock; Dividend Up
It was not a surprise party, but Wall Street celebrated anyway when the General Electric Company announced yesterday that it had increased its quarterly stock dividend by 14 percent and would buy back up to $5 billion worth of its own shares.
General Electric's stock jumped $1.25 to close at $50.25, as 7.8 million shares traded, including an early block of 3 million shares.


Davenport's Coach
When 18-year-old LINDSAY DAVENPORT, now the only American tennis star in the top 10, finished her year at a career-high ranking of sixth in the world, she found herself in need of a full-time coach for 1995.
When MARTINA NAVRATILOVA retired last month at the age of 38, her longtime coach, CRAIG KARDON, found himself unemployed and unable to forge an agreement with the WTA Tour returnee JENNIFER CAPRIATI, who decided to begin her comeback with part-time assistance from JIM COURIER's mentor, JOSE HIGUERAS.
But after a test series of workouts this week in Dallas, Davenport signed a one-year pact with Kardon. (AP)


Court Panel Upholds Gejdenson's Re-election
A three-judge panel from Connecticut's highest court today unanimously affirmed the re-election of Sam Gejdenson, a seven-term Democratic Congressman, over his Republican rival, Edward W. Munster, in one of the closest and mostly bitterly fought recount battles in the nation.
Mr.
Munster immediately denounced the ruling, and said he believed the Republican-controlled House of Representatives, which has the final say in the seating of its own members, would take up the issue.


Foreign Chips Gain in Japan
The share of Japan's semiconductor market held by foreign suppliers jumped to a new high of 23.2 percent in the third quarter, the Governments of Japan and the United States said on Thursday.
The new foreign share is up from 21.7 percent in the second quarter and is more than five percentage points higher than the 18.1 percent share in the third quarter of 1993.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies Maurice Saatchi was forced out of Saatchi &amp; Saatchi, which he and his brother built into a global advertising power.
Mr.
Saatchi stepped down after the board sided with shareholders angry about his pay package and his role in internal squabbles.
The board also said it would change the name of the British company.  [ Page 39. ] Lockheed won a $1.3 billion order to supply Britain with 25 military transport planes.
The choice of an American company came over protests that the Royal Air Force should wait for the development of a European military freighter.  [ 39. ] U.S.
Shoe has reopened talks with Nine West Group, which has offered to buy the company's footwear division in a $627 million deal.
U.S.
Shoe's rejection of an earlier $425 million offer from Nine West had set off loud protests from some shareholders.  [ 39. ] Shares of General Electric jumped in heavy trading after the company increased its quarterly stock dividend by 14 percent and said it would buy back as much as $5 billion worth of stock.  [ 39. ] Hoffritz, an old name in knives, has a second chance at survival.
Last week, a group of investors injected $500,000 into the company, which was forced into bankruptcy in August.  [ 39. ] Steinhardt Management and Caxton agreed to pay a total of $76 million to settle charges that they had cornered the market in an issue of two-year Treasury notes in 1991.  [ 48. ] Philip Morris named new heads for its food and tobacco divisions.
The expiration of options accounted for much of the activity.
The Dow rose 41.72 points, and the S.&amp; P. 500 gained 3.45 points  [ 39. ] Treasury prices were mixed.
Bonds rose, and notes fell.  [ 48. ] Coffee prices jumped after a report showed a steep drop in supply in the United States.
Sugar prices also rose sharply.  [ 49. ] The dollar was little changed in quiet trading.
The Canadian dollar weakened after Quebec's debt rating was lowered.  [ 49. ] The Economy Starts on new houses rose 6.9 percent in November, the most rapid rate for residential construction in nearly a year.  [ 48. ] Orange County, Calif., sold the rest of the $1 billion in Government-sponsored notes in its troubled investment portfolio.  [ 48. ] Your Money Taking the self-employed route requires caution and planning.
Replacing the corporate safety net of insurance, pension and other benefits may be put off for a while, but it must be reckoned with eventually to achieve some degree of financial security.  [ 37. ] The bankruptcy of Orange County, Calif., points to the need for municipal bond investors to guard against risk.
But securing too much safety can be wasteful, experts say.  [ 37. ] Families intent on getting the most in college aid need to make adjustments two years before their student enters college.  [ 38. ]


The Neediest Cases; Easing a Teen-Ager's Return to Class
Last year, when he was new to the United States, Yuri Khablo started skipping school.
At 16, the Ukrainian immigrant spoke little English and had no friends in his Brighton Beach neighborhood.
His mother, a former nurse, could not find a job here, so Yuri went to work for a moving company.
The company paid him off the books, and Yuri often made only $20 for 12 hours of work.
He kept the job, he said, to help his mother and grandmother pay for food and clothing.
Last winter, he injured his back on the job and had to quit.
But Yuri still missed school constantly, and he was failing every class.


Canby Is Chief Theater Critic
Vincent Canby, the Sunday theater critic of The New York Times, was named chief theater critic yesterday.
The announcement was made by Joseph Lelyveld, the executive editor.
Mr.
Canby, 70, an author and playwright, became The Times's chief film critic in 1969.
He had been a cultural news reporter at The Times and a theater and film reporter and critic at Variety and other journals.
He has written "Unnatural Scenery," a novel published by Alfred A. Knopf in 1979, and three full-length plays, including "End of the War," which was produced by the Ensemble Studio Theater in 1978.
He was appointed Sunday theater critic in October 1993.


NEWS SUMMARY
Simpson made to a friend.  8  FIGHT OVER PUBLIC PROGRAMMING  The Corporation for Public Broadcasting is gearing up to fight Newt Gingrich's plan to "zero out" the organization.  9  N.A.A.C.P.
New York's judicial upheaval.
A prudent turnabout.
Letters  Russell Baker: Head down, Newt.
Eric D. Fingerhut: A Democrat throws stones.
Iain Guest: Will the U.N. smother its conscience?
Gennadi I. Gerasimov: A death wish is haunting Russia.
Neediest Cases 26  Chronicle 30 Bridge 18 Crossword 14


Will Roberson, 36, Director and Writer
Will Roberson, a director and playwright, died on Tuesday at his home in San Diego.
He was 36.
The cause was AIDS, said Bryan Scott, a friend.


Seeking Carter Visit, Bosnia Serbs Ease Up
Intent on luring former President Jimmy Carter to Bosnia, the Bosnian Serbs declared the Sarajevo airport open today after a break of almost one month and eased their hold on United Nations convoys.
A convoy carrying 106 tons of food was allowed into the encircled northwestern Muslim enclave of Bihac, and the United Nations said that it would resume flights into Sarajevo on Saturday.
The airport, the chief conduit for food aid into the capital, has been closed since Nov. 21 because of threats from new Serbian surface-to-air missiles.


RESULTS PLUS
N.B.A.
Magic Goes Overtime  Shaquille O'Neal scored 40 points and Anfernee Hardaway had a career-high 38, including a pair of free throws with 7.2 seconds left in overtime, as the Orlando Magic defeated the Golden State Warriors, 131-128, in Oakland, Calif., last night.
O'Neal also grabbed 18 rebounds and Hardaway added 13 assists.
Golden State lost its ninth straight despite a season-high 40-point effort by Latrell Sprewell and Tim Hardaway's 22 assists and 15 points. (AP) Pacers 93, Hornets 91: Reggie Miller scored 22 points and hit 2 free throws with 6 seconds left, lifting Indiana to victory over visiting Charlotte.
Larry Johnson, who led the Hornets with 22 points, tied the score at 91-91 with a pair of free throws at the one-minute mark.
Starting 61st, he was timed in 1 minute 57.30 seconds over the Oreiller-Killy course.
Luc Alphand of France was second in 1:57.41.
The top American was AJ Kitt, 12th in 1:58.44.(AP) GOLF  Davies Retains Lead  Laura Davies held to her three-stroke lead through the second round of the Australian Ladies Masters in Gold Coast by firing a five-under-par 68 yesterday.
The British golfer has a 36-hole total of 132.
Jane Crafter of Australia was Davies's closest rival after a 66 in the second round.
Jill McGill, the 1993 United States Amateur champion, missed the cut in her first tournament as a professional, carding a 77 for a total of 153. (AP) HOCKEY  Two Stars Miss Game  Even playing without the N.H.L. stars Pavel Bure and Alexander Mogilny, Russia swept past France, 7-2, with four goals in the final period yesterday as the Izvestia Cup tournament opened in Moscow.
Bure lost his hockey gear on the flight from Vancouver, British Columbia, to Moscow; Mogilny was unable to clear up insurance problems. (AP)


Once Again, Els Can Do No Wrong
You don't hear much calypso music in the islands these days.
Reggae has long since supplanted it as the rhythm and rhyme of choice.
But what Ernie Els is doing at the Tryall Club up on the hill over the Caribbean is calling to mind an old calypso song and dance called "The Limbo," a party tune where revelers bend backward and try to slink under a crossbar while the band sings, "How low can you go?"
In Els's case, the answer seems to be: as low as he wants.
For the second straight day in the Johnnie Walker World Championship, he tore Tryall apart, shooting another round of 64 that was, if anything, more effortless than the one he opened with on Thursday.
On a warm tropical day, Els turned up the heat a notch, increasing his lead to six strokes over Nick Faldo, who shot his second straight 67 only to lose ground, and Tom Lehman, who shot 65.


PRESIDENT INSISTS HIS TAX CUTS KEEP DEFICIT IN CHECK
The White House set out today to sell President Clinton's proposed tax breaks in the face of far grander Republican promises, saying the political test was whether such proposals could be paid for without worsening the deficit -- and insisting that its cuts could be.
But senior officials withheld virtually all specifics about what Government programs they would cut in five agencies to help finance the $60 billion package over five years.
And they acknowledged that the President's proposed tax credits for children and new deductions for education would have to be phased in, starting at perhaps half their eventual value, before savings would be available to finance them in full.


Bridge
Study the diagramed deal, consider what contracts are likely to be reached in a strong game, and decide what the results should be.
It was played early this month at the Honors Club, 42 East 74th Street, in the annual Ogust-Schenken game.
This is in memory of two famous old-timers, Harold Ogust and Howard Schenken, and was won by two young-timers from Manhattan, Charles Reich, 26, and his 24-year-old sister, Elizabeth.
East-West will certainly locate their diamond fit, and may play five diamonds doubled, or even four diamonds undoubled if North is unduly cautious.
Nine tricks are likely to be made, for the declarer can maneuver to discard one spade loser on a heart winner.
He will lose a club trick, a heart trick and two spade tricks.


Teaching Children Respect for Wildlife
To the Editor:
While most Americans are concerned about budget cuts and a failing economy, the U.S.
Fish and Wildlife Service is throwing hundreds of thousands of dollars into a National Shooting Sports Foundation program to turn unsuspecting children into sport hunters, according to Bob Herbert ("Reading, Writing, Reloading," column, Dec. 14).


Corrections
A brief article in some editions yesterday about a ruling in Federal District Court in Manhattan upholding New York State's ban on assisted suicide misidentified the judge who issued the ruling.
He was Thomas P. Griesa, not Peter K. Leisure.


New York's Judicial Upheaval
The Justice Department has thrown New York State's judicial system into turmoil by finding that three New York City boroughs choose their trial judges in a racially discriminatory way that violates the Voting Rights Act.
Though confusingly written, the department's objection is basically correct: New York's system, with its false promise of democratically elected judges, is especially harmful to minorities.


Israel Soldier Faulted for Not Fighting Back
Shmuel Meiri, an Israeli on army reserve duty, made a near-fatal mistake this week when he took a wrong turn and got stuck in traffic in this Palestinian town just north of Jerusalem.
Within moments, his car was surrounded by a mob that smashed the windows, then stabbed him and pounded him to a bloody pulp with fists, rocks and iron bars.
Sergeant Meiri, blood streaming down his face as he was led away by border policemen, was filmed by Palestinian cameramen who happened to be on hand, and the graphic images shocked both Jews and Arabs.


Chairman Is Deposed At Saatchi
Maurice Saatchi, who built the Saatchi &amp; Saatchi advertising empire and then nearly drove it to ruin through overexpansion, was forced out tonight as the company's chairman under pressure from angry shareholders.
Mr.
Saatchi, along with his brother, Charles, built a small London agency into a powerhouse through a series of acquisitions on Madison Avenue during the 1980's that earned them the nickname "Snatchit and Snatchit." He stepped down after the board sided with large shareholders unhappy about his pay package and his role in persistent internal squabbles.


Observer; Head Down, Newt
Poor Newt Gingrich.
Washington is giving him the buildup.
It's unprecedented for a mere Congressman to get the buildup.
Until now, the buildup has always been reserved for Presidents.
"We build 'em up because it's so much fun to knock 'em down," as nobody ever says in Washington.
It's a sly little city.
They don't talk plain there.


6.9% Rise in Home Starts Despite Rate Increases
The most interest-sensitive part of the American economy -- the housing market -- seems almost impervious to this year's sharp rise in the cost of mortgages.
Confounding forecasters, builders stepped up groundbreaking on new homes by 6.9 percent in November to an annual pace of 1.54 million, the Commerce Department reported today.
This was the biggest advance since March and the most rapid rate for residential construction in nearly a year.


PENTAGON TO HELP U.N. QUIT SOMALIA
The United States will send ships and several thousand marines to Somalia to help evacuate the remaining United Nations peacekeeping troops there, the Pentagon said today.
Deputy Defense Secretary John M. Deutch said at news conference that American involvement was "not imminent, but in the planning stages," and would likely take place early next year.
About 3,000 marines would provide cover to peacekeepers leaving the Somali capital, Mogadishu, and help remove hundreds of United States tanks, helicopters and armored personnel carriers that Washington loaned to the United Nations, he said.


Jockeys Evaluating Offer
After a two-hour meeting yesterday in Manhattan, representatives of the Jockeys' Guild said they needed more time to evaluate the latest offer to finance insurance coverage by the Thoroughbred Racing Associations.
But the representatives agreed to meet again well before Dec. 31, when the current contract between the Guild and the T.R.A. expires.
The guild, which represents 950 of the nation's jockeys, has said its members will not ride if there is no new agreement on Jan. 1.
The T.R.A., a trade group representing 41 tracks in North America, including Aqueduct, has provided insurance for jockeys since 1968.
The jockeys maintain they waived their claim to broadcast rights in exchange for the coverage.
"That's been one of the sticking points," John Giovanni, national manager of the Jockeys' Guild, said.
"The language in the proposal says they don't agree we have media rights."


No Headline
METRO DIGEST  BRONX GANG MAKES BURGLARY AN ART Sometimes they visit a store posing as foreign tourists interested in videotaping a modern supermarket for the folks back home.
But they return when the store is closed, pound through the roof with sledgehammers, disable alarm systems and then break open the safe with hammers, crowbars, torches and specialized saws.
These are the tactics the police say are used by crews of burglars -- based in the Bronx and made up of immigrants from Albania and the former Yugoslavia -- that have attacked retail stores up and down the East Coast for the last three years.
Page 1.
NEW YORK CITY  MAYOR'S PLAN TO SELL CHANNEL 31 RESISTED The nonprofit organization that operates New York City's broadcasting system said that it opposes Mayor Giuliani's plan to sell the city-owned television station, WNYC-Channel 31, arguing that it is an important cultural institution.
Page 27.
BRATTON SAYS HE FLIES FOR EFFICIENCY Responding to a published report that he flies in police helicopters for routine travel at a time when the city is in a budget crunch, Police Commissioner William J. Bratton said that he travels by helicopter to maximize his efficiency.
Page 27.
BUILDER TO PAY CHURCH $4.9 MILLION A Westchester developer has agreed to pay $4.9 million to the Greek Orthodox Archdiocese of North and South America to settle a dispute over losses from a real estate deal.
Page 26.
TOWER AIR SAYS PLANES WERE VANDALIZED Tower Air said that someone, probably an employee, had cut electrical wires on three cargo planes and two or three passenger planes at Kennedy International Airport in October and early November, disabling monitoring systems.
Page 26.
REGION  CUOMO SAYS FAREWELL, FAST Gov.
Mario Cuomo began what he said would be his last speech as a public official by excusing himself for talking so fast.
There was so much, he said, that he wanted to say.
In a 35-minute goodbye at the National Press Club, Mr.
Cuomo said he does not expect to ever become a Supreme Court justice and does not intend to become the commissioner of baseball. ("If you did want to give a political opinion from time to time, you couldn't do it.") Page 26.
COURT UPHOLDS GEJDENSON RE-ELECTION A three-judge panel from Connecticut's highest court affirmed the re-election of Sam Gejdenson, a seven-term Democratic Congressman, over his Republican rival, Edward W. Munster, in one of the closest and mostly bitterly fought recount battles in the nation.
Mr.
Munster immediately denounced the ruling.
Page 26.
BACK WITH FRIENDS IN THE BARBERSHOP After an unwelcome brush with fame, Deno Lloyd was back at the fourth chair in Jules's Barber Shop in the Bronx, cutting hair, giving shaves and getting high-fives from regular customers.
"I just want to get on with my life," said Mr.
Lloyd, 34, who became the focus of a murder trial in Rockland County after the defendant identified him as the mysterious Dino he had long insisted was responsible for a carjacking and slaying.
Page 26.
Neediest Cases...26  About New York by Michael T. Kaufman...27


Remembering the Battle of the Bulge, 50 Years Later


Graham's Choice: Security Or Starts?
If the Giants do somehow, miraculously, make the playoffs, there are several plays they will remember.
One of them was by a player who is not even starting anymore.
Quarterback Dave Brown has been one of the major reasons why the team has turned things around but it was his backup, Kent Graham, who made the big play that ended the seven-game losing streak.


Oakley's Toe Causes Concern
Charles Oakley missed his second consecutive game tonight because of increased pain in his dislocated right toe, raising more concern that surgery may be necessary.
The Knicks forward has not practiced since Monday night's game against the Miami Heat, and he was not sure whether he would play Sunday night against the Portland Trail Blazers.
If Oakley decides to have surgery, he will be out for an extended period.
"Any time it bends, there's pain," Oakley said tonight before the Knicks' 106-85 loss to the Phoenix Suns.
"It just came on all of a sudden. I'm willing to try whatever -- treatment, different shoes -- but eventually we're going to have to take the next step and have surgery.
"For me to come back, I'm going to have to work out and put pressure on it. I have to hope it's going to get better walking around, but playing it's going to take pounding. I want to play, but we'll have to see what happens."





Citing Financial Ways, Faction Seeks Ouster of N.A.A.C.P. Head
A group of prominent blacks within the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People called today for the group's chairman, William F. Gibson, to resign, asserting that he had diverted the organization's money to his own use and that he had driven the organization to the brink of bankruptcy through free-spending habits.
"We cannot let our beloved association die an ignominious death because William F. Gibson thinks he is more important than the N.A.A.C.P.," said C. DeLores Tucker, a member of the board of the organization's tax-exempt fund-raising arm.


Palestinian Militants in Gaza Threaten More Attacks


COMPANY BRIEFS
HOSPITALITY FRANCHISE SYSTEM INC., Parsippany, N.J., a hotel franchisor, said its board had authorized the repurchase of as much as $50 million of common stock in the next 12 months.
SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA EDISON CO., Rosemead, Calif., will freeze salaries for its nonunion employees next year to control costs.
About 9,500 of the company's nearly 17,800 employees will be affected by the plan.


McDowell Weighs Options, And Yanks Cross Fingers
The Yankees have spoken to Jack McDowell's agent twice since obtaining the pitcher in a trade with the Chicago White Sox on Wednesday night, but the most important conversation that could help determine the right-hander's future will occur between him and his brother sometime this weekend.
Jim McDowell, who is his brother's agent, and Jack will discuss the intricacies of possibly signing a contract now, possibly waiting to do something and possibly playing for the Yankees for a prolonged period.


G.O.P. in House Rehearse For Revival of 1954 Show
Representative Newt Gingrich, the next House Speaker and newly crowned master tactician, held the 229 other Republican representatives captive in the Capitol's House chamber for two relentless days this week, drilling them on parliamentary minutiae, whipping them through mock debates, exhorting them with inspirational speeches.
Ever the strategist, Mr.
Gingrich said the object was to prod Congress's perpetual minority into acting, at long last, like a majority party.
Ever the showman, Representative-elect Sonny Bono, a California Republican and show-business icon to the slightly paunchy, put it another way.


Fake Bank Set Up by U.S. Agents Snares Drug-Money Launderers
The Federal authorities said today that a fake bank they created in the Caribbean had crippled major money-laundering schemes used by the Cali drug cartel of Colombia and organized crime groups in Italy.
As the first financial institution ever created and operated by Federal agencies in a criminal investigation, the bank produced what the American and Italian authorities said was the strongest evidence yet of direct financial links between the cartel and Italian groups that distributed their drugs.
The ploy allowed the authorities to seize almost $40 million in cash as well as paintings by Picasso and Rubens.


Randy Barcelo, 48, A Stage Designer
Randy Barcelo, a costume and set designer on and off Broadway, died on Dec. 6 at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center.
He was 48 and lived in Manhattan.
The cause was cancer, said his mother, Ondina Lopez.


Builder Ready To Settle Case With Church
A Westchester developer has agreed to pay $4.9 million to the Greek Orthodox Archdiocese of North and South America to settle a dispute over losses from a real estate deal.
Chris Demetriades, a developer who is also a prominent layman in the church, agreed to pay the sum with interest, over the next six years, according to a statement issued by the Archdiocese.
The settlement, which was first proposed in March, was approved on Wednesday by Justice Stuart Cohen in Manhattan State Supreme Court and brings to an end several lawsuits that had been brought by the church and its critics.


A. Walter Socolow, Jewish Reconstructionist, 87
A.
Walter Socolow, a lawyer who was a longtime lay leader in the Jewish Reconstructionist movement, died on Dec. 3 at his home in Manhattan.
He was 87.
The cause was heart disease, said his son Robert, of Princeton, N.J.


AIDS Research Benefit
The Carmagniole Symphony Orchestra is to give a benefit concert tonight at 7:30 at St.
Francis Xavier Church, 46 West 16th Street, Manhattan.
The program, conducted by Barry Lawrence Stern, features Brenda Dawe, soprano, in Mozart's "Exsultate, Jubilate" and also includes Vaughan Williams's Third Symphony ("Pastorale") and Mendelssohn's Fifth Symphony ("Reformation").
Tickets are $10; $5 for the elderly and students.
Proceeds are to be donated to New York AIDS research organizations.
Information: (212) 568-7743.


Irish Premier Greets I.R.A. Political Chief At a Meeting
Ireland's new Prime Minister, John Bruton, greeted the leader of the I.R.A.'s political wing at a peace forum today in a move to allay fears that he is less committed to peace efforts in Northern Ireland than his predecessor.
On his first full day as Prime Minister, Mr.
Bruton walked up to Gerry Adams, the leader of Sinn Fein, and shook his hand before taking his seat at the forum on Northern Ireland peace.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.50
8.50
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
4.75
4.75
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
5.43
5.61
2.94
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.53
5.53
3.02
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
6.20
6.18
3.20
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.80
7.80
5.76
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.85
7.87
6.27
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.72
8.72
7.33
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.99
6.98
5.58
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Sir Geoffrey Rudolph Elton, 73, Tudor Historian at Cambridge
Sir Geoffrey Rudolph Elton, an eminent Tudor scholar and Regius professor emeritus of history at Cambridge University, died on Dec. 4 in his home in Cambridge, England.
He was 73.
He suffered a heart attack, according to Patrick Collinson, the present Regius professor.


Johnson Staying in TV
JIMMY JOHNSON plans to announce that he has decided to stay in television, but may return to coaching after a three-year network contract expires, The Dallas Morning News reported yesterday.
Johnson, the former coach of the Dallas Cowboys, considered an offer of about $4 million a year from the Philadelphia Eagles before making his decision, the newspaper said.
The new Fox television network contract will contain provisions allowing Johnson to return to coaching after the 1997 season. (AP)


Death of a Nazi Judge
To the Editor:
The Nazi judge Roland Freisler was not executed as a war criminal, contrary to "In Today's Germany," the Dec. 12 advertisement by the Church of Scientology.


Republicans Say Clinton's Tax Cuts Aren't Deep Enough
The Republican leaders of the next Congress today praised President Clinton for endorsing new steps toward tax relief.
But they said they remained intent on moving much farther and faster on cutting taxes and spending than Mr.
Clinton had proposed.
As the Republicans renewed their calls for more drastic action, it was evident that the proposals presented by Mr.
Clinton on Thursday night would represent no more than a starting point for negotiations.


CLASSICAL MUSIC
A Seasonal Alternative Almost Four Centuries Old  Monteverdi Vespers Church of the Ascension


Toasting the Zest of Youth With a Jazz-Ballet Cocktail
Alvin Ailey and Duke Ellington were in some respects cut from the same cloth.
Both were artists with a passion for life and work, though for the most part neither wore that passion on his sleeve.
And their work was filled with a compelling mix of sweetness and tart humor.
"Night Creature," a 1974 dance that takes its name from its Ellington score, is a perfect example.
Created for the young dancers of the new Ailey Repertory Ensemble, the junior Ailey company, "Night Creature" is in part a celebration of sassy, heedless youth.
Sarita Allen embodied that spirit in a revival of the work, presented by the Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater on Thursday night at City Center, moving through a hip crowd of silvery night creatures with wry aplomb.


Brown Case Arguments
A lawyer for female athletes suing Brown University said yesterday that the school had failed to give women sufficient opportunities for sports participation, while a lawyer for the school said men were more interested in sports and so took part more.
The arguments came in the closing session of a trial to determine whether Brown has failed to meet stipulations in Title IX, a 1972 law prohibiting gender discrimination at schools that receive Federal funds. (AP)


Corrections
A picture caption on Thursday about Army troops sent to Little Rock, Ark., in 1957 to integrate Central High School misstated the content of one photograph in some copies.
Gov.
Orval Faubus, who resisted integration, was not shown in the 1957 photo.


Father and Son Reunion To Find Roots and Die
Kirk Douglas has developed a cottage industry of playing trimly fit, irrepressible old men who have no intention of going gentle into any good nights.
Here he goes again, in a teleplay written by Ernest Thompson ("On Golden Pond").
In "Take Me Home Again," on NBC at 9 tomorrow night, irascible Ed Reece (Mr. Douglas) wants to escape his suffocating family to die in the bed and place where he was born, somewhere in California, or maybe Oregon.
The only one who might possibly help him get there is his wandering son Larry (Craig T. Nelson), once a Vietnam War protester and now an absentee husband and father.
A wary Larry arrives, and father and son set off on a cross-country trek, stopping to chat every once in a while with new colorful characters and old loves.
Mr.
Douglas and Mr.
Nelson work well together, often quite movingly.
But Mr.
Thompson's script is curiously unfocused.
There are passing references, presumably unflattering, to Reagan and Bush, but there is no real political statement.


Game Is Fun Again For Danny Hurley
To see the change in Danny Hurley, all that is needed is one glimpse of him with a basketball in his hands.
"We're only seven games into the season," Seton Hall's Hurley said recently.
"We lost two of them really badly. And I'm still happy."


Wall Street Watch
President Clinton's $60 billion tax cut proposal might have been directed at angry middle-class voters, but it was shaped, at least in part, by concern over how already nervous financial markets would react.
And Republican plans can expect similar scrutiny.
News analysis, page 10.


Beliefs; Daily prayer: Is it indeed a ritual or just simple thoughts simply stated?
"Open my lips, O Lord, and my mouth shall proclaim your praise." Often enough he said those words in the shower while the hot water washed away his drowsiness and he thought, "Open my eyes, too, so I can find the washcloth."
"Create in me a clean heart, O God" -- and clean ears and elbows, he told himself -- "and renew a right spirit within me."


Growth-and-Income Group Breaks the Mold
What's in a name? When it comes to growth-and-income mutual funds, not much.
The traditional fund in this category owns growth stocks -- mostly big blue chips -- and picks up a bit of income from dividend yields.
The average fund in the category yielded 1.86 percent in November, according to Morningstar Inc.


No Headline
Ever since the Republican landslide on Nov. 8th, it's been getting dark outside a little earlier every day.
You notice that? -- GOVERNOR CUOMO.  [ 28:4. ]


U.S. Copter Said to Crash In North Korea
North Korea reported today that it had shot down an "enemy helicopter," thought to be American, after it flew into its airspace at 10:45 A.M.
United States military officials later confirmed that an American military helicopter was missing.
The officials would say only that an OH-58 copter had made an emergency landing, probably in North Korea, with two crew members aboard.


Melville Rosen, 71, Doctor and Educator
Dr.
Melville G. Rosen, a physician and educator who encouraged the practice of family medicine at a time when his profession was becoming one of increasing specialization, died on Tuesday in his home in Deer Park, L.I.
He was 71.
The cause was a stroke, said his daughter, Jane Rosen of San Gregorio, Calif., and Manhattan.


Thank You, Stranger
To the Editor:
The weekend of Dec. 3, I was in New York City for a party at a restaurant at Broadway and 12th Street.
I must have dropped my purse in the street when getting out of a cab at that corner.
I did not realize I had lost it until I was in the restaurant.
I went out and retraced my steps, but could not find it.
I thought I had left it in the cab.


Seaford Journal; Faith, Not Fear of a Flood, Inspires a Church to Build an Ark
Centuries ago, when few people could read, church buildings were designed to tell stories, their exteriors adorned with carvings of saints and apostles, angels and Last Judgments.
These days, as many people again seem more comfortable with pictures than text, a small congregation here is moving in step with the times in putting up a church meant to look like Noah's ark.


Tokoza Journal; For a Township's Rival Vigilantes, a Time to Heal
Before they became bunkmates at a training camp for apprentice policemen in September, Themba Buthelezi and Themba Masuko had never met.
"But it is possible we have shot at each other," Mr.
Masuko said, recalling the men's recent past on opposite sides of this township's seemingly intractable political wars.


CHRONICLE
CATHERINE DICKENS will be in the Winter Garden at the World Financial Center this weekend, contemplating Christmas past.
Really past.
The one of 151 years ago, when her great-great-great grandfather Charles Dickens wrote "A Christmas Carol."
She won't be cooking a prize goose, but she and her parents, CHRISTOPHER CHARLES DICKENS and JEANNE-MARIE DICKENS, who live in England, will be signing and selling paperback copies of the book.
Proceeds of the sale will go to New York Downtown Hospital's pediatric division, she said.


Montana to Start
JOE MONTANA confirmed yesterday that he will start in the Kansas City Chiefs' final home game of the season tomorrow against the Houston Oilers.
Montana's 16th season nearly ended prematurely Nov. 27 when he injured his left foot during a game at Seattle.
Trainers feared that the injury was more serious than it turned out to be.
But Montana sat out the next two games, while the Chiefs fell to 7-7. (AP)


Police Say Albanian Gangs Make Burglary an Art in U.S.
The burglars sometimes visit a store beforehand, police investigators say, posing as foreign tourists interested in videotaping a modern supermarket for the folks back home.
But they return when the store is closed, pound through the roof with sledgehammers, disable alarm systems and then break open the safe with hammers, crowbars, torches and specialized saws.
These are the tactics the police say are being used by crews of burglars -- based in the Bronx and made up of immigrants from Albania and the former Yugoslavia -- that have attacked retail stores up and down the East Coast for the last three years.


Arthur Bestor, a Leading Scholar On the Constitution, Dies at 86
Prof.
Arthur Bestor, a constitutional historian and a frequent commentator on the separation of powers, died on Tuesday at his home in Seattle.
He was 86.
The cause was lung cancer, his family said.


'Messiah' Reigns, Forever, It Seems
"I walked in the bright paths of sound," wrote Ralph Waldo Emerson after he heard Handel's "Messiah" for the first time, in Boston, on Christmas, 1843.
This week I have also walked in those paths, sampling a few of the many performances this work ritually receives every December, marveling again at the unearthly simplicity of "Behold, I tell you a mystery," the tenderness of "He was despised and rejected," and the robust vigor of Handel's conception of God and man.
This oratorio has an uncanny ability to survive almost any performance, shedding glory on the players even if they do not always return the favor, allowing itself to be freely molded in the image of the musical worshiper.
Those images once included gargantuan performances like the one in London with 3,500 choristers that George Bernard Shaw wrote about in 1891.
That tradition, a reflection of the British empire at the height of its power, is much more modestly preserved in the New York performances of the Oratorio Society or the Masterwork Chorus, but Handel today is generally far less grandiose and less awesome.
There is a presumption of familiarity in the performances.
The forces are usually smaller, informed by the authenticity movement; the singing is less stentorian and less connected to operatic styles.
Trumpets sound, good tidings are told and the Lord reign eth without the music's seeming to come from some realm beyond the earthly.


Corrections
An article on Wednesday about a speech by Sol Wachtler, the former chief judge of New York State, misidentified the agency where he will perform community service.
It is the Education Assistance Corporation of Carle Place, L.I., which provides services for drug and alcohol offenders, not the Legal Aid Society of Nassau County.


WNYC Group Opposes Sale Of TV Station
The nonprofit organization that operates New York City's broadcasting system said yesterday that it opposes Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani's plan to sell the city-owned television station, WNYC-Channel 31, arguing that it is an important cultural institution.
"The foundation does not agree to support the city's announced intention to sell the license of WNYC-TV," the organization, the WNYC Foundation, said in a statement yesterday.
Officials of the foundation said they wanted to continue to press for an agreement in which it takes control of the television station as well as the two radio stations the group also runs for the city, WNYC-AM and FM.


POP
Alternative Rock Groups With Oddities at the Mike  Sunny Day Real Estate  and Shudder to Think Irving Plaza


CLASSICAL MUSIC
An Audience of Children Applauds a Holiday Classic  Amahl and the Night Visitors Kaye Playhouse


Simpson Case Judge Delays DNA and Statement Rulings
After several hours of inconclusive and, at times, heated arguments today, Judge Lance A. Ito put off rulings on two crucial issues in the O. J. Simpson case: When the hearing on the admissibility of DNA evidence will be held and whether prosecutors could obtain a possibly incriminating statement that Mr.
Simpson made last month to Roosevelt Grier, a former football player who is now an ordained minister.
Judge Ito promised decisions on both matters on Monday.
The court will then recess until Jan. 4, when it is scheduled to address a third nettlesome issue, the admissibility of evidence about the Simpsons' tumultuous marriage.
It is still unclear when testimony will actually begin; come the New Year it could be days or months away.


Don't Punish Watershed Residents for New York City Pollution
To the Editor:
"Mr. Pataki: Save the Watershed" (editorial, Dec. 12) must derive from handouts circulated by New York City's more strident environmental groups and by the long-gone Environmental Protection Agency expert panel on the watershed, which labored a year and then, on the eve of publishing its conclusions, made its only visit to the area.


Fund Manager Failed The Test of Prudence
To the Editor:
Re "Ill-Fated Fund's Manager: Mr. Main St., Not Wall Street" (front page, Dec. 11), about Robert L. Citron, the Orange County treasurer, whose management of the county's investment fund led to a loss of more than $1.5 billion:


U.S. Shoe Is Looking Again At Bid by Nine West Group
Under pressure from its institutional shareholders, the United States Shoe Corporation is taking a second look at a proposal by Nine West Group Inc., a national shoe marketer, to buy U.S.
Shoe's successful footwear division for cash and securities currently worth about $627 million.
Nine West, which is based in Stamford, Conn., had first proposed the acquisition on July 27.
But its earlier $425 million offer was rejected by the U.S.
Shoe board, a move that set off loud protests by some institutional shareholders with large holdings in the company, which is based in Cincinnati.


Dow Up 41.72 in Heaviest Trading Since '87
Stock traders ignored another signal of a possibly overheating economy and bid up stock prices higher yesterday during the biggest trading day since the 1987 stock market crash.
The Dow Jones industrial average rose 41.72 points, to 3,807.19, as trading volume on the New York Stock Exchange hit 483.2 million shares.
That was the third-heaviest volume after the record 608 million shares set on Oct. 20, 1987, just after the stock market plunge of Oct. 19, when 604 million shares were traded.


Briefly Grounded, Kiwi to Resume Its Flights
Kiwi International Airlines and the Federal Aviation Administration yesterday worked out a way to put the carrier back in service, and one flight crew was approved to begin flying last night.
Arlene Feldman, the agency's administrator for its Eastern Region, said that after a daylong meeting between agency representatives and company officials, procedures had been worked out to enable the airline to resume its 42 flights as soon as possible.
She was unable to estimate, however, how long it would take for restoration of full service.


Cuomo Makes His Last Speech as an Official, in a Hurry
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo began what he said would be his last speech as a public official by excusing himself for talking so fast.
There was so much, he said, that he wanted to say.
In a 35-minute goodbye at the National Press Club, Mr.
Cuomo said he did not expect to become a Supreme Court justice and does not intend to become commissioner of baseball. ("If you did want to give a political opinion from time to time, you couldn't do it.")


New Press Chief Waits in Wings At White House
Michael D. McCurry, the State Department spokesman, is on track to being named next week as the new White House press secretary, senior White House officials said tonight.
Mr.
McCurry is expected to meet this weekend with Leon E. Panetta, the White House chief of staff, and senior officials described the session as a prelude to his being formally offered the job.


INSIDE
U.S. Copter Down in Korea
A U.S. military helicopter crashed in North Korea, the Pentagon said, but the North Koreans said they had shot it down.
Page 3.
Wall St.'s Frenzied Day
The stock market had its busiest day since the 1987 crash, with prices surging as traders ignored hints of an overheating economy.
Page 39.
Saatchi Is Deposed
Angry shareholders forced out Maurice Saatchi, who built the Saatchi &amp; Saatchi advertising empire and then nearly saw it fall to ruin.
Page 39.


Similar Problems Facing Jets and Chargers
The quarterback is throwing interceptions, the big runner isn't picking up 100-yard games, the team is on a losing streak after a breakaway start.
Suddenly there is gloom.
And that's on a 9-5 San Diego team.
Imagine how the same scenario is playing out for the 6-8 Jets in this bicoastal drama.


Helping a Child Buy a First Home
Patricia Vincent, a widow from Corpus Christi, Tex., wanted to help her daughter buy a house, and planned to give her some money for that purpose.
Then her financial adviser told her about a program that would allow her to provide home financing for her daughter while leaving the money invested.
Mrs.
Vincent decided the program made sense for her, since she could use the additional income.


Negotiators Creating Chance for a Settlement
Summoning a gimmick from at least some of their childhoods, negotiators for baseball's striking players and club owners will engage in a do-over next week.
Beginning Monday in Washington, they will take another swing at the opportunity they might have missed in Rye Brook, N.Y., this past Wednesday.
As they worked internally yesterday, both sides tried to put aside the confusion, misunderstanding or miscommunication that prompted a breakoff in talks just when it appeared the negotiators had made some movement in their effort to settle the longest strike in sports history.


A Municipal Meal


Clash Over Name Puts Museum Gift in Doubt
It was just a year ago that the Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum announced the largest gift in its history: $10 million in exchange for naming its landmark Frank Lloyd Wright rotunda after the real estate developer Samuel J. LeFrak and his wife, Ethel.
At the time, Mr.
LeFrak said the money came "with no strings attached."
But after several failed attempts to get the New York City Landmarks Preservation Commission to approve the LeFrak name on the exterior of the rotunda, at Fifth Avenue and 89th Street, Mr.
LeFrak appears to be rethinking his gift.


Rites for Mail Bombing Victim


USX Chairman Arrested on Gun Charge
The mills are booming and profits increasing, but steel can still be a pretty tough business.
That may explain why Charles A. Corry, the chairman of the USX Corporation, which includes the nation's largest steelmaker, U.S.
Steel, was carrying a gun when he went to a meeting at the Treasury Department on Wednesday.
According to people familiar with the incident, Mr.
Corry is licensed to carry a gun in Pennsylvania and routinely packs a .32-caliber pistol in his briefcase.
But only law enforcement officers are allowed to own or carry guns in the District of Columbia.


CHRONICLE
Now for the latest love story featuring couples in opposing political camps.
She is ELIZABETH P. MCCAUGHEY, the Republican Lieutenant Governor-elect of New York; he is WILBUR L. ROSS JR., an investment banker who has been a fund-raiser and financial contributor to Democratic campaigns.
Ms.
McCaughey, 46, an academic from the Manhattan Institute think tank, earned a spot on the ticket last November for her published attacks on the Clinton health care plan.
Mr.
Ross, 55, senior managing director with Rothschild Inc., has a spot of his own, on President Clinton's Fund for Large Enterprises in Russia.


Schnellenberger Hired By Oklahoma Sooners
Oklahoma turned to a builder of football programs to return the Sooners to national prominence, hiring HOWARD SCHNELLENBERGER yesterday to replace GARY GIBBS.
Schnellenberger, 60, led Miami over five years from the brink of extinction to a national title in 1983.
He has been at Louisville for the last 10 years, winning nearly half his games and taking the Cardinals to two bowl games.
In the decade before his arrival, Louisville had only two winning seasons.
His college record is 96-71-2.
Pending approval by the school's regents, Schnellenberger will be given a five-year deal worth a base salary of $125,000 per year.


What to Do if Counting Sheep (or Whatever) Fails


Thomas Sutton, 71, Advertising Official
Thomas Francis Sutton, a former top executive of the J. Walter Thompson advertising agency, died on Dec. 9 at his home in the Cotswolds in England.
He was 71.
The cause of death was cancer, said a spokesman for J. Walter Thompson.


Out of Court and Back to Barbering
After an unwelcome brush with fame, Deno Lloyd was back at the fourth chair in Jules's Barber Shop in the Bronx yesterday, cutting hair, giving shaves and getting high-fives from regular customers.
"I just want to get on with my life," said Mr.
Lloyd, 34, who became the focus of a murder trial in Rockland County after the defendant, Edward L. Summers, identified him as the mysterious Dino he had long insisted was responsible for a carjacking and the slaying of Michael Falcone that followed.
Mr.
Summers was convicted on all counts Thursday night.





Orange County Blues: Gauging Bonds' Risks
IF bonds from a bastion of wealth like Orange County can go into default, what can investors possibly do to shield themselves?
They can buy taxable bonds instead of municipals.
They can diversify.
They can buy bonds that are insured.
And as they make their holdings safe they can do one more thing: take care not to overdo it.


College Aid Eligibility: 2-Year Head Start Helps
YEAR-END financial planning usually involves basic steps that will lessen the tax bill in April.
For parents with college-bound children, the task can accomplish much more.
Any parent of a junior in high school is about to turn the calendar on the year that will prove crucial in determining financial aid eligibility.
Whereas financial consultants generally urge people to defer income if possible -- in the hopes of deferring taxes as well -- these parents may qualify for more college aid if they accelerate income into this year.


Postal Worker Indicted in Check Scheme
A Federal grand jury indicted a Postal Service letter carrier and two others yesterday, saying they took part in a scheme to delay delivery of Social Security payments and other Government checks in Brooklyn unless recipients paid a fee of $5 or $10 a month.
Officials said the delays, which occurred from about January to November, affected more than 100 people in Brownsville.


Celtics Are Reportedly Seeking to Buy The Red Sox
Despite a losing record on the basketball court, the limited partnership that runs the Boston Celtics has lately been winning big on the balance sheet and, according to people in the partnership, is interested in buying the Boston Red Sox.
Since the end of June, the Celtic partnership, which is traded on the New York Stock Exchange, has been building its assets, taking $85 million in loans from Shawmut Bank against the impending sale of its television station, and putting those funds into short-term investments to keep them liquid.


Russian General Halts His Tanks As Qualms Over Rebellion Grow
In an extraordinary sign of the Russian military's unhappiness with its mission in the rebellious republic of Chechnya, the commander of a tank division halted his advance about 20 miles from the rebel capital today and promised local villagers that he would not go any further.
The officer, Maj.
Gen.
Ivan Babichev, told weeping Chechen women: "It is forbidden to use the army against peaceful civilians. It is forbidden to shoot at the people."


Passengers Scramble as Airline Cuts Back Service
Travelers across the Midwestern snow and ice belt spent today trying to find alternative ways home for Christmas after American Eagle shut down its Chicago commuter service when a pilots union complained of inadequate training in wintertime flight procedures.
The union, the Allied Pilots Association, said on Thursday that a group of pilots brought to Chicago this week largely from the warmer climate of the South needed more training before taking off into the freezing, gray skies of the Midwest.


CLASSICAL MUSIC
A Night's Work Dedicated To the Dodecaphonic Aleck Karis and Eliza Ross, pianists Weill Recital Hall


Richer Adds Voice To Devils' Hard Line
Since the start of the National Hockey League lockout, which begins its 12th week today, the Devils have been among the hard-liners in ownership and management.
John McMullen, the owner, has been a major public supporter of Gary Bettman, the commissioner, who is the lead negotiator in the struggle.
Lou Lamoriello, the president and general manager, is a member of the bargaining committee and has been harsh in his criticism of Bob Goodenow, the executive director of the N.H.L.
Players Association.
Now, a Devils' star, Stephane Richer, has been quoted in a French-language newspaper in Montreal as saying that his union would be willing to capitulate to the owners in order to go back to work.
His views were quickly disputed by the Devils' player representative, Bruce Driver, and by Goodenow.
But both said Richer had a right to speak his opinions, which he did, in a blunt way.


Knicks Tumble to Bottom of the Valley of the Sun
This was a night the Knicks would love to forget.
Charles Oakley missed his second consecutive game due to pain in his dislocated right toe, raising concern that surgery may soon be necessary.
And by the fourth quarter, the score was so one-sided that fans were heading for the exits, and the Knicks were headed for another loss.
Having their way with New York throughout the second half, the Phoenix Suns waltzed to a 106-85 victory tonight at the America West Arena, giving the Suns (16-5) a franchise-record-tying 21st consecutive regular-season home victory.


Putting More Police on the Streets


Libby Pataki, in Transition; Personal Life Is Also Changing for the Next First Lady
Just as New Yorkers were getting to know the Ladies' Home Journal Libby Pataki, she is changing.
The woman known for her loyalty to her husband, George, and their four children, her mean backhand on the tennis court, her friendly style of managing the 10 seasonal employees of the Pataki family produce stand and her unflagging commitment to a weekly nondenominational women's prayer group is taking on a more public persona.
A First Lady with an agenda is emerging from the fuzzy photograph of bucolic country life.
"I don't want to co-govern," she said recently.
"But I certainly intend to be an activist."


As U.N. Mission Winds Down, Peace Remains Elusive
As the billion-dollar United Nations famine-relief and peacekeeping operation in Somalia packs up and prepares to leave, no settlement is in sight for the factional violence that prompted the mission in the first place.
Fighting between clans has actually increased in recent weeks in Mogadishu, the Somali capital, heightening concern that the final phase of the pullout will not be peaceful.
Clan officials say a peace conference is continuing, but aid workers say it never seems to convene.


Tower Air Says 5 or 6 Planes Were Vandalized at Kennedy
Tower Air said yesterday that someone, probably an employee, had cut electrical wires on three cargo planes and two or three passenger planes at Kennedy International Airport in October and early November, disabling monitoring systems.
All the damage was easily detected, the airline said, and no plane took off with disabled equipment.
It called the incidents vandalism, as opposed to terrorism or sabotage, and the F.B.I., which is investigating, used the same word.


Gore Upbeat After Talks With Top Russian Leaders
After 10 days of fevered speculation about the state of relations between the United States and a more nationalist Russia, American officials said today that "a lot of air has been cleared" and that "the relationship is in pretty good shape."
Vice President Al Gore, after three days of talks with the Russian Prime Minister and a morning meeting with President Boris N. Yeltsin, was upbeat.


Fleeing the Wards, They Join Homeless Ranks
To the Editor:
Re your Dec. 10 article on the "escapees" from New York metropolitan area state mental hospitals:


Commerce Secretary's Business Ties May Face House Scrutiny
The next chairman of the House Government Operations Committee may hold hearings on whether Commerce Secretary Ronald H. Brown's business holdings have created conflicts of interest.
Aides to the incoming chairman, Representative William F. Clinger Jr., Republican of Pennsylvania, said he might do so if he did not receive satisfactory replies to his requests to the Office of Government Ethics and the Commerce Department's Office of the Inspector General for information about Mr.
Brown's business interests.


Justice and Mercy in Arkansas
The death of Orval Faubus is a reminder of the common bond among his generation of segregationist politicians.
They doomed themselves to arguing with history.
These men wanted to be remembered for the many small things they did right.
History has decreed, beyond argument and beyond appeal, that they will be remembered for the one big thing they got wrong.
That is good, because Mr.
Faubus earned his six terms as Arkansas Governor with an act of moral duplicity.
By background he was a classic Southern progressive.
As a schoolteacher he could read the Constitution as well as the next person.
As Governor he was blessed with a state where race had never been central to the political ethos and in which desegregation of buses and schools was already under way by 1957.


A Plan That Tries to Please
The blueprint for tax cuts that President Clinton unveiled on Thursday night was not only an appeal to disgruntled middle-class voters.
It was also directed at the nation's nervous financial markets, which may ultimately hold the veto power over the best-laid budget plans of either Democrats or Republicans.
While it may have been fear of more middle-class wrath that forced Mr.
Clinton to move at all, more than two years after his campaign promise to cut taxes for ordinary working Americans, fear of the markets also kept the proposal limited in scope.
Although $60 billion over five years is a lot of money, it is still a drop in the stream of an economy rushing along at $6 trillion annually.


To Judge a College, Check Out the Dorms
To the Editor:
It's not as hard to choose a college as Emily Kelton suggests in "Brown, Bowdoin, Brandeis and Prozac" (Op-Ed, Dec. 10).


POP
Songs That Travel Life's Bumpiest Roads  Greg Brown The Bottom Line


Corrections
A holiday music listing in Weekend yesterday about a concert at 6 tonight by the Pre-College Chorus misstated the site, the address and the information telephone number.
The event is at the Juilliard Theater, 155 West 65th Street, in Lincoln Center.
The number is (212) 769-7406.


Bratton Says He Takes Copters for Efficiency
Responding to a published report that he flies in police helicopters for routine travel at a time when the city is in a budget crunch, Police Commissioner William J. Bratton said yesterday that he travels by air to maximize his efficiency.
The Daily News reported yesterday that Mr.
Bratton uses the seven-helicopter fleet to fly to news conferences, tour precincts and appear at dedications, in contrast to the practice of past commissioners, who used the fleet mostly in emergencies.


Russian Folk Idiom With Tudor Echoes
WHAT transports the imagination without resorting to special effects or electronic monsters, rivals Disney without trespassing on his domain and is, in fact, the work of one man apparently unaided by photography?
The answer, on view at the Firestone Library of Princeton University, is a show titled "Gennady Spirin, a Modern Russian Master of Children's Book Illustration."
Gennady Spirin's signature is similar to but simpler than the first Queen Elizabeth's, and, if the self-portrait aspiring to Holbein is any guide, the artist himself is Tudorish in appearance.
The miniature shows him dressed like Henry VIII but with a fuller beard.


Xerox's New Strategy Will Not Copy the Past
JOHN NELSON and a dozen fellow middle level executives sit in a classroom at the Xerox Corporation's training center here, earnestly studying the digital future.
In all-day sessions at the modern complex, nestled in the rolling hills of Virginia, they listen to lectures on the new technology and computer-age sales tactics.
The training program lasts a week, and this group of Xerox students certainly seems to be getting the message.
Mr.
Nelson, a district business manager in Hartford, and his colleagues speak fluently of "digital solutions" in business and the need for the copier company to "capture the benefits of digital technology."


The Joy of Boredom
BOREDOM The Literary History of a State of Mind.
By Patricia Meyer Spacks. 290 pp.
Chicago: The University of Chicago Press. $24.95.


The Executive Life; Silicon Valley Finds No Time for Holidays
"A poor excuse for picking a man's pocket every twenty-fifth of December!" said Scrooge, buttoning his great-coat to the chin.
"But I suppose you must have the whole day. Be here all the earlier the next morning!" "A Christmas Carol," Charles Dickens


Gingrich: Man in Spotlight And Organization in Shadow
Back in 1987, when most people thought Democratic control of the House would last forever, Newt Gingrich had a vision: Raise millions of dollars and spend it to nurture a dynamic new generation of Republican politicians -- a farm team that could some day march from the statehouses to Congress.
He had a vehicle as well: a political action committee called Gopac that is the centerpiece of what has become known as "Newt Inc.," an interlocking set of entities that in recent years has grown to include a think tank and college course beamed around the country.


Sanders Runs Over The Vikings
Barry Sanders has made many remarkable runs this season -- long, entertaining jaunts of 85 and 84 and 69 and 63 and 62 yards.
None of those were for touchdowns.
On most of them, Sanders was caught from behind.
But not today.
There was no catching Sanders and no keeping up with the Detroit Lions here this afternoon.
Both started fast and finished in a blur, leaving the Minnesota Vikings wheezing in their wake in a 41-19 whipping before 73,881 fans at the Silverdome.


Patricia Sanabria, Andres Gonzalez
Patricia Sanabria D'Luque, a consul in the Colombian Consulate in New York, was married in New York yesterday to Andres Gonzalez Angulo, a lawyer in Bogota, Colombia.
The Rev.
Thomas Nielsen performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at St.
Patrick's Cathedral.


Sound Bytes; 'Bootstrapping' to the Future
DOUGLAS ENGELBART has been called the patron saint of the computer industry, a soft-spoken computer scientist with the idealism of a college student.
One doesn't have to look very far to see the fruits of his lifelong efforts.
Among the more tangible achievements of his 20 years at SRI during the 1960's and 70's, which was then a Stanford University think tank, Mr.
Engelbart is credited with contributing to inventions like the computer mouse and on-screen windows -- the basis of today's popular graphical user interfaces found on the Macintosh and Microsoft Windows-equipped PC's.


Airline Safety Rising to Fore As a Question
When Transportation Secretary Federico F. Pena meets next month with hundreds of airline employees and other aviation experts, a basic question will be on the table: What is being done to improve airline safety?
The question is rarely raised in so public a forum.
But then again, it has been years since travelers have so frequently been led to ask: "Another crash? What caused it?"


Both Sides Still Skating In Place
On the 78th day of the hockey lockout, subcommittees representing management and labor met for five hours in Toronto yesterday, then adjourned with no further talks scheduled.
They are to report their findings to Gary Bettman, the commissioner of the National Hockey League, and Bob Goodenow, the executive director of the N.H.L.
Players Association, who did not attend last week's mini-meetings.


Victor: Victorian:
Little Madeline look-alikes dressed in black and red recall Ludwig Bemelmans's "Madeline" storybooks of 12 little girls who lived in a vine-covered house in Paris.
Hundreds of them have been swarming around Fifth Avenue in their red holiday coats with matching hats.
There are many styles in the same colors, but the big success is the Victorian-style coat, its capelet edged in black velvet with a big bow at the back.
Lord &amp; Taylor even has Madeline dolls, including some in the original storybook colors: blue coats and yellow hats.





NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-25  FROM SEPARATISTS, DEFIANCE  The people of a separatist republic whose capital was surrounded by Russian troops seemed largely defiant, as they have for 300 years of Russian rule, even as they faced an invasion or bombing. 1  RUSSIA SETS A DEADLINE  Russia said it would restore order in a breakaway region, using all necessary means, if its fighters did not lay down their arms by midnight; Russian forces continued to press toward the capital. 22


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
SKINNY DIPPING  And Other Immersions in Water, Myth, and Being Human.
By Janet Lembke.
Lyons &amp; Burford, $21.95.


Revelers


The Romance of Plastic
To the Editor:
"The Credit Card: We Love It, We Hate It" (Viewpoints, Nov. 20) encouraged me to reflect on an antiquated New York law that makes it difficult for governments to allow residents to pay taxes by credit card.


Recession Leaves, Company Party Returns
THE lean, mean parties of Christmas past are now history.
This season, according to a survey of hotel managers, restaurateurs and corporate planners, the corporate holiday party is making a strong comeback.
"Companies are coming out of the recession," said Wes La Bay, general manager of the Hudson River Inn and Conference Center in Ossining.
"They are doing better and spending more."


Two Cruises Focus On Asian Temples
The temples and sacred sites of southern Asia are among the highlights of two tours this winter.
The Metropolitan Museum of Art and the American Geographical Society are sponsoring a 23-day voyage from Java to Bombay aboard the 80-passenger, 290-foot Renaissance IV of Renaissance Cruises.
Departing Feb. 6 for Jakarta from New York, the tour includes visits to the temple of Borobudur, Java; the island of Phuket; a tour of the temples of the Pallava kings at Mahabalipuram, in the Indian state of Tamil Nadu, and a three-day stop in Bombay.
The tour costs from $13,945 to $17,075 a person, double occupancy.
The fare includes meals, hotel accommodations and round-trip air fare from New York.
For information, call the tour operator Raymond &amp; Whitcomb at (212) 759-3960.


White House Comes Under Fire Again


At Work; The Office as a Work in Progress
SOMETIMES a cigar is just a cigar and an office just a place to go every day to make a living.
But an exhibit at the Cooper-Hewitt National Design Museum in Manhattan makes a compelling case that the office is also a laboratory of social and material values, adapting and changing -- evolving, that is -- as new technology is introduced.
The office is, in short, a work in progress, even if "progress" is a discredited 19th-century notion.
As "Good Offices and Beyond: The Evolution of the Workplace" intriguingly demonstrates, there is less distance than one might think between the paper clip and the virtual office.
Anyone who keeps track of events at the Cooper-Hewitt will not be surprised that the museum has mounted a witty, down-to-earth exploration of the connections between design, technology and everyday life.
It is in the tradition of last year's "Mechanical Bride" exhibit, which examined the historical relationship between emerging household technology and women's work.
In addition to its other virtues, "Good Offices" encourages participation: Visitors have filled dozens of notebook pages responding to questions on technology, what constitutes a good office -- natural light, many visitors say -- and what work means to them.
One room of the exhibit is dedicated to the Laboratory of Seating, where visitors may help test 15 ergonomic office chairs.


Ideas &amp; Trends; The Chip on Intel's Shoulder
ANDREW GROVE, the chairman of the Intel Corporation, the world's largest computer-chip maker, has long run his company with the dictum, "Only the paranoid survive."
In recent weeks, evoking memories of Richard Nixon at the height of the Watergate crisis, Mr.
Grove has retreated to his "war room" inside the company's corporate headquarters in Santa Clara.


Living on Vodka and Asparagus
DREAMS OF DEAD WOMEN'S HANDBAGS Collected Stories.
By Shena Mackay. 478 pp.
Wakefield, R.I.: Moyer Bell. $24.95.


Altman Embraces Fashion; Does Fashion Embrace Him?
FORTUNATELY FOR fashion insiders Monday night -- before the artist formerly known as Prince performed, and after the premiere of Robert Altman's new movie, "Ready to Wear" -- there was plenty of time for two sports vital to the opinion-making process at the real Paris fashion shows: milling and polling.
Because the "Ready to Wear" premiere and party afterward were sponsored by Elle magazine, any gaps in Mr.
Altman's knowledge about who should be there were soon filled, as the industry's heavyweights showed up to see just how fashion fared under Mr.
Altman's scrutiny.


The Romance of Plastic
To the Editor:
Come on, guys.
Don't be disingenuous.
"Nobody knows why people spend more with a credit card than with either cash or checks," you say.
Of course they do.
The industry is built on it.
People don't instinctively feel like they are spending "real money" with credit cards.
Not until they get the bill with the high interest charge tacked on, that is.
That's when the revulsion part of the phase sets in.
Then we go spend some more to soothe ourselves. (Is there a Marxist dialectic at work here?) MARCIA SPIRES  Manhattan, Nov. 23


Lori B. Kessler, Jeffrey R. Paige
Lori Beth Kessler, the daughter of Marilyn Kessler of New York and Howard Kessler of Forest Hills, Queens, was married last evening to Jeffrey Robert Paige, a son of Joyce and Julius Paige, also of New York.
Cantor Daniel Rous officiated at the Stanhope Hotel.
Mrs.
Paige graduated cum laude from the University of Pennsylvania.
She is a vice president and media director at Kallir, Philips, Ross, an advertising agency in New York.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
LATE LOVE  A Celebration of Marriage After Fifty.
By Eileen Simpson.
Peter Davison/Houghton Mifflin, $21.95.


Gifts of Gab for '95
THE BEST WRITERS know how hard it is to make writing look easy.
That's a flat sentence; no color in it.
Alexander Pope, in his "Essay on Criticism," breathed life into the thought by using a terpsichorean metaphor:


Dec. 11-17: Portfolio to Go; Jimmy Carter's Newest Mission Is Peace for Bosnia
Former President Jimmy Carter had already plunged into two of the year's most serious crises of American foreign policy.
But last week proved him unable to resist the lure of the stickiest, the 32-month-old civil war in Bosnia that has confounded peacemakers of all stripes.
It turned out that Mr.
Carter had been meeting in Atlanta with representatives of the Bosnian Serb leader, Radovan Karadzic, who sought out his help.
When Mr.
Karadzic promised to make some gestures of good faith, Mr.
Carter announced that he stood ready to travel to the Bosnian capital of Sarajevo to take up the task of conflict resolution.


Elizabeth A. Comcowich, C. J. Garcia
Elizabeth Ann Comcowich, a daughter of June M. and William J. Comcowich of Fairfield, Conn., was married yesterday to Christopher Joseph Garcia, the son of Hope V. and Hector J. Garcia of Houston.
The Rev.
Edward J. Scull performed the ceremony at St.
Pius X Roman Catholic Church in Fairfield.
Mrs.
Garcia, 28, graduated from Simmons College and received a master's degree in public administration from New York University.
She is a nursing care coordinator in the maternal-child health division at Beth Israel Medical Center in New York.
Her mother is the director of special education at Ansonia (Conn.) High School.
Her father is the president of Ultitech, a multimedia production company in Stratford, Conn.


Confronting Mortality, Mitterrand Fascinates His Country
The conversation was clearly intended to be private, yet it was hardly out of character for President Francois Mitterrand to visit a devoutly Catholic French philosopher to discuss death.
Ailing with prostate cancer, he has addressed his own approaching death in public more than once.
The philosopher, Jean Guillot, 93, disclosed that the meeting took place last month in an article in the newspaper Liberation on Friday morning.
Mr.
Guillot went even further later in the day, saying in a radio interview that the President had also confided that his doctors had given him no more than six months to live.


O.K., Call It War
I USED TO HATE hearing about the "war" against drugs, and as executive editor tried to discourage that metaphor in The Times.
But the politicians won the battle of the cliche even as they were losing the war.
The "war" term appeared in this newspaper only 16 times in all of 1981, but 66 times in 1987 and 511 times in 1989, after President Bush promised at his inaugural, "Take my word for it, this scourge will stop." Well, it didn't, and we're down to about 100 mentions in each of the Clinton years, a mere twice a week.
And now I'm sorry, for it's time the media began to cover the war on drugs as a war -- the way they covered the last war that America lost.
The better newspapers are portraying the drug quagmire the way they once portrayed the quagmire in Vietnam.
Dispatches from the front find cops risking life and limb to drag in users and dealers, but just as many stalk the streets the next night.
The brass that's bragging about progress and calling for still more troops, weapons, prisons and money must be smoking something.


The Future for Salaam? Colorado, It Seems
It looks as though Colorado tailback RASHAAN SALAAM, the Heisman Trophy winner, may return for his senior season next year instead of entering the National Football League draft.
At a news conference Friday, Salaam said he has made a decision on his future, but wouldn't make an official announcement until Jan. 6.
But later when asked if it was safe to say he is staying at Colorado, The Denver Post quoted Salaam as saying, "Yes." Asked why?
"The team," he said.
"The team is it." The outgoing coach, BILL McCARTNEY, wouldn't be surprised if Salaam stayed.
"I'm the same guy who wrote BARRY SANDERS, encouraging him to stay in school," said McCartney, who will coach his final game when the Buffaloes meet Notre Dame in the Fiesta Bowl Jan. 2.
"I believe all that money doesn't make you happy. I believe experience is what you draw your greatest delights from."


At Checkpoint Charlie, A Museum Remembers
THIS city boasts as great a variety of museums as any in the world, from the famous Pergamon, which houses a spectacular collection of antiquities, to smaller ones celebrating everything from sugar to musical instruments.
Only the Checkpoint Charlie Museum, however, regularly brings tears to the eyes of visitors.
For nearly three decades, Checkpoint Charlie was the most heavily guarded border crossing between East and West Berlin.
Soviet and American tanks faced each other there in 1961 in a crisis that many feared would explode into war, and in the following years the crossing became a vivid symbol of the Cold War.


Dancing Through Potholes on York Ave.
An elaborate, two-year construction project along York Avenue is officially finished -- but don't try telling that to people like Betty Cooper Wallerstein.
Late last month, Mrs.
Wallerstein tripped in a pothole near the corner of 79th and York, scattering her Christmas purchases and spraining her hand as she fell.
She was not the first pedestrian to fall there, and she was no ordinary pedestrian, either; Mrs.
Wallerstein is president of the East 79th Street Neighborhood Association, and concerned with the state of her neighborhood, particularly in the wake of the construction project, which included water-main work, utility repair and repaving by at least four separate companies and city agencies.


There's More to Project Than Some Felled Trees
"Cutting of Trees Upsets Port Washington"  [ Nov. 13 ]  was misdirected.
While the issue of the trees is certainly a concern of the neighboring community you all but neglected to mention the very positive aspects of this remarkable undertaking to create both housing for needy elderly and community space for Port Washington.
The Long Island Housing Partnership has been involved with the Landmark Project for several years, and I have never worked with a more dedicated, caring group of citizens, people who have given tremendous amounts of time and resources for the good of the community, and who have struggled through all sorts of obstacles to make sure that Port Washington could continue the spirit of community that is is so well known for.


Correction
A review on Nov. 27 about "In Pharaoh's Army," by Tobias Wolff, misstated the location of the Hill School, which Mr.
Wolff attended on a scholarship.
It is in Pottstown, Pa., not in New England.


The $6 Million Dallas Defender
The Dallas Cowboys have offered defensive end TONY TOLBERT a four-year, $6 million contract, The Fort Worth Star-Telegram reported yesterday.
Tolbert, one of 17 Cowboys who will become unrestricted free agents as of Feb. 17, seems destined to come close to tripling the $650,000 he makes in this final season of a three-year, $1.8 million pact.
And at an average of $1.5 million a year, Tolbert would become the second-highest-paid Cowboy defender, behind CHARLES HALEY.
Tolbert, a six-year veteran, and other teammates have agreed to postpone negotiations until after the regular season. (AP)


Carter Heading Off to Bosnia On Broadened Peace Mission
Former President Jimmy Carter prepared to set off tonight on a Balkan peacemaking mission that has been broadened at the urging of the Clinton Administration to give less prominence to the Bosnian Serbs and to include talks with most of the major parties in the Bosnian war.
Mr.
Carter said today that he was not yet prepared to commit himself to a meeting with Radovan Karadzic, the Bosnian Serb leader, who invited him to make the journey.
The former President said he had not been able to determine whether Dr.
Karadzic had taken the steps he promised this week to calm tensions in the region.


Goodbye, Garden! Hello, High-Rise!
For years, Claremont stables' western neighbor was a community garden, plots of carefully tended flowers and vegetables that filled the lot along Amsterdam Avenue, between 89th and 90th Streets.
But plans for a long-awaited new building are being completed for the lot, the last urban renewal site on the Upper West Side.
And residents of the area are a tad nervous.


Holiday Shoppers Filling the Aisles
SHOPPERS across Long Island are filling malls, spending more on holiday gifts than last year, they say.
Sales are up and customer complaints are down, according to stores, and shoppers say the holiday spirit is brighter than it has been for years.
On a recent afternoon in the Roosevelt Field Mall in Garden City the aisles were filled with shoppers toting bags from Macy's, A.&amp;S., J. C. Penney and the Gap, holding packages of all sizes and shapes.


Kelli Peterson, William McGuinn
Kelicia Leigh Peterson, a daughter of Iver and Christine Peterson of Lawrenceville, N.J., was married there yesterday to William Thomas McGuinn, the son of William and Judith McGuinn, also of Lawrenceville.
The Rev.
Deadra B. Johns performed the ceremony at the Presbyterian Church of Lawrenceville.
Mrs.
McGuinn is 19 and is known as Kelli.
Her father is a reporter for The New York Times and her mother is a New Jersey State Ranger at Washington Crossing State Park in Lambertville, N.J.


Good Buys on Tavern Menus
IF Tiffany's had a low-price outlet store it would be a popular place.
Yet a number of the finest, most luxurious restaurants on Long Island have the equivalent of discounts, and they go virtually unnoticed.
They are called tavern or taproom menus and offer some of the same dishes that are on the more expensive a la carte bills of fare.
The more limited menus often offer slightly smaller portions of upstairs dishes.
Yet the top-quality ingredients and high-powered chefs responsible for the restaurants' reputations are also involved in their preparations.
The lower-price meals are sometimes served only in one area like the barroom.


Helen Kim, Doohi Lee
Helen Hei-Kyung Kim, a daughter of Dr.
Chin-Tai Kim of Shaker Heights, Ohio, and Dr.
Youngjai Kim of New York, was married yesterday to Dr.
Doohi Lee, a son of Dr.
Choon Won Lee and Si Oak Lee of Edison, N.J.
The Rev.
Richard D. Leonard performed the ceremony at the Unitarian Church of All Souls in New York.
The bride, 32, is an associate manager and the orchestra representative at Columbia Artists Management in New York.
She graduated from the Juilliard School.
Her father is the chairman of the philosophy department at Case Western Reserve University in Cleveland.
Her mother is a neuropsychologist at Beth Israel Medical Center in New York.


Orderly House, Orderly Mind
ONE Tuesday morning, a 38-year-old, neatly dressed woman with long brown hair arrived at the Greenwich Civic Center to lead the Messies Anonymous group meeting.
She reaches out to members with a soothing smile and heartening words.
She is a picture of serenity.
It was not always that way.
Before she cleaned and uncluttered her house, she said, she would never have assumed a leadership role.
Her house was strewn with piles of papers, toys, clothes and unfinished projects.
She was ashamed, embarrassed.


Suicides by Bullied Students Stir Japanese Furor
For more than a year, four of his classmates had been demanding money from him, sometimes hundreds of dollars at a time.
Once, when he would not comply, they held his head under water in a river.
Another time they forced him to undress and left him in the gymnasium in his underwear.
Finally, Kiyoteru Okouchi could not take it any more.
On Nov. 27, the 13-year-old eighth grader hanged himself from a tree in the family garden, leaving behind a suicide note detailing the extortion, a poignant diary that named his tormentors and a note promising to pay his mother back the roughly $11,000 he had taken to give to the bullies.


Robert F. Wagner Jr. Honored With Park
A 3.5-acre segment of land at the southern end of Battery Park City will remain a park in progress until the summer of 1996.
But since last week, it has a name: the Robert F. Wagner Jr.
Park.
Robert F. Wagner Jr. died just over a year ago at the age of 49.
The son of a renowned mayor, Mr.
Wagner spent his life in public service.
He served as a deputy mayor in the Koch administration, Board of Education president and chairman of the City Planning Commission.
A lifelong Democrat, he transcended partisan politics, becoming an adviser to Rudolph W. Giuliani during his 1993 mayoral campaign.


Never at a Loss


In America; Can So Many Be Wrong?
When Ramon Cortines came to New York as the city's Schools Chancellor in the summer of 1993, the school system was in its usual state -- that is, everything was in turmoil.
A quiet man, the new Chancellor was entering a cacophonous and brutal environment, a zone of almost unrestrained hostility that seemed certain to devour him in short order.


In the Region/Connecticut; Low-Income Housing Proposal Troubles Trumbull
LIKE many Connecticut suburbs, Trumbull is having trouble with a 1990 Affordable Housing and Use Appeals law, which gave developers the right to appeal rejection of proposed low-income housing.
The law says that a town that rejects a proposal for low-income housing must prove that its zoning does not exclude low-income people or that the proposed housing would be a detriment to the community.


Death in the Mail -- Tracking a Killer: A special report.; Investigators Have Many Clues and Theories, but Still No Suspect in 15 Bombings
They have thought he might be a sullen student or teacher.
They have thought he might be an enraged airline or computer worker.
They have thought he might be someone at the post office or in a lumberyard.
They have thought he might work at a factory that makes artificial limbs.
When he resurfaced last Saturday, mailing a package that killed an advertising executive named Thomas J. Mosser at his home in North Caldwell, N.J., investigators once again found themselves grimly sifting for clues to a bomber who has baffled them for 16 years and now seems to have escalated his rampage.
The early returns, investigators said, have been achingly familiar -- no especially tantalizing leads to freshen a scent that remains faint at best -- but the searchers hint that they are exploring some new directions.


A Critic's View: Defining A New York Style
"IT'S like the 80's all over again," said an out-of-town friend after a week of eating in New York.
"It's wonderful!"
It isn't really chic to say so, but New York restaurants are suddenly more exciting than they've been for years.
There's a new energy in the air, a willingness to experiment, a sense that New York is once more America's most important restaurant city.


Habitats/Denville, N.J.; The Managed-Care Move
GRACE BROMM, a vivacious woman with impeccably coifed waves of gray and black hair, was waiting in her motorized cart when the elevator door opened on her floor.
Her arthritis had been acting up, but she said she was still delighted to show a stranger her two-bedroom, two-bath apartment in Franciscan Oaks, a new 220-unit managed-care complex in Denville, N.J., about a 45-minute drive west from Manhattan.


City Hall and Schools
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani's brash campaign to oust Schools Chancellor Ramon C. Cortines shows how the city's changing political machinery has helped cut the school system loose from the politics of City Hall.
The chancellor is still chosen by a board of seven members, two appointed by the mayor and one each by the five borough presidents.
But the legal and collegial ties that bound them have all but evaporated since the dismantling five years ago of the city's Board of Estimate.


Clock Will Work and Strike the Right Note
Two years ago, storms blew the hour hand off the clock on the north-facing wall of the Carl Fischer Music building at Astor Place.
Now, a replacement is finally in the works.
Scaffolding went up two weeks ago, and the wall is now covered with black and deep-mauve paint.


Struggling Families Need Jobs, Not Orphanages; Trauma of Separation
To the Editor:
With respect to the fate of children of young single mothers on welfare, legislators should consider the Hampstead Nurseries in London.


Animal Magnetism
To the Editor:
Any recounting of Richard Pryor's comedic excellence  [ "How He Kept 'Em in Stitches," Nov. 27 ]  should include his use of "animal personifications." In his stand-up routine, Mr.
Pryor often communicated the thoughts of dogs, gorillas and other animals in ways that are hilarious and humane.
This is an important aspect of Mr.
Pryor's artistic contribution, one that is especially delightful to audiences of all ages and is frequently overlooked.
JUDITH C. ALLEN  Cleveland


Braving Gloom, to Tell the Spruces From the Firs
A LONG time ago, in the deep woods of New Hampshire, my sister showed me how to tell the difference between a fir and a spruce.
It had something to do with the needles, but by the time we were thawing out by the fire, I forgot.
So last weekend, I hooked up with five hardy souls at Wave Hill, that quietly glorious public garden that overlooks the Hudson River in the Riverdale section of the Bronx, for a free workshop called "Needling Questions About Conifers."


Oysters Almost Every Way; More Please
THE latest restaurant to open in Greenwich is the Elm Street Oyster House, in former luncheonette space converted to a handsome cafe setting.
A long bar (the only area where smoking is permitted) is followed by an equally long, narrow dining room with a deep blue-green hardwood floor, sea-blue seat covers on booths and piscine paintings on the walls.
Though not large, the all-seafood menu offers enough intriguing choices to satisfy any seafood-starved visitor.
We began by wolfing down raw littleneck clams and a dozen fresh oysters -- duos of Chesapeake, Malpeque, Kumomoto (the briny best), Chincoteague, Louisiana and bluepoint -- which came with a horseradish dip, a standard cocktail sauce and a tangy mignonette of shallots, red wine vinegar and cracked black peppercorns.
Our only complaint was that careless opening of the shells left chips and slivers.


Runoff From the New Diaspora Is Water of Life for Old Synagogues
Evening services had just begun last Wednesday at Rabbi Jacob Twersky's synagogue on Bronx Park East.
A few stragglers arrived, and soon 18 faithful were praying, including eight recent immigrants from Russia.
It was a good showing.
The previous week, minutes before the daily evening service, the rabbi had been forced to his "emergency list" -- the men, many elderly, willing to drape coats over their pajamas and clamber through the dark streets of Pelham Parkway to make the minyan.


Struggling Families Need Jobs, Not Orphanages; When Home Isn't Best
To the Editor:
Ronald A. Feldman's "What You Can't Learn From 'Boys Town' " (Op-Ed, Dec. 13) gives the impression that those who advocate reconsidering orphanages are suggesting that the Government swoop down on young mothers just because they are poor and remove their children from their loving arms in order to raise them in bleak warehouses of Dickensian character.
Nothing could be more misleading.


Odyssey of the Ducks
On Jan. 10, 1992, a cargo ship was en route from Hong Kong to Tacoma, Wash., when a severe storm struck.
At the international date line, halfway between the Equator and the North Pole, 12 containers fell overboard -- one full of packages of plastic ducks and other toys.
By Thanksgiving 1992, loose floating ducks had turned up at Sitka, Alaska.
The toys then went north.
Two scientists, W. James Ingraham and Curtis Ebbesmeyer, using computer models of ocean currents, theorize that some ducks are now frozen in the Bering Sea.


That Jeweler's Best Pal From Little Rock
WHO says Mama Rose is the summit role in musical theater?
After Ethel Merman's classic creation in the original production of "Gypsy" in 1959, selected stars have had successes, award-winning ones, even, as the monster stage mother of them all.
But count Lorelei Lees and you won't get past Carol Channing. (Marilyn Monroe as Marilyn Monroe in a bowdlerized movie version is disqualified).
The impossible dream of striking just the gold digger who can follow the intimidatingly legendary Channing caricature cum characterization may be the reason the 1949 musical has not had a revival to remember.


Conifers With Some Yardish Promise
THE seasonal deadline is here.
The family must decide on the tree, where to get it, what sort and how last-minute the buying can be.
Just because it has needles, and because of the time of year, it is called a Christmas tree.
Maybe that is what Santa calls it, but in actuality, there is no such thing.
The tree is more properly known as a spruce, a fir, a cedar -- whatever is brought home for the holidays and decorated.


WHAT'S NEW YORK THE CAPITAL OF NOW?
Maybe Southern Californians don't place the capital of the world at "the intersection of the Hollywood and Santa Monica Freeways" because the Hollywood Freeway becomes the Santa Ana Freeway two or three miles before it crosses under the end of the Santa Monica Freeway.
Of course, one of the attractions of living in New York is not having to pay attention to the geography in the provinces.


Conifers With Some Yardish Promise
THE seasonal deadline is here.
The family must decide on the tree, where to get it, what sort and how last-minute the buying can be.
Just because it has needles, and because of the time of year, it is called a Christmas tree.
Maybe that is what Santa calls it, but in actuality, there is no such thing.
The tree is more properly known as a spruce, a fir, a cedar -- whatever is brought home for the holidays and decorated.


WHAT'S NEW YORK THE CAPITAL OF NOW?
Your splendid special issue "What's New York the Capital of Now?" (Nov. 20) reminded me that New York was once the capital of college football.
In the 1920's, 1930's and early 1940's, Fordham, Columbia, New York University and Manhattan College were members of college football's aristocracy.
Fordham was the 1942 Sugar Bowl champion; Columbia was the 1934 Rose Bowl winner.
Jock Sutherland, the legendary coach at the University of Pittsburgh, used to tell his players that if they wanted to make all-American, they had to play exceptionally well against Fordham before the New York crowd.
ED GILLERAN Helena, Mont.


Little Rock Journal; 3 Million Points of Light Waiting to Be Turned On
By now, perhaps, the entire town has realized that nothing will prevent Jennings Osborne from flipping on the 3.5 million Christmas lights that hang in his yard.
Not a blown-out transmitter that darkened several of his neighbors' homes a few years back.
Not the next-door neighbors. (He simply bought their houses and turned them into part of his display.)


No Collusion in Australian Yacht Plans
An international America's Cup jury vindicated Australian yachtsmen late Friday in a long-awaited decision over the two-boat rule.
A five-member jury decided that cooperation in boat-building and training between two Australian cup syndicates had not violated regatta restrictions.
The decision allows One Australia, the yachting group founded by a veteran cup skipper, JOHN BERTRAND, to proceed with its plans to build and race two new America's Cup yachts.
At issue was a 1995 restriction that each syndicate can build only two new yachts.
But a majority of challengers, as well as the United States' three defense groups, alleged collusion between Bertrand's group and a syndicate founded by SYD FISCHER of Australia.
They charged that Bertrand was using Fischer's new cup yacht to further One Australia's two-boat program.


Back Off Scissorhands, the Beer Claw Is Here!
Earning $10.50 per case sold, beermongers at R.F.K.
Stadium in Washington try to work fast.
But with no cans allowed in the hands of fans, pouring slows the process down.
So Perry Hahn, above, invented a wrist-mounted, battery-powered opener that slices the tops off cans and allows him to pour a case a minute.
The opener leaves his fingers free for holding cups and counting money.
He may be counting more of it soon: he hopes to manufacture copies of the device.


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
WINTER HABITAT
The waters off Norwalk have been chosen by some harbor seals as a nice place to spend the winter.
Ever watchful for ways to keep the public in touch with the sea, the Maritime Center on North Water Street last year ran Creature Cruises to view the seals, and it will do so again every Sunday from Jan. 8 to March 26, weather permitting.
Sailing times aboard the research vessel Oceanic will vary with the tides, and since only one cruise will be offered each Sunday, reservations should be made early.


Correction
A recipe on Dec. 4 for roasted capon with pecan stuffing misstated an ingredient.
The recipe uses 2 cups of pecans, toasted and coarsely chopped, not 2 cups of walnuts.


Some Observations On the Elections
The article "Whitman's Popularity Helped Lautenberg" is an attempt to usurp Senator Frank Lautenberg's personal victory.
The Senator won on his own merit in an election marked by a parade of nobodies before an electorate clearly taken in by the concocted dreams of magical tax reductions to come.
Senator Lautenberg loomed tall through this miasma because of the way in which he conducted himself while in office.
He made his dignified, rational pronouncements of what he felt was right or wrong, what could and should be done, and then acted accordingly.
Over time, the voters, surprisingly, recognized sincerity.
The campaign shenanigans were casually accepted as "politics, the way it's played today" and forgiven out of hand.
MARTIN FASS Manalapan


Renovated QE2 to Return to U.S. Thursday
The Queen Elizabeth 2, the 963-foot flagship of the Cunard Line, is scheduled to sail into New York Harbor on Thursday after a 30-day, $45 million refurbishment.
The most sweeping renovation of the ship since her maiden voyage on May 2, 1969, was done in the Blohm &amp; Voss shipyard in Hamburg.
The ship received a new radar system, fresh coats of white and royal blue paint and an overhaul of the stabilizers.


Jets Who've Seen It All but Not Enough
Little by little, as frustrations mounted and failed promises accumulated, Jim Sweeney and Kyle Clifton acquired a veteran's insight: The Jets won't be in the playoffs every year.
"You think, after you make it two times in your first three seasons, you'll always be in," Sweeney, an 11-year veteran, said on Friday.
"Kyle and I talk about it all the time now, how we thought, 'This is easy.' Little did we know."


Then Came the Fall of Rome (Splat!)
THE CARTOON HISTORY OF THE UNIVERSE Volumes 1-7: From the Big Bang to Alexander the Great.
By Larry Gonick.
Illustrated. 358 pp.
New York: Main Street Books/ Doubleday.
Paper, $14.95.
CD-ROM.
Volumes 1-7 on 2 disks. (Macintosh or Windows) Reston, Va.: Putnam New Media. $40.
THE CARTOON HISTORY OF THE UNIVERSE II Volumes 8-13: From the Springtime of China to the Fall of Rome.
By Larry Gonick.
Illustrated. 305 pp.
New York: Main Street Books/Doubleday.
Paper, $15.95.


Dickens Unplugged: 'Christmas Carol' on PBS
"MARLEY WAS DEAD: to begin with." As Martin Sheen reads the deceptively simple opening words of Charles Dickens's "Christmas Carol" to an audience of well-heeled listeners in the east wing of the Pierpont Morgan Library, it quickly becomes clear that PBS is offering an alternative to the overchoreographed tunefests and animated schlock that herald the Yuletide on television.
A reading by Mr.
Sheen and James Earl Jones of excerpts from the tale, which Dickens said he wrote "as a sledgehammer against poverty," will be broadcast under the title "Bah! Humbug!" at 8 on Christmas night.
The host is Robert MacNeil, who puts aside his ruminations on Newt Gingrich for one brief hour to shed a bit of light on the conditions of Victorian England, and on the great storyteller's own childhood.


Baseball Fan: Heal Thyself
We came back after the Fix of 1919 and we came back after the Abandonment of 1957 and we'll come back after the Strikeout of 1994, sadder Budweiser, wearing our rally caps, salary caps, dunce caps, backward, of course.
We need to be tested every four decades or so to prove that fan is short for fantasist.
"We're the problem," said Roger Sims, an acknowledged fan.
"We have this unrealistic view of who they are, and what our relationship is. The owners are truly from another planet, these gray old men who smell of cologne, but what did we ever do about the reserve clause or the antitrust exemption? And the players haven't been one of us in years, but we still demand some connection between our lives and theirs, just because we need them so much.


'J. Faust's Guide to Power' And Other Self-Help Classics
Literature is out; self-help books are in.
Why read "Siddhartha" when you can browse through "10 Steps to Yoga"?
Still, booksellers have to find some way to move all those old titles.
The solution?
Repackaging.
So You Want to Be an Artist as a Young Man
You've got the talent to write great literature, but you just can't seem to get started.
You wake up with admirable artistic aims, then spend hours traipsing around Dublin.
Another day wasted, another epic failure.
Isn't it time you learned to escape the nets of family, country and religion through silence, exile and cunning?
With a little practice, you too can forge in the smithy of your soul the uncreated conscience of your race.
Emma Bovary's Emotional Weight-Loss Cookbook
Tired of putting on and taking off the same five pounds?
Don't delay, buy this book today -- and watch yourself shed both respectability and surplus avoirdupois!
More than 100 exciting recipes, including Forgetting the Chocolate in the Mousse While Languishing on the Divan, as well as Depriving Oneself of Roast Rack of Lamb for the Bourgeois Husband.
Let the hidden powers of boredom and resentment loose in your kitchen!
J.
Faust's Guide to Power: How to Get It, How to Use It
This is not a book for plodders.
But for those who aspire to greatness, here is the definitive guide.
No longer will you curse your lack of success and say, "To hell with it!" Now hell will come to you.
J.
Faust, who holds doctorates in philosophy, jurisprudence, medicine and theology, shows how to make simple pacts with the Devil, from changing horses into brooms to swinging deals on real estate.
If you've got a soul, you've got the potential to do business.
Oliver Twist's Dance-O-Mania
If a poor boy from a workhouse can overcome his handicap and learn to trip the light fantastic, so can you!
This easy step-by-step guide gives you all you need to know when it comes to dancing about London, nimble and quick.
Learn the techniques for the Scamper and other fancy footwork, including the Close Coincidence.
Everything is packed into this book, from Fagin's Fandango to Sikes's Sideswipe and, of course, Oliver's Twist.
What the Dickens are you waiting for?
Become an Artful Dodger today!
Dr.
Frankenstein's Self-Creation in 30 Days
Achieve a new you with this fascinating scientific breakthrough.
Dr.
Frankenstein, a noted researcher in his field, describes how to build up your body from almost nothing.
Through a careful course of electrotherapy and injections of Gothicism, you will be literally remade.
Feel your psyche surge as your limbs flex and reach out to encounter the world again.
Unleash your potential and watch everyone stand back!
Jane Eyre's Workout Book
Have you ever dreaded long walks through thistle fields or been put off by energetic proselytizers?
Fear no more, dear reader -- now you can develop the iron will and athletic build of a Rochester without becoming blind and lame into the bargain.
Follow Jane as she leads you through the rigorous regimen developed at the Lowood School for Girls.
Watch her take on the entire staff of a formidable mansion and win!
Get the feeling that comes from a strong heart in a moral novel.
Comes with free sermon video by an upright Anglican minister.
Captain Ahab's Compleat Whaler
When is harpooning off a lee shore favorable, and when is it absolute folly?
Why is it bad form to ask the captain about his past, and what in the world is a waif-pole?
These and other fascinating questions are explored in this monumental tome on cetology.
Written in a detailed, monomaniacal style, this is a real "hands-on" book, blending technical information with out-and-out adventure.
Crime and Punishment: Freedom From Guilt
Does the future fill you with foreboding?
Do you ever feel you're being watched by other people?
Is the fear of retribution turning your waking hours into a nightmare?
If the answer to any of these questions is yes, then you need this book.
From the author of "Notes From Underground," this six-part series takes you places, from post-murder anxiety to the proper conduct at an inquest.
Find out what Dostoyevsky's message of faith can do for you.


SERVICE WITH A SNEER
I have to be somewhat irate to write a letter about letters, but the "Service With a Sneer" section of the Nov. 27 Letters column was too much.
One writer seems to see equal harm in Denny's discriminatory policies and in its "fat-and-cholesterol-laden platter." Sorry.
I'll decide what to eat, and I'll decide whether "to eat such a meal is to pay dearly indeed for the right to be served." And I won't consider it with the same gravity as I do a human rights violation.


Ideas &amp; Trends; Go Go Paranoia!
THERE are, to judge from the front pages and the 11 o'clock news, three great forces menacing the post cold war world.
They are: the rising tide of ferocious nationalisms, the collapse of NATO and Power Rangers.
Whole countries -- Canada and New Zealand, for now -- have banned the "Mighty Morphin Power Rangers" television show.
Otherwise sensible people, forgetting that small boys have never needed an excuse to kick each other on playgrounds, suddenly perceive a shocking increase in violence among the young that they attribute to the show, and to the dolls and toys it spawned.


Ellen M. Miller, John A. Feinsot
Ellen Mindy Miller, a daughter of Judith D. and Bernard Miller of Great Neck, L.I., was married yesterday in New York to John Abbott Feinsot, a son of Louise and Dr.
Aaron Feinsot of New York.
Rabbi Amy B. Ehrlich officiated at the Boathouse in Central Park.
The bride, 37, graduated summa cum laude from the State University College at Cortland, N.Y.
She is a senior vice president and the director of the research and strategic planning division at Jordan, McGrath, Case &amp; Taylor Inc., a New York advertising agency.
Her father retired as the chairman of Aquetta Products in New York, a housewares division of Ames Industries.
He was also the executive vice president of Ames.
Her mother owns Judith Miller Interiors, designers in Great Neck.


Sports Arena Proposed For a Coney Island Site
It was on the hard-tar track behind the old Boys High in Bedford-Stuyvesant, Brooklyn, that Diane Dixon, then a whippet of a 14-year-old, first started sprinting toward her gold medal in the 1984 Olympics.
"Four straightaways, corner to corner, and, oh, so hard on the legs," Ms.
Dixon recalled of that old track last week after the Brooklyn Borough President, Howard Golden, and the Temporary State Commission on Brooklyn Recreation Facilities announced plans for a sports complex on the old Steeplechase grounds at Coney Island.


Amy P. Lederman, Jeffrey Verschleiser
Amy Patricia Lederman, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Mark T. Lederman of New York, was married last evening to Jeffrey Louis Verschleiser, a son of Elaine Strum of New York and the late Jack Verschleiser.
Rabbi Michael D. Shmidman officiated at the Pierre in New York.
Mrs.
Verschleiser, 24, teaches the first grade at the Birch Wathen Lenox School in New York.
She graduated from Tufts University and received a master's degree in education from the Bank Street College of Education.


Signs of the Tenants on East 96th: Talking About Rats and Repairs
It was mid-October when the signs first appeared in the windows of several 19th-century tenement buildings along East 96th Street, around the corner from Lexington Avenue.
"Over 1 1/2 Years Waiting for Repairs, Larry," says one.
Nearby is "Larry Ginsberg, When Do I Get a Stove?" Above a drawing of a giant rodent, another says, "Larry Ginsberg, I Am Afraid of the Rats."
The signs are the latest chapter in a long running saga of determined tenants battling years of neglect in the name of hanging onto some of the city's cheapest housing: 800-square-foot apartments that can cost less than $100 a month; the most expensive are no more than $400 a month.


Call for Talks at Deadline for Chechyna
The Russian deadline for the rebellious Chechnya region to disarm its soldiers and recognize Russian sovereignty passed this morning with last-minute efforts by the Chechen leadership to forestall an attack on the capital.
The Russian Government had vowed on Saturday that its troops would "restore order" in Chechnya -- and if necessary bomb the capital, Grozny -- if rebel forces did not lay down their arms by midnight (4 P.M. Eastern time).


Word for Word / Street Drug Jargon; Don't Bogart That Fatty, My Friend, Pass It Over to the Lexicographer
DRUG abuse and trafficking in illegal drugs remain stubborn facts of American life.
This was affirmed most recently last week by a University of Michigan study tracking a steady rise in illegal drug use among teen-agers.
Another reflection of a persistent drug subculture is the ever-expanding list of street terms put out by the Drugs and Crime Data Center and Clearinghouse.
Begun "about five years ago," according to a center worker, and updated monthly, this list now contains nearly 2,000 entries culled from drug agency reports, news articles and other sources.
The center, established by the Justice Department, intends the list as a resource for the police and educators.


Elizabeth Mahon, Antonio Fiol-Silva
Elizabeth Mary Mahon, a daughter of Kathleen and John J. Mahon of Edison, N.J., was married yesterday to Antonio Javier Fiol-Silva, the son of the late Petrin Silva de Fiol and Antonio Fiol-Bigas.
The Rev.
Edward C. Puleo officiated at St.
Francis of Assisi Roman Catholic Cathedral in Metuchen, N.J.
The bride, who is keeping her name, is a partner in Mahon Wong Associates: Architects, in Cambridge, Mass.
She graduated cum laude from the University of Pennsylvania and received a master's degree in architecture from Yale University.


Corrections
An entry in the International Datebook listing on Dec. 4 for the Tournament of Roses Parade in Pasadena, Calif., misstated the date.
The event is Jan. 2, not Jan. 1.


Preserving Irish Dance Traditions In and Around Westchester County
A BONE-RATTLING wind whistles its welcome to winter, but inside Flannery's Bar in Manhattan the heat is high.
Downstairs, away from the juke box, two flip-skirted dancers pick and step, tapping tunes their Irish grandparents taught them.
The music spurs them on until they pause, breathless, to let the fiddlers, flutist and accordian player take the floor.


Brain Study Examines Rare Woman
A brain-damaged woman who cannot recognize fear on other people's faces or feel it herself is helping researchers learn important details about how the human brain is wired.
By observing the woman's behavior, scientists have found that the brain has separate circuits for recognizing facial expressions and facial identities.
They have proved that a small brain structure, the amygdala, is essential for experiencing fear and for recognizing other emotions.
And they have gained a deeper understanding of brain regions that facilitate social interactions, including making or breaking eye contact.


What Was That Wine In 'Disclosure'?
WHEN Demi Moore sets out to seduce Michael Douglas in the hit film "Disclosure," she starts with wine.
"The '91 Pahlmeyer," he exclaims happily. "How did you know about that?"


Corrections
A credit was omitted last Sunday for a picture of Melanie L. J. Stiassny, a curator at the American Museum of Natural History.
The photographer was Edward Keating of The New York Times.


Depressed Woman's Child Abandoned at Church
A despondent homeless woman, who said she could no longer care for her two children and abandoned one of them on the steps of a Brooklyn church, was missing yesterday, heightening fears that she may not be alive, the authorities said.
On Thursday evening, the woman's 3-year-old son, Anthony, was discovered wandering by himself in the Bridge Street Church in Bedford-Stuyvesant, the police said.


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: December 18, 1994
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
4
A DANGEROUS FORTUNE, by Ken Follett. (Island/Dell, $6.99.) A young student's mysterious drowning in Victorian England.
2
14
DISCLOSURE, by Michael Crichton. (Ballantine, $6.99.) An executive who rejected his boss is accused by her of sexual harassment.
3
31
INTERVIEW WITH THE VAMPIRE, by Anne Rice. (Ballantine, $6.99.) The 1976 novel that began "The Vampire Chronicles."
4
12
THE VAMPIRE LESTAT, by Anne Rice. (Ballantine, $6.99.) Eerie carryings-on in a tale ranging from ancient Egypt to the 20th century.
5
7
MR. MURDER, by Dean Koontz. (Berkley, $6.99.) A mystery writer vs. a madman.
6
27
THE SHIPPING NEWS, by E. Annie Proulx. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $12.) A man mourns his adulterous wife in Newfoundland.
7
3
SLOW WALTZ IN CEDAR BEND, by Robert James Waller. (Warner, $4.99.) From Iowa to India: the romance of a professor and a colleague's wife.
8
5
BAD LOVE, by Jonathan Kellerman. (Bantam, $6.50.) The psychologist-detective Alex Delaware tracks a series of violent deaths.
9
2
MCNALLY'S CAPER, by Lawrence Sanders. (Berkley, $6.50.) Archy McNally on the trail of a malefactor at large in a Palm Beach mansion.
10
5
YOU BELONG TO ME, by Johanna Lindsey. (Avon, $6.50.) An arranged marriage between two reluctant partners in 19th-century Russia.
11
16
SMILLA'S SENSE OF SNOW, by Peter Hoeg. (Dell, $6.50.) In Copenhagen and Greenland, a woman investigates a child's mysterious death.
12
9
THE QUEEN OF THE DAMNED, by Anne Rice. (Ballantine, $6.99.) Continuing the author's chronicle of 6,000 years of vampirism.
13
2
FORGET ME NOT, by Elizabeth Lowell. (Avon, $5.50.) A widow returns to the Wyoming mountains where she lost her husband and finds a new soul mate.
14*
12
VANISHED, by Danielle Steel. (Dell, $6.99.) The abduction of a young boy creates a crisis.
15
1
ROGUE WARRIOR II: Red Cell, by Richard Marcinko and John Weisman. (Pocket, $5.99.) An attempt to stop nuclear materials from reaching North Korea.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
NonFiction
1
13
EMBRACED BY THE LIGHT, by Betty J. Eadie with Curtis Taylor. (Bantam, $5.99.) A woman's near-death experience.
2
12
HAVING OUR SAY, by Sarah L. Delany and A. Elizabeth Delany with Amy Hill Hearth. (Dell, $5.99.) Two black sisters, both of them over 100, reflect on their lives.
3
49
CARE OF THE SOUL, by Thomas Moore. (Harper Perennial, $12.) A psychotherapist discusses spirituality and everyday life.
4
8
WOULDN'T TAKE NOTHING FOR MY JOURNEY NOW, by Maya Angelou. (Bantam, $5.50.) Essays on life and death, good and evil.
5
8
SEE, I TOLD YOU SO, by Rush Limbaugh. (Pocket, $6.99.) More comments on the state of the nation by the talk show host.
6
1
SOUL MATES, by Thomas Moore. (Harper Perennial, $13.) A psychotherapist discusses love and relationships.
7
580
THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $10.95.) Inspiration.
8
47
WHERE ANGELS WALK, by Joan Wester Anderson. (Ballantine, $10.) Stories about angelic intervention in human affairs.
9
16
A HISTORY OF GOD, by Karen Armstrong. (Ballantine, $14.) The development of monotheism over the past 4,000 years.
10
6
ARMORED CAV, by Tom Clancy. (Berkley, $15.) A "guided tour" of an armored cavalry regiment.
11
8
FURTHER ALONG THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $12.) A discussion of spiritual growth.
12*
6
A MARRIAGE MADE IN HEAVEN ...
OR TOO TIRED FOR AN AFFAIR, by Erma Bombeck. (Harper Paperbacks, $5.99.) Thoughts on 44 years of marriage.
13
96
I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS, by Maya Angelou. (Bantam, $4.99.) The poet's depiction of her childhood and adolescence.
14
12
DAKOTA, by Kathleen Norris. (Houghton Mifflin, $9.95.) A celebration of the changing life and terrain of the Great Plains.
15*
31
MAMA MAKES UP HER MIND, by Bailey White. (Vintage, $10.) Life in a tiny Georgia town, as seen by a first-grade teacher.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Advice, How-To and Miscellaneous
1
11
HOMICIDAL PSYCHO JUNGLE CAT, by Bill Watterson. (Andrews &amp; McMeel, $12.95.) A collection of "Calvin and Hobbes" cartoons.
2
12
CHICKEN SOUP FOR THE SOUL, compiled by Jack Canfield and Mark Victor Hansen. (Health Communications, $12.) Stories meant to "open the heart and rekindle the spirit."
3
2
ENSUCKLOPEDIA, by Sam Johnson, Chris Marcil, et al. (MTV/Pocket, $10.) Cartoon humor featuring the television characters Beavis and Butt-head.
4
3
THE CURSE OF MADAME "C," by Gary Larson. (Andrews &amp; McMeel, $8.95.) A collection of "Far Side" cartoons.
Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending Dec. 3, at 3,050 bookstores plus wholesalers serving 38,000 other retailers, statistically weighted to represent sales in all such outlets nationwide.
An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.


'I Want My Sculpture to Be Only Its Self,' Says Ibram Lassaw
THE light changes.
Out of the browns of the welded metal surface, the slow greens grow greener, the siennas separate themselves just a little bit more from their base.
Out of the slate gray, the sudden turquoise grows just a little bit more startling.
"The Greeks painted their sculpture," Ibram Lassaw says smiling.


Innes A. Laimins, Mark P. Baughan
Dr.
Innes Adele Laimins, a daughter of Ellen Laimins of Chicago and the late Dr.
Peter T. Laimins, was married yesterday to Mark Philip Baughan, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
John J. Baughan of Westport, Mass.
The Rev.
Dean Wolfe performed the ceremony at Trinity Church in Boston.


2 SoHo Blocks: A Landmarks Notebook
FOR Spalding Gray, it's the cobblestones.
"When I come back from traveling and take a cab home," said the actor, writer and longtime resident of SoHo, "the cobblestones on the street give me the sense of returning to a place that's old, that has character, that has history, that has a name. That's so important to me."
He is not alone.
It is more than two decades since the Landmarks Preservation Commission, on Aug. 14, 1973, designated 26 blocks of SoHo -- from Crosby Street to West Broadway and from Canal to Houston Street -- as a historic district.
The designation has preserved the neighborhood's notable 19th-century cast-iron architecture.
It even led to the reintroduction of such amenities as the Belgian block cobblestone so beloved by Mr.
Gray, the rectangular granite stones, so redolent of roadbeds past, with which parts of Mercer and Greene Streets were repaved several years ago.


Soldiers Heading for the Christmas Front


F.Y.I.
Eek, a Rat Dropping!
Q.
I used to love to read the health reports on restaurants, before they were discontinued a few years after half the city's health inspectors were charged with extorting bribes.
Where can I find the reports now?


Tarpley and Motta: War of Words Goes On
The Dallas Mavericks and ROY TARPLEY's agent have postponed a meeting in Los Angeles that had been set for today so both sides could clear the air about a feud between the forward and Coach DICK MOTTA.
The team headed west Friday to begin a 10-day road trip.
Tarpley served a one-game suspension for his part in Tuesday's argument with Motta.


Director Resigns From Agency That Fights Organized Crime
Ronald Goldstock, who for 13 years was the head of the agency that investigates organized crime in New York State, announced his resignation yesterday.
After serving as the director of the State Organized Crime Task Force under two Democratic governors, Mr.
Goldstock was almost certain to be replaced by the incoming Governor-elect, George E. Pataki, and the Attorney General-elect, Dennis C. Vacco, both Republicans, who will take their offices next month.
State law empowers the governor and the attorney general to appoint the task force's director, whose annual salary is $107,000 and whose title is deputy attorney general.


Adopt an African Artifact, Aid a Museum
In 1922, Stewart Culin of the Brooklyn Institute of Arts and Sciences did something no other museum curator had done before: he started collecting African handcrafts for an art exhibit.
Back then, the West viewed Africa mostly as the mysterious and savage continent described in Joseph Conrad's "Heart of Darkness." In the natural history museums of London, Paris, New York and Chicago, artifacts from Africa's tribal kingdoms were considered objects of anthropological curiosity.


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
Before-the-Ball Burgers
ON their way to the Grand Victorian Ball, Tony and Rose Peraza of Shoreham stopped at a McDonald's.
"We were starving," Mrs.
Peraza said.
"And we weren't sure what food they would serve at a ball."
What everyone would wear to the ball, a fund-raising event for the historic Terry-Ketcham Inn in Center Moriches, was another matter.
"We were told to wear clothes from the 1830's to 1860's," Mrs.
Peraza said.
Mr.
Peraza rented a Civil War officer's uniform for himself and a ball gown for his wife.
"They call it the Scarlett O'Hara model," he said.


Teena G. Odom And Craig Lobdell
Teena Grace Odom, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Edgar J. Odom of Rocky Mount, N.C., is to be married there today to Craig Vincent Lobdell, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Ralph S. Lobdell of Jupiter, Fla.
The Rev.
Dr.
David Jones is to perform the ceremony at the First Presbyterian Church.
Mrs.
Lobdell, 24, is a corporate benefits consultant at Hewitt Associates in Rowayton, Conn.
She graduated from the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill.
Her father retired as the manager of the Binswanger Glass Company, a manufacturer in Rocky Mount.


Keep Marathon Time, Samaranch Says
JUAN ANTONIO SAMARANCH, the president of the International Olympic Committee said yesterday that he favors keeping the men's marathon at its traditional time for the 1996 Summer Games in Atlanta.
"I think the marathon must be the last sports event before the closing ceremony," Samaranch said at a news conference in Atlanta that wrapped up a series of Olympic meetings there.
Samaranch's position contradicts the stance of his own I.O.C. medical commission, which has suggested moving the men's marathon to the morning in order to avoid the extreme heat and humidity of the late afternoon. (AP)


[ THE ACQUIRING MIND ] ; In a Little League of Their Own
Carole Kaye never had a doll house as a child, but she's certainly making up for lost time.
Four years ago, looking for an activity to occupy her grandson, Peter, she wandered into a Beverly Hills, Calif., miniatures store.
"I got a kick out of it," she recalls, "and I said to Peter, 'Shall we build a doll house together?' and he said, 'Great, Nanny,' so I bought my first doll house. As we were checking out I realized that I'd spent $300. I said to the owner, 'That's ridiculous,' and the customer next to me said: 'Lady don't complain. I have $9,000 in my doll house.' I said, 'Then you need to have your head examined.' "


BEHIND THE WHEEL/1995 BMW 540i; A High-Spirited Handful Of Rich Bavarian Cream
TECHNOLOGY creeps along, with a small refinement here, another tweak there, and it is easy to think that today's car is simply an evolutionary product not so far removed from the finned chariots of the 50's and 60's.
If you take a hard look, though, you recognize the immense differences, and an almost perfect example turns up in BMW's new 540i.
The technology is magic, and the car itself is a total joy.


The Labor of Waiting
MOHAMMAD LITON was "backwaiting" a while ago at a big Manhattan restaurant, darting and cajoling in a Chaplinesque role in which he had to track all the food orders coming in from all the waiters and waitresses just beyond the swinging kitchen doors and bark assembly-line suggestions to the overwrought chef.
The job is rather like that of a corner man in a prizefight who, surrounded by a throng of famished carnivores, must shout scraps of boxing science at a bloodied, reeling combatant.
Yet it is fondly that Mr.
Liton, an adventurous soul in the spirit of Orwell's "Down and Out in Paris and London," remembers the pure screaming in the kitchen on one particular lunch hour.
Food orders from 51 different tables arrived at his backwaiting station within a frightening 24-minute span via slick-looking computer terminals that were absolutely no advantage in prodding the harried omelet maker to whisk faster, faster, and the sandwich man to smear and cut like a surgeon daft from triage.


Tamar D. Lang And Jay Oakes
Tamar Debra Lang, the daughter of Judith L. Barnett of New York and the late Justice Irving Lang, was married last evening to James Jeffrey Oakes, a son of Noreen M. Oakes and F. Robert Oakes of Barrington, R.I.
Rabbi Charles D. Lippman officiated at the National Arts Club in New York.
The Rev.
Charles Kullmann, a Roman Catholic priest, took part in the ceremony.
Ms.
Lang, 28, is keeping her name.
She graduated from New York University.
An actress, she plays Donna on the soap opera "Guiding Light" on CBS-TV.
Her father was an acting justice of State Supreme Court in Manhattan.
Her mother retired as the executive director for human resource development at the UJA-Federation of New York.
The bride is the stepdaughter of Norman Barnett.


Henry James's Jaw
To the Editor:
A small point for the record with respect to Jay Parini's review of the latest collection of John Updike's short stories, "The Afterlife" (Nov. 6).


Mulch Early And Mulch Often
I came in from mulching my roses under a warm morning sun to read the admonition in "Fall Cleaning for a Better Spring Show"  [ Nov. 27 ]  to delay that job until he ground is well frozen.
Rather than unmulch, I gave some thought to the thermodynamics of the situation and would like to challenge that oft-repeated advice.


RECORD BRIEFS
Schumann: Piano Concerto, Violin Concerto  Martha Argerich, pianist; Gidon Kremer, violinist; Chamber Orchestra of Europe conducted by Nikolaus Harnoncourt.
Teldec 4509-90696-2; CD.


Dining on New York


BEN &amp; JERRY
BEN AND JERRY ARE HAPPY AS clams, even though for much of the past year or so they have been getting a lot of dubious press.
Many of the news stories pounced on the announcement in June that Ben Cohen was stepping down as chief executive of Ben &amp; Jerry's Homemade Inc., which takes in $150 million a year selling such diet-busters as Coconut Almond Fudge Chip and Chocolate Chip Cookie Dough ice cream.
In fact, Cohen and his partner, Jerry Greenfield, were looking for a chief executive officer to "help the company realize its next stage of growth and financial strength." Was this, reporters wanted to know, a prelude to Ben and Jerry's leaving the company they founded in 1978?
Other stories took the company to task for including artificial ingredients in some of its "all-natural" flavors; for a high injury rate among employees; for making many stockholders anxious with a sharp fall in share prices and other stockholders unhappy by dropping its official policy of having the highest-salaried jobs at the company paying no more than seven times the lowest-paid ones.


Kim T. Hamer, Arthur C. Nagle
Kim Thompson Hamer, a daughter of Martin J. and Dr.
Judith A. Hamer of Westport, Conn., was married yesterday to Arthur Charles Nagle, a son of Robert and Molly Nagle of Blue Hill, Me.
The Rev.
Donald Hinckley, a Unitarian-Universalist minister, performed the ceremony at the Blue Hill Farm Country Inn.
Ms.
Hamer, 30, is keeping her name.
She conducts workshops on leadership skills and team-building.
She graduated from Emerson College.
Her mother is the vice president of corporate training and development at Paine Webber in Hoboken, N.J.
Her father, who retired as a communications manager for I.B.M., is a writer.
The bride's parents are the editors of "Centers of the Self, Short Stories by Black American Women from the 19th Century to the Present," published by Hill &amp; Wang.


For Mandela, Polls Show Honeymoon Isn't Over
Hardly a day goes by without another warning that President Nelson Mandela's supporters are losing patience, that his courtship of the white minority is alienating the black majority, that the needy have too little to show for his eight months in power.
The alarms come from workers in his own party, from union leaders, from black journalists and pundits.
They are reinforced by a few small but sensational gestures of protest -- squatters occupying a Johannesburg apartment complex, jobless blacks storming a new Pepsi plant.


Business Diary: December 11-16
THE ECONOMY All Hail the Conquering Middle Class (Whoever They Are) Clearly, the belles of the post-election ball are the middle class; politicians everywhere are groveling before these poor, forgotten souls.
But who, exactly, are they?
Magnanimous Republicans brandish tax cuts for the under-$200,000 set -- which, of course, is practically everyone (99 percent of taxpayers).
Now comes President Clinton, hearing this drummer loud and clear, with a "middle-class bill of rights" featuring tax cuts for a far narrower group, families with incomes up to $75,000 to $100,000 or so.
Both sides, of course, insist that this headlong rush to cut taxes will not add to the deficit, but that math remains murky.
And even as he fell into political step, Mr.
Clinton vowed to put "politics as usual dead last," but everyone -- right or left, culture or counterculture -- knew the awful truth: that the '96 campaign was officially open for business.


The Nation; Draconian In the Extreme
A HALF-DOZEN times this month alone, social and economic programs being pushed by the new Republican majority in Congress have been described by one source or another in this newspaper as "Draconian."
Everyone knows why the relationship between Elizabeth Taylor and Rock Hudson was called Platonic.
But Draco?


Neither Here Not There
BETWEEN EAST AND WEST Across the Borderlands of Europe.
By Anne Applebaum.
Maps. 314 pp.
New York: Pantheon Books. $24.


A Pair of Saints Who Refuse To Stay Dead
ELVIS WAS A HIP replacement, a shaky premise, a groined vault.
He put the male pelvis right where belly dancers and stripteasers had already put the female's: up front in the spotlight.
This made some people nervous.
What's more, he was vulgar, his hair was full of goo, he had a pink stripe on his black pants, and his music borrowed freely from black gospel, blues, and rhythm and blues.
Numerous disk jockeys burned stacks of his records.
Ministers preached against him.
Police and district attorneys held him responsible for juvenile delinquency.
Pravda gleefully declared him proof of Western decadence, and many Americans agreed.
He just wanted to play house in the Heartbreak Hotel.
He just wanted you to love him tender.
Marilyn was the promise of pneumatic bliss and the power to cloud men's minds.
She was the blondest woman in America, a bombshell made of custard, the ecstatic answer to your mother's injunction to have a good time, dear.
She had a smile as bright as cloudless skies while inside she rained tears, but at the moment that the Pill became available she let women know that sex was more fun than the married women's instruction manuals let on, thereby helping prepare the ground for sexual revolution.
Baseball greats and playwrights married her; men in high office bedded her.
She just wanted someone to love her true.


The Great Social Security Debate: Phase 3
To the Editor:
Many of the responses to Floyd Norris's column on Social Security reflect misconceptions about the system ("Social Security: The Issue They Chose to Ignore," Market Watch, Nov. 6; "Coming Fiercely to the Defense of Social Security," Letters, Nov. 27).
Despite denials by the letter writers Jack Scarangella, William Luce and W. David Waters, cuts in Social Security benefits reduce the deficit in exactly the same manner other spending cuts do.
The economically relevant deficit is the Government's net borrowing from the public because it competes with (and crowds out) private investment.
This borrowing equals the general-treasury deficit minus the Social Security surplus; benefit cuts increase that surplus and thereby reduce net borrowing.


He Who Smuggles Must Learn to Party
THE RANSOM OF RUSSIAN ART By John McPhee.
Illustrated. 181 pp.
New York: Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux.


In 'Slavs!' Kushner Creates Tragic Burlesque
THE HEAVEN THAT TONY Kushner envisions in the epilogue of "Slavs!," his bracing, rational 80-minute new fantasia at the New York Theater Workshop Off Broadway, is a dark, gloomy place designed to look like a city after an earthquake.
The landscape is barren.
Snow falls lightly.
Huddled in their overcoats, two old Russian Bolsheviks sit on wooden crates and play cards, when a little girl named Vodya arrives.
"Welcome to Nevermore," says one of the old men.
The other asks how she died.
"Cancer," says Vodya, who was a victim of a nuclear spill.
She is impassive but not at a loss for words that bewitch: "A wild profusion of cells; dark flowerings in my lungs, my brain, my blood, my bones; dandelion and morning-glory vine seized and overwhelmed the field; life in my body ran riot. And here I am."


Welcoming the Past
The reopening of the Newark Museum's newly restored Ballantine House, Dec. 6.


Social Studies Panel Hopeful Despite Delay
WHAT should students know after 12 years of social studies and how should they learn it?
Members of a state-appointed committee, who spent nearly three years drafting a framework for a new social-studies curriculum, say they expect to save the core of a plan that failed to win the approval last month of the State Education Commissioner, Dr.
Thomas Sobol.
Daniel Berman, chairman of the social studies department at Fox Lane High School in Bedford and the only county representative on the 18-member committee, said he felt "much better" about the framework's future since he and others met in Albany recently with Dr.
Sobol and an assistant commissioner, Edward T. Lalor.


Stopping at Schiphol? Consider a 2-Hour Tour
Passengers transferring at the Amsterdam Airport Schiphol can fill their layover time with a choice of short guided excursions.
Holland Tours Schiphol offers three programs, each lasting two hours.
A tour of Amsterdam includes visits to the Anne Frank House, Dam Square and the Royal Palace, as well as a cheese and wooden-shoe factory.
Other tours explore the Zaanse Schans, an open-air museum village with working mills, and the Vecht and Amstel rivers, with stops at mansions and castles along the way.
Passengers are transported on minibuses, which seat up to six people.


The Nation; Despising Welfare, Pitying Its Young
IT is hard to imagine a less popular word than welfare.
Its two simple syllables conjure a mental mural of poverty, failure and futility.
Welfare mother, welfare cheat, welfare state -- the associations steamroll to the conclusion seemingly ratified in last month's elections: Cut Welfare.
But shift the conversation to the fate of "poor children," and the psychic landscape is transformed.
From the Congressional Black Caucus to the Junior League, poor children are a bipartisan concern, the subject of countless blue-chip commissions and public-service ads on television.
Nearly one child in four lives in poverty in America, and that leaves many citizens ashamed.


CURRENCY
Last
Prior
Year
Week
Week
Ago
Japanese Yen
100.21
100.10
110.17
per Dollar
German Mark
1.5730
1.5757
1.7092
per Dollar
Canadian Dollar
1.3918
1.3839
1.3398
per U.S. Dollar
British Pound
1.5504
1.5600
1.4860
U.S. Dollar per British Pound
Gold
$378.80
$377.40
$387.10
Republic National Bank
Currency: Friday NY Close


Interest Groups Rally to Prevent Medicare Cuts
At the moment, the budgetary news out of both parties is blissfully painless: an array of tax cuts for the middle class, a stern stance on fiscal responsibility and the trimming back of inefficient, generally discretionary domestic spending programs.
But the interest groups in Washington are not so easily fooled.
Ahead lie some wrenching political battles, and nowhere is that more clear than in the sprawling, complicated, exceedingly sensitive and exceedingly costly Medicare program for the elderly.
The fear among groups representing doctors, hospitals and the elderly, and the expectation among many members on Capitol Hill, is that Medicare will become a tempting piggy bank to help pay for tax cuts, deficit reduction or just the general tightening and reordering of the Federal budget.


Drug Sleuths' Surprise Produces a Breakthrough
As they climbed from the pool on Sept. 30 after a workout in Hiroshima, Japan, 16 Chinese swimmers were met with an unexpected request.
Not for interviews, or autographs, but for urine samples.
Suspicion of drug use by Chinese swimmers had reached a feverish stage.
Several weeks earlier, the Chinese women had won 12 of 16 gold medals at the world swimming championships in Rome.
Officials from the United States and other swimming powers, convinced that the Chinese were using illicit, but undetected, substances to enhance their performance, had demanded more surprise, out-of-competition testing.


Laurie Lisle, Robert Kipniss
Laurie Lisle, a writer, and Robert Kipniss, a painter and printmaker, were married yesterday at the Century Club in New York.
Judge Jacqueline Silberman of Civil Court in Manhattan officiated.
The bride is the daughter of Mrs.
Johns H. Congdon of Little Compton, R.I., and the late Laurence Lisle.
A graduate of Ohio Wesleyan University, she is the author of "Louise Nevelson: A Passionate Life" (Summit Books, 1990).
Her father was the president of the Townshend (Vt.) Furniture Company.
Her stepfather retired as the president of the Congdon &amp; Carpenter, metal fabricators and distributors in Providence, R.I.


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
SACRED AND SECULAR
Leroy Anderson's "Christmas Festival" and "Sleigh Ride," "Greensleeves," "Brazilian Sleighbells" and selections from the score of Jerome Kern's "Showboat," plus a number of sacred and secular works of the Christmas and Hanukkah season will be heard in Yonkers today at 2 P.M.


Release 2 Pilots, U.S. Insists of North Korea
The United States demanded yesterday that North Korea release American Army pilots whose helicopter strayed into its airspace and was either shot or forced down.
Senior Pentagon officials said the helicopter was on a routine training mission, and could not explain why it flew into North Korean territory.


Taking a Block of Ice and Fashioning a Thing of Wonder
IT would be the perfect Christmas gift, Bob Johnson thought.
It would please his parents.


The Executive Computer; Sharp Unveils a New Breed of Personal Digital Assistant
IT'S probably never a good idea to name any new computing device after the dinosaurs, particularly when the competitive landscape for the product is already full of tar pits and carcasses.
But Sharp Electronics, in announcing the Zaurus last week, said it picked the name -- derived from the "saur" in dinosaur -- to indicate it was taking an "evolutionary" step in personal digital assistants.
I'm still a bit puzzled by that throwback logic.
But I'll concede that in many ways, the Zaurus does effectively mark the end of one age and the beginning of another.
For the first time in a hand-held computing device, a company has found a way to build a truly usable keyboard into a unit that also allows use of a stylus for entering data and writing notes in "electronic ink."


Tom the Misunderstood
HARDY By Martin Seymour-Smith. Illustrated. 886 pp. New York: St. Martin's Press. $35.


They Drive by Night, Guarding Quality of Life, Cars and Vans
They cruise at night, trailing cars randomly and punching license plate numbers into a computer terminal on the front seat.
Within seconds, the computer spits out the name of the owner.
And whether the vehicle has been reported stolen.


Small Cities Like Fresno, Calif., Start to Hear Gunshots
At the age of 8, when most little girls are learning how to dress Barbie or ride a two-wheel bike or skate the whole length of the driveway without taking a tumble, Laquita Johnson and her playmates have picked up a special skill.
"Soon as the shooting starts, we fall down and cover our heads," she said.
"That way we don't get hit, just like you see on TV."


Niners' Numbers Sending Message
The road to the Super Bowl now officially goes through San Francisco, although the Denver Broncos offer the following advice: Yield before entering.
The 49ers played today as if they were late for an appointment as they fit an entire game into a first half and clarified Dallas's itinerary.
If the Cowboys are to win an unprecedented third straight Vince Lombardi Trophy, they must first spend an afternoon at Candlestick Park, and it is a virtual freeway on the field here.


Ms. Aboyoun, Mr. LoFrumento
Susan Jane Aboyoun, an associate at the New York law firm of Morgan, Lewis &amp; Bockius, was married yesterday to Anthony LoFrumento, a vice president of strategic planning at Chemical Bank in New York.
The Rev.
Salvatore B. Matarazzo performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at the Church of St.
Vincent Ferrer in Manhattan.
The bride graduated magna cum laude from Dartmouth College and received her law degree from New York University.
She is a daughter of Monroe and Carol Aboyoun of Wayne, N.J.
Her father is an agency vice president for Metropolitan Life Insurance in Little Falls, N.J.
Her mother teaches the first grade at the Lafayette School in Wayne.


Corrections
A chart in the Travel Advisory column on Dec. 4, about the cost of mailing an airmail postcard to the United States from abroad, misstated the rate from Mexico.
It is 1.5 pesos (about 41 cents), not 1.2 pesos (35 cents).


Conditions At Jail Complex Under Scrutiny
A SPECIAL commission charged with investigating security and safety issues at the County Correctional Complex in Valhalla began meeting this month after the release of a grand jury report on conditions at the jail and further reports of disturbances there.
A grand jury was impaneled in May to examine circumstances surrounding an incident on Aug. 15 last year, when inmates reportedly seized control of a cell block and locked up four members of the County Correction Department.


Samuel Lipman Is Dead at 60; A Cultural Critic and Pianist
Samuel Lipman, a pianist and critic who was the publisher of The New Criterion, a conservative journal of the arts, died yesterday at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center in Manhattan.
He was 60 and lived in Manhattan.
The cause was leukemia, said his wife, Jeaneane.


Ann L. Stonesifer, David L. Johnson
Ann Landon Stonesifer, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Geary Lee Stonesifer Jr. of Owings Mills, Md., was married there yesterday to David Leslie Johnson, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
John D. Johnson of Thornhill, Ontario.
The Rev.
William P. Baxter performed the ceremony at the Episcopal Church of St.
Thomas.
Mrs.
Johnson, 28, was until recently a first-grade teacher at the Nightingale-Bamford School in New York.
She graduated from Duke University and received a master's degree in education from Columbia University.
Her father, who is retired, was the chief of surgery at the Greater Baltimore Medical Center in Towson, Md., and an associate professor of surgery at Johns Hopkins University's medical school.


'The Russians Have Saved This Shul'


Budget Threatens Yorktown Theater Troupe
Chris Principe, a 14-year-old from Somers, N.Y., has no time to hang out at the mall.
He's too busy with the theater.
Returning home one evening from a rehearsal of the Yorktown Theater Company's Christmas production "The Elves and the Shoemaker," in which he plays an elf, Chris described the theater as "a place where kids can meet people they wouldn't ordinarily meet, and you can be yourself."


Reborn Every Minute
Long before chimneys became symbols of industrial pollution in New York, Santa Claus was climbing down them when the city was a Dutch colony on the Hudson River.
This is pertinent because one of the items Santa should be distributing this season is THE HISTORICAL ATLAS OF NEW YORK CITY: A Visual Celebration of Nearly 400 Years of New York City's History (Holt, $45).
The book, by Eric Homberger, who teaches American studies at the University of East Anglia in England, may be as close to a printed CD-ROM as paper can get; it is a triumph of graphics, with text, maps and photographs sharing space in a variety of colors, typefaces and layouts.
These brilliant displays are built around Mr.
Homberger's history of the city from precolonial days to the current 42d Street renewal.
It is a fair and lucid commentary that includes a plethora of relevant and not-so-relevant but descriptive detail.
Although other boroughs are mentioned and mapped, this is essentially a Manhattan book, and no less interesting for that.
Alice Hudson, chief of the New York Public Library's Map Division, has presided over a magnificent assortment of maps that, with other charts and graphs, tells the reader about the bewildering demographics of the city.
The material, which might otherwise seem too academic, comes to life in these clear-cut, simplified expositions.
Most useful is the chronology that wraps up the city's history -- a hodgepodge of notable incident and era-dividing development.
The spread of material across the pages may seem difficult to assimilate all at once, but you do not need to -- it is a book that lends itself remarkably well to dip-and-flip reading.
RICHARD F. SHEPARD


Nightclub Where Four Died Had Troubled Safety Record
Fire Department officials and police officers were not strangers to El Balcon.
Long before the wild rush from the dance floor and the four deaths in the crushing pileup of bodies on the stairway on Dec. 3, the second-floor club had a troubled safety history, and some questionable monitoring of its liquor and dance hall licensing by various city departments.


Stars Off the Rack And Off the Big Screen
UPTOWN -- The last snide remark, seating problem and act of ill will at the spring collections in New York and Europe had only recently faded from memory when Robert Altman's "Ready to Wear" had its world premiere at the Ziegfeld Theater on Dec. 12.
As they entered the lobby, actors from the cinematic sendup of the fashion industry were plucked by publicity handlers like outfits off a sale rack and distributed to television reporters corralled behind velvet ropes.
"You're one of the most elegant women in the world and you shop at the Gap?" Claudia Cohen, the entertainment reporter for "Live With Regis and Kathie Lee" asked Anouk Aimee, the French actress, who plays an understated French designer in the film.
Ms.
Cohen, who was wearing a not-so-understated orange wool overcoat by Yves Saint Laurent, rearranged her smile as Kim Basinger (also in a bright orange wool overcoat) was deposited before her.


World Markets; The Russian Funds Are Coming!
AMERICANS interested in Russia's expanding private economy will soon find it easier to invest there, despite the daunting risks foreigners still face in this new Wild West of equity markets.
The World Bank calculated in October that half of Russian industry was in private hands after three rounds of privatization, in which Russian citizens received vouchers exchangeable for company shares.
Typically, 30 percent of a privatized company's capital is reserved for employees and the remainder offered to the public.


Carter Visit Instills Hope Among Serbs
It is bitterly cold here today in the mountain stronghold of the Bosnian Serbs, but a conviction has taken hold that Jimmy Carter might extract the Serbs from a long winter struggle and isolation.
The conviction is not shared by everyone.
But the fact that a former United States President may soon come to this village, the Bosnian Serbs' "capital," has instilled the hope that America will now play a decisive role in breaking the long Bosnian deadlock.


The Nation; The Talk Is Tax Cuts: Look Who's Talking Too
PRESIDENT CLINTON'S televised Thursday night demurral aside, the rasher of middle-class tax cuts that he and other politicians now propose clearly begins the greased-pig chase toward 1996 and national political dominance.
And by entering the tax-cut scramble -- and muting his support for a smaller Federal deficit -- Mr.
Clinton has unmistakably chosen what George Bush might have called the prudent political course.
But just as surely, what happened last week was about something far bigger than politics.
It was about control of the national discourse -- leadership, in a word -- and here, some experts say, the President's choice may prove much riskier.


Tara L. Warrick, Douglas W. Cameron
Tara Lippincott Warrick, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
William H. Warrick Jr. of Rye, N.H., was married yesterday to Douglas Wright Cameron, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Donald J. Cameron of Bronxville, N.Y.
The Rev.
Charles Amstein performed the ceremony at the Madison Avenue Presbyterian Church in New York.
Mrs.
Cameron, 22, is a financial analyst at Dillon Reed &amp; Company, the investment bank in New York.
She graduated from the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill.
Her father is a vice president in Rochester, N.H., with Willis Corroon, the insurance brokers.
Her mother, Elizabeth W. Warrick, is an agent at Tate &amp; Foss, a real estate company in Rye.


Buying a Cruise In a Package
CRUISE passengers, particularly those planning to sail on big ships, often automatically buy a package that includes an air ticket.
Fearful of missing the boat, they want the security of the cruise line "cocoon": transfers from the airport to the wharf are included, and the line is responsible for getting passengers on board and does the rebooking if the flight does not get there.
The cruise lines also monitor flights carrying blocks of passengers and may hold the sailing if flights are delayed.
Josephine Kling, a partner in Landry &amp; Kling, a cruise agency in Coral Gables, Fla., said: "When I drive home from work, I can always tell when you are having bad weather in the North because all the ships are still at the dock, waiting for the late flights."


Law Teacher Tutors The Owners on Perils That Might Lie Ahead
When Richard Ravitch was chairman of the Metropolitan Transit Authority in New York in the early 1980's, an outside counsel to the M.T.A. was Lewis Kaden.
When Ravitch more recently was trying to induce major league club owners to agree to a revenue-sharing plan, he sought legal opinion on what voting requirement would be appropriate for the adoption of a plan.
The lawyer he asked was Lewis Kaden.
Ravitch, who has resigned as the owners' chief labor executive, effective at the end of the year when his contract expires, was not at the owners' meeting in Chicago last Thursday, but Lewis Kaden was.


Yes, This Movie Will Be on the Test
Among the pleasures of watching period drama is the arcane knowledge that can be accumulated.
What is the man called who rides the front left horse pulling a four-horse carriage?
A postilion. (Nicholas Hytner, the director of "The Madness of King George," opening later this month, says, "I don't think the postilions do anything in particular, but they are part of the whole ceremonial paraphernalia.") Wonder about the fashions in France in 1816, after the end of Napoleon's First Empire?
According to the forthcoming fiml "Colonel Chabert," rich and fashionable Parisiennes were still wearing Empire gowns (and some sort of dish towels on their heads).
Fashionable Viennese women were wearing Empire gowns into the 1820's in "Immortal Belowed." Not really clear on the battle between the Roman Catholics and the Hugueonts over the French throne?
"Queen Margot" is the first of seven planned films about Henry IV, based on the novels by Alexandre Dumas, of 'Three Musketeers" fame.


SERVICE WITH A SNEER
The pitifully ignorant comments, in a letter from Robert C. Rhodes, characterizing the harrowing account of racist treatment of African-Americans at Denny's as "ho-hum complaints by blacks" is the answer to the question posed in the letter from Alan Hyde: How is such racism "ordered and maintained"?
JANICE MCNEIL Washington


The World: Post-Mortem for Charities; Compassion Wasn't Enough in Rwanda
THE epic exodus of Rwandan refugees into Zaire last summer stirred deep compassion among Americans.
A restaurant in Boston raised $50,000 by asking diners to pay $1 for a glass of water; at a bar in Fairbanks, Alaska, patrons collected $5,000 one night.
Many other Americans simply got out their checkbooks.
"I think it was unprecedented," Julia Taft, president of InterAction, a coalition of more that 150 nonprofit organizations, said of the outpouring of compassion and money.
Nearly $100 million in cash and goods was given to charities for Rwanda, she said.


Maura P. Sullivan, William Maloney
Dr.
Maura Pegeen Sullivan and Dr.
William James Maloney are to be married today at the Church of the Annunciation in Crestwood, N.Y.
The Rev.
Vincent J. Duminuco is to perform the Roman Catholic ceremony.
The bride is a dentist in the Bronx.
She graduated from Boston College, and she and the bridegroom received D.D.S. degrees from New York University.
She is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John D. Sullivan of Crestwood.
Her father retired as a vice president of J. J. Kenny, a municipal-bond brokerage in New York.


California Dreaming
The Nob Hill Lambourne Hotel in San Francisco doesn't put chocolates on your pillow as other swank hostelries do.
At the Lambourne, you will find beta-carotene antioxidant tablets for your bedtime treat.
The substance, which is found in abundance in fresh vegetables, is thought to help prevent cancer and heart disease.
The tablets come in bags, each with an epigram of the sort you might expect in a no-fat, no-sugar fortune cookie: "Dreaming permits each of us to be quietly and safely insane" or "No pillow is as soft as a clear conscience."


Some Observations On the Elections
Congratulations to the 52,064 New Jersey voters who did not waste their votes on Frank Lautenberg or Chuck Haytaian ("Whitman's Popularity Helped Lautenberg," Nov. 13).
They have continued the tradition of the 60,000 who voted for alternative candidates for governor last year and the 500,000 who did not vote for the "major" party Presidential candidates in 1992.
They are a continuing source of frustration to the professional politicians, pollsters and advertising firms, who designed the idiotic campaign commercials that work on so many others.
Their attack ads, which were supposed to make people vote for candidate A because they demonized candidate B, obviously didn't work on these New Jersey voters.


Delta to Ban Smoking On All Flights Jan. 1
There is more bad news for travelers who smoke, and more good news for those who do not.
Delta Air Lines said that on Jan. 1 it would ban smoking on all its flights worldwide, making it the first United States carrier to do so.
In addition, the United States, Canada and Australia have signed an agreement to prohibit smoking on flights among the three countries, starting March 1.


A Monthful of Thrills in 2 Minutes
Somewhere along the way of what has been an impressive career as both a player and a coach, the Giants' Dan Reeves got the two-minute touch.
Maybe it rubbed off on him when he was a quarterback at the University of South Carolina, or when he was a running back and then a coach with the Dallas Cowboys and got to watch Roger Staubach, a master of the two-minute tango.
Or maybe it was when Reeves coached John Elway, who has pulled off a few last-minute victories for the Broncos in his time.
There is no question that it is the player who does the work in those final minutes.
Staubach and Elway were the ones throwing the passes and running the offense, not Reeves.
Yet it is as if someone had cast a magic spell on Reeves because wherever he has been and whoever his quarterback has been, that person has excelled at the two-minute drill.
New York -- and Dave Brown -- is simply the latest installment.


New &amp; Noteworthy Paperbacks
NEW YORK DAYS By Willie Morris.
Back Bay/Little, Brown, $12.95.
The author writes of his four youthful years as editor in chief of Harper's Magazine, a position he assumed in 1967 and used to bring in fresh talent and an irreverent slant -- a move that ultimately caused conflict with the venerable publication's corporate owners.
Last year our reviewer, Elizabeth Hardwick, said, "He has cast his story in the streets of the city with a fluent affection and an acute rendering of the turmoil of the years."


Struggling Families Need Jobs, Not Orphanages
To the Editor:
"Orphanages Are No Solution" (editorial, Dec. 12) argues that children are best raised in a family and that orphanages would be an expensive way to care for them.
However, you neglect to mention two important ingredients that contribute to successful families.


WHAT'S NEW YORK THE CAPITAL OF NOW?
Why wasn't George Pataki asked what he thought New York was the capital of?
SUZIE BAER New York


Judge Backs Shipment Of Sewage
A Federal judge has approved Westchester County's plan to ship its sewage residue to a plant in northwestern New Jersey that will convert it into fertilizer, Government officials said earlier this month.
In approving the agreement between the county and the Federal Government, Judge Whitman Knapp of Federal District Court here also reduced to $200,000 a $1 million fine that the county incurred for missing a December 1993 deadline to apply for a permit to dispose of its sewage sludge.


A Puerto Rican Stew
I'M IN MY KITCHEN, browsing through Puerto Rican cookbooks, when it hits me.
These books are in English, written for people who don't know a sofrito from a sombrero.
Then I remember the afternoon I returned to Puerto Rico for the summer after 15 years of living in the United States.
The family gathered for dinner in my mother's house.
The men settled in a corner of the living room, while Mami and my sisters chopped, washed, seasoned.
I stood on the other side of the kitchen island, enjoying their Dance of the Stove with Pots and Pans -- the flat metal sounds, the thud of the refrigerator door opening and closing, the swish of running water -- a percussive accompaniment enhancing the fragrant sizzle of garlic and onions in hot oil.
"Do you cook Puerto Rican?" Norma asked as she cored a red pepper.


Times Readers Help the Neediest
Advocates for the homeless estimate that more than a third of the people now on the streets of New York -- the third that are mentally ill -- would not be there if there were adequate programs to assist them.
For such people, simply providing a place to live, even a job, would not solve their problems.
They need support, encouragement and understanding.
For poor people in New York City suffering from mental and emotional disabilities, there is Project Moving On, which begins with the basics: helping people who have been unable to sustain the simplest social interaction learn to make contact with others.
Those skills are essential before they can move on toward self-sufficiency and some form of employment.


Setting A Price Limit
WHEN shoppers go out to buy a car or a microwave oven or a TV set they don't automatically go for the top of the line, even if they can afford to do so.
But when it comes to buying a home, brokers rarely ask how much you want to spend.
Rather, they assume you will spend the most you can afford, based upon income and assets.
They may even pull out charts that show how you can stretch that limit if you're willing to consider, say, a variable-rate mortgage.


Hans Brinker Would Feel Right at Home
IN winter, rural children can grab their ice skates and shovel the snow off the nearest lake.
Well, it doesn't have to be much different for those in New York City.


New Surfmobile
James Bond ruined an entire generation of car lovers.
After "Goldfinger," it was no longer enough for cars to look cool.
They had to shoot bullets and shred tires -- or at least float.
Now techno-adolescents can breathe easy.
The amphibious car, a curious offshoot from the main branch of automobile evolution, has been given new life by a group of California entrepreneurs.


Journal; The Last Taboo
Joycelyn Elders took a dive so that masturbation might live.
The cashiered Surgeon General was fated for a fall in Washington, where black women who speak their minds are now routinely vilified with racial epithets spun off from that popular coinage of the Reagan era, "welfare queen." As Lani Guinier was the "quota queen," so, inevitably, Dr.
Elders, a proselytizer for preventive measures in an age of rampant teen-age pregnancy and AIDS, was the "condom queen."


Move Over, George. This Is Samuel's Place
THE town of Scotland, population about 1,200, tucked into the rolling landscape of eastern Connecticut, is a place out of time in the late 20th century.
Great swells of pasture are dotted only here and there by sturdy and unpretentious houses and marked by old stone walls that wander randomly over hills or into the woods.
Except for lumber, farming is still the only industry.
The town hall is a wooden structure originally built in 1896 as the town's schoolhouse.
G.
Nelson Perry, the First Selectman for the past 31 years, mostly operates out of his home, which is more comfortable than the town hall.
Shucks, everyone in town knows his phone number anyway.


Conifers With Some Yardish Promise
THE seasonal deadline is here.
The family must decide on the tree, where to get it, what sort and how last-minute the buying can be.
Just because it has needles, and because of the time of year, it is called a Christmas tree.
Maybe that is what Santa calls it, but in actuality, there is no such thing.
The tree is more properly known as a spruce, a fir, a cedar -- whatever is brought home for the holidays and decorated.


WHAT'S NEW YORK THE CAPITAL OF NOW?
As the international migration agency for the Jewish community, the Hebrew Immigrant Aid Society processes 3,000 Russian refugees and immigrants a month, including those featured in your article on Brighton Beach.


Bonn Ponders Air Support For U.N. Exit
Germany has said it will probably provide logistical assistance and combat air cover, but not ground troops, if United Nations forces withdrew from Bosnia and Herzegovina.
No decision has been made yet to pull out the United Nations force, whose 24,000 troops include large contingents from France and Britain.
Contributing countries, which do not include Germany, will meet in The Hague next week with NATO officials to discuss French proposals to make the force less vulnerable to coercion from the Bosnian Serbs and other warring parties.


2 Bronx Bus Lines Pass the Test
After a six-month trial, the New York City Transit Authority has recommended that the service on two bus lines traversing the southeastern section of the Bronx be expanded permanently.
Demand from passengers exceeded expectations, according to reports released on Friday, and the Transit Authority turned a profit, too.
The buses, Bx22 and Bx5, serve areas poor in public transportation and rich in illegal livery vans that steal passengers by offering them cheaper and quicker service.
The Transit Authority has been trying to recapture customers by, for instance, offering discounted fares on the Bx22 line.


Struggling Families Need Jobs, Not Orphanages; No Single Solution
To the Editor:
We write regarding "Orphanages Are No Solutions" (editorial, Dec. 12), first because our agency has been so closely identified with orphans and "orphan trains" from our early history, and second because this is a problem we care about still.


Lost and Found


To Solve Tipping Problem, Simply Do Away With It
To the Editor:
Those who defend the concept of tipping -- in your Dec. 4 article, "A Time to Give, to Everybody" -- argue that without tips, service people do not get paid enough.


Correction
The Commercial Property column on Dec. 4, about remeasuring the space used to compute rents in office buildings, misstated the increase in square footage on the sixth floor of 20 Cooper Square.
It was 8.8 percent, not 18.4.


Very Lost


Kmart's Woeful Impact On Life in Fresh Meadows
To the Editor:
The Dec. 4 article, "New Kmart Worries Some in Co-op City," tells of the problems experienced by that community after the opening of a Kmart.
It sounds all too familiar.


Commercial Property/Building Management; Operational Chores Swinging Back to In-House
BACK in 1989, when Anthony E. Malkin joined W&amp; M Properties, his family's development and property management business, he was appalled at the way many functions were farmed out.
Outside accountants generated most of the reports, outside architects controlled the way tenants' offices were built and outside engineers ran the maintenance and repair.


Law Firm Takes a Case With 2 Million Clients
When the 4 A.M. call for help came from a financially drowning Orange County a week ago, it seemed to be the call that Bruce Bennett had been preparing for all his professional life.
This would be the biggest municipal bankruptcy ever, "enormously challenging, complex, with very interesting issues," as Mr.
Bennett, a 36-year-old bankruptcy lawyer, said over dinner on Wednesday.
Though young for the job, he had handled several major corporate reorganizations, and at first he felt he was on familiar ground.


Giving The Gift Of Time
The holidays are a time of giving.
And the gift of time can be very precious.
The following is a list of some organizations around the five boroughs that can use help this holiday season and beyond.
THE MAYOR'S VOLUNTARY ACTION CENTER 61 Chambers Street, Manhattan.
The center is a volunteer clearinghouse, which uses a database that lists more than 2,000 volunteer jobs in the five boroughs to match people with agencies that could most use their help.
Call Monday through Friday, 9 A.M. to 5 P.M., for an appointment. (212) 788-7550.
NEW YORK CARES 116 East 16th Street, Manhattan.
New York Cares requires a one-hour orientation at which volunteers receive a monthly calendar that lists 100 to 200 volunteer opportunities to help at 100 to 150 organizations.
No long-term commitment required.
Orientation is by appointment only.
Office hours: Monday through Friday, 9 A.M. to 5 P.M. (212) 228-5000.
THE VOLUNTEER REFERRAL AGENCY 161 Madison Avenue, Manhattan.
The agency requires a half-hour interview for prospective volunteers to properly place them with more than 500 organizations throughout the boroughs.
Interview by appointment only.
Office hours: Monday through Friday, 11 A.M. to 5 P.M. (212) 745-8249.
BIDE-A-WEE 410 East 38th Street, Manhattan, or 3300 Beltagh Avenue, Wantagh, L.I.
This is a privately financed organization for abandoned or unwanted pets.
Bide-a-Wee never destroys its animals.
Volunteers can assist in walking and caring for the animals, raising money, writing newsletters, clerical work and many other opportunities.
Training depends on the job.
Office hours: Manhattan and Long Island locations, Monday through Friday, 9 A.M. to 5 P.M.
Manhattan, (212) 532-6395.
Long Island, (516) 785-4199.
SAMARITAN HOT LINE The holiday season is especially difficult for some New Yorkers, and New York's only 24-hour suicide prevention line is in constant need of good listeners.
Volunteers must have a telephone interview, complete 24 hours of training and then commit themselves to four shifts a month, including one weekday shift of 11 P.M. to 8 A.M.
Volunteers must be 21.
Donations welcome. (212) 673-3041.
G.M.H.C.  (Gay Men's Health Crisis), 129 West 20th Street, Manhattan.
The name may be deceiving because the Gay Men's Health Crisis helps everybody with AIDS.
Volunteers take part in all aspects of helping the ill from home care to clerical work in the G.M.H.C. office.
Volunteers must complete a two-day training session.
Office hours: Monday through Friday, 10 A.M. to 6 P.M. (212) 337-3593.
NOW (National Organization for Women), 22 West 21st Street, Manhattan.
Needs volunteers both for daytime and nighttime work.
They can handle the help line, do clerical work or at night be an advocate.
Office hours: Monday through Friday, 9 A.M. to 5 P.M.; (212) 807-0721.
PARTNERSHIP FOR THE HOMELESS 305 Seventh Ave, Manhattan, will train volunteers for any of its seven programs for the homeless.
Ask for Jennifer Brady for more information.
Office hours: Monday through Friday, 9 A.M. to 5 P.M. (212) 645-3444 x 118.
GOD'S LOVE WE DELIVER 895 Amsterdam Avenue, Manhattan.
God's Love needs delivery people for a Christmas Eve meal.
It is also preparing gift baskets for homebound men, women and children with AIDS and will accept toys, and new articles of clothing.
In Manhattan, volunteers do not need a car.
For other boroughs, delivery person must have a vehicle.
In general, God's Love needs van assistants and weekday delivery help.
Office hours: Monday through Friday, 9 A.M. to 5 P.M. (212) 865-6500.
POWARS (Pet Owners With AIDS/ARC Resource Service), P.O.
Box 1116, Madison Square Station, Manhattan, 10159.
Powars is a privately financed volunteer organization to care for the pets of people with AIDS.
Volunteers are needed for dog walking, veterinarian visits, clerical work, grant writing and public relations.
Volunteers must complete two training sessions.
Hours: Flexible.
General office: (212) 744-0842; Volunteer Coordinator: (212) 924-2932.
THE BRONX ZOO 2300 Southern Boulevard, The Bronx.
The Friends of Wildlife Conservation will train volunteers once a week for 12 weeks to assist in guided tours of the zoo and all facets of the animal education program.
Office hours: Monday through Sunday, 9 A.M. to 5 P.M. (718) 220-5141.
VICTIMS SERVICES AGENCY 2 Lafayette Street, Manhattan.
Victims Services offers support and counseling to victims of domestic violence, rape, incest, muggings and other violent incidents.
Volunteers are trained in accordance with the job they choose.
Opportunities include counseling, child care, client intake, clerical and answering the hot line.
Office hours: Monday through Friday 8:30 A.M. to 5 P.M. (212) 577-1287.


State Champs Against All Odds
HARTFORD'S Public High School has gained statewide renown in sports through its basketball team, which won the state championship the last two years.
But only in recent years has the football team showed any promise.
When the football season began, the Owl gridders had recorded four straight winning records.
It is surprising since nowadays high schools in the state's big cities rarely produce winning football teams, largely because of low turnout of players.
But Hartford Public High has achieved something no other high school in the city has ever done before: win a state championship in football, beating Southington in the Class LL (large school) final on Dec. 2.
In a city beset by gang warfare, poverty, large-scale exodus to the suburbs, the closing of stores and assorted other municipal woes, Hartford was in need of a boost.
And it got it from the Hartford Public High football team.


Holing Up in the Lowest of Keys At New York's Jewel-Box Hotels
THEY are small, intimate, full of eccentricities and largely bereft of a service industry's most basic amenities.
There are no bars, no restaurants, no free weights, no lap pools, no pay-per-view movies and, most of all, no room service -- so remember to eat before it gets too late.
Limousines and entourages?
Leave the superstar accouterments at home.
Manhattan, home of multi-star hotels and beloved architectural bombast, is making room for a growing band of European-style boutique hotels -- elfin establishments, typically with fewer than 100 rooms, homey accommodations, chic decor and (relatively) low prices.


RESULTS PLUS
COLLEGE FOOTBALL  Title for Youngstown  Mark Brungard rushed for two touchdowns and threw for another, leading defending champion Youngstown State to a 28-14 victory over Boise State in the Division I-AA title game in Huntington, W.Va., yesterday.
Youngstown State (14-0-1) won its third title in a record-tying four consecutive championship-game appearances.
The Penguins became the second team to win three titles since the division was formed in 1978.
The first was Georgia Southern (1985, 1986, 1989 and 1990).


Shoppers and Visitors Create Visions of a Record Christmas
The Empire State Building is drawing at least 50 percent more visitors than in any previous December, greeted by King Kong in a Santa hat, who began a week of appearances starting yesterday.
Contributions to the Salvation Army and the New York Cares Coat Drive are up markedly; Tourneau, the Swiss watch emporium, is having its best Christmas season, even selling a few $400,000 watches, and hotels and restaurants at all price levels are packed.


Little City Halls Cutting Staff As Big One Tightens Its Belt
When the city's 59 community boards were created in 1977, city officials meant them to be miniature city halls, where citizens could complain about local services or speak about neighborhood issues.
And while the City Charter restricted the boards to an advisory role, board members have said over the years that city agencies have usually listened to them and responded.
Now, for the first time, community boards are facing budget cuts and are going ahead and reducing the sizes of their hired staffs.
The exact size of the cuts awaits the resolution of the city's budget impasse.


Girls, Boys And Oscar
AS HOLLYWOOD SHIFTS INTO YEAR-END awards mode, the usual glaring inequity reappears.
Strong candidates in the best actress category are elusive, to put it mildly, while prize-worthy male actors are hard to miss.
This raw deal doesn't work to anyone's advantage.
While leading actresses languish or play thankless roles, men continue to tough it out in the most competitive of all movie awards categories: best supporting actor.
This year turned out to be a particularly brutal one for supporting actor candidates and once again we see why these secondary roles boast a disproportionate share of talent.
For one thing, good supporting roles are easier to write than leading ones, because they needn't be fully rounded or carry a story.
A supporting character -- like Bruce Willis's Butch in "Pulp Fiction" or his construction boss in "Nobody's Fool" -- can display his flashiest attributes without bothering to explain his quiet side.


Cathryn J. Prince, Pierre Saldinger
Cathryn Jane Prince, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Marvin L. Prince of Danbury, Conn., was married last evening to Dr.
Pierre Frank Saldinger, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Paul Saldinger of Basel, Switzerland.
Rabbi Melvin N. Sirner performed the ceremony at Beth El Synagogue in New Rochelle, N.Y.
Mrs.
Saldinger, 25, is a reporter for The Boston Business Journal.
She graduated from George Washington University and received a master's degree in journalism from Columbia University.
Her father is a gastroenterologist in Danbury and an assistant clinical professor of medicine at Yale University in New Haven.
Her mother, Norma Prince, is a speech and language pathologist in the Pleasantville, N.Y., school system.
Dr.
Saldinger, 32, is an associate surgeon at Beth Israel Hospital in Boston and an instructor in surgery at Harvard University.
He received his medical degree from the University of Basel.
His mother, Yolande Saldinger, is a public relations consultant in Basel.
His father is a financial adviser in Basel.


Leslie J. Gastwirt, Laurence J. Bazer
Leslie Jill Gastwirt, a daughter of Dr.
Lawrence E. Gastwirt of Westport, Conn., and the late Elaine Gastwirt, is to be married today to Rabbi Laurence Joel Bazer, the son of Charlotte Bazer of West Hartford, Conn., and the late Robert Bazer.
Rabbi Stanley Kessler is to perform the ceremony at the Woodbury (L.I.) Jewish Center.
The bride, 30, teaches social studies at Solomon Schechter High School of Long Island in Hicksville.
She graduated from Brandeis University and received a master's degree in teaching from the New School for Social Research.
Her father is the director of the Alliance for Technology Management, a research consortium at the Stevens Institute of Technology in Hoboken, N.J.


Rachelle H. Pleva, Jed M. Milstein
Rachelle Hope Pleva, an associate at the law firm of Fishman &amp; Callahan in Livingston, N.J., was married last evening to Jed Matthew Milstein, a New Jersey deputy attorney general in Trenton.
Rabbi Gerald Goldman performed the ceremony at Tappan Hill in Tarrytown, N.Y.
Mrs.
Milstein, 25, graduated from the University of Michigan, as did her husband, and received her law degree from Georgetown University.
She is the daughter of Ann Dlugasch, an interior designer in Watchung, N.J., and the stepdaughter of Jerome A. Dlugasch.
Mr.
Dlugasch is the president of Poly Plus Manufacturing, a plastics maker in Chatham, N.J.


In Nigeria, The Payoff For Takeoff
"Welcome to Nigeria," the customs agent at Murtala Muhammed Airport says, smiling as he greets an arriving passenger.
Then comes the punch line: "What have you brought for me?"
Africa has long been associated with air-travel hardships.
Overbooked flights crowd to bursting with passengers and outsized carry-on baggage.
Long delays are often spent in unventilated departure lounges that feel like steam baths.


Autistic Youth Is Held in Death of Baby Thrown From Window
A 17-year-old youth who the police described as autistic and suffering from emotional problems was being held early this morning in the death of his five-month-old nephew, after the police said he threw the infant from a fifth-floor apartment window on the Upper West Side yesterday.
The teen-ager, Michael Holmes, was in the apartment, at 176 West 81st Street, with the baby and a 35-year-old man who is believed to be the teen-ager's older brother, when the phone rang and the older man answered it, said Officer Scott Bloch, a Police Department spokesman.


Viewpoints; Car Rentals: Only the Best Need Apply
YOU have just flown 1,626 miles from New York to Denver with your family for a week's vacation in the Rockies.
In your hand is a reservation from a major car rental company.
Your flight is fine, your bags arrive on schedule, and you step up to the rental counter.
The clerk takes your license, punches its number into the computer -- and suddenly announces that your reservation will not be honored.
The reason?
You have received an average of one speeding ticket a year for the last three years, for driving slightly over the speed limit.
A trip down the line of competing rental counters results in the same refusal.
What to do?
If you are the only licensed driver, all you can do is sit in Denver until the following Sunday to retain your cheap air fare, pay many more dollars for full-fare tickets home or tour the Rockies by taxi.


Yaffa R. Regosin, Noam S. Ohring
Yaffa Rachel Regosin, the daughter of Ina S. and Gerald S. Regosin of Milwaukee, is to be married to Noam Shalom Ohring, a son of Ahrona and Milton Ohring of Teaneck, N.J.
Rabbi David M. Feldman is to officiate at the Teaneck Jewish Center.
Ms.
Rogosin, 22, is keeping her name.
She teaches kindergarten at the Abraham Joshua Heschel School in New York.
She graduated cum laude from Barnard College and received a master's degree in special education from Columbia University.
Her father is a retail consultant in Milwaukee and her mother is the executive director of the Milwaukee Association for Jewish Education.


Good Wines, Good Prices: A Primer
NO place can match New York for the variety and competitive prices of its retail wine shops.
The same can't be said about its restaurants.
Too many restaurant owners see high wine prices as a way to subsidize their food.
"If I didn't charge a lot for my wine, I'd have to double my food prices," is a common rationale.
Fortunately, though, there are restaurant owners who care about wine, who work with imaginative importers and distributors and who offer exciting wines at affordable prices.
And who seem to be thriving.


Lost Film


Take This Bike, Please
The city of Portland, Ore., has a few old bikes around town -- leaning unlocked against street signs and poles.
It started with 10 and hopes to have 200 before Christmas.
The bikes, all donated by the civic-minded, are painted bright yellow and are set out by the Community Action Network.
Everyone is using the bikes, according to the group's director, Joe Keating, who says he once saw 16 yellow-bike riders "swarming like bees" on a downtown plaza.
Keating also presented a classic adult three-wheeler to the Mayor.


Shedding The Macho Image
To the Editor:
Since the late 1980's, the change in the jazz world has been radical and positive.
Thanksgiving week alone, jazz groups were led by Joanne Brackeen at the Knickerbocker, Lynne Arriale at Fat Tuesday, and Geri Allen at the Village Vanguard.
Yes, the women I mentioned are pianists, but never before were three of them heading groups at the same time in the best clubs in town.


'Shadows of the Mind'
To the Editor:
Hilary Putnam must, of course, express his own opinions in reviewing my book "Shadows of the Mind" (Nov. 20), but it is unfortunate that he should do so using factual inaccuracies.
Perhaps I may single out just one of the most important of these.
He asserts that my book has "an obvious lacuna: the possibility of a program we could write down but not succeed in understanding is overlooked! This is the mathematical fallacy on which the whole book rests." However, such a hypothetical program is explicitly discussed at length in Section 3.3 and at many places later in my book. (It is my "possibility II" on page 131.) I had made a special effort, in "Shadows of the Mind," to address virtually all the points raised by Mr.
Putnam in his review.
Whatever he may think of these efforts, it is regrettable that he has chosen simply to ignore most of them.
ROGER PENROSE  Oxford, England


No Headline
"If the public absolutely demands that flying be totally safe, you are going to have to ban flying." STUART MATTHEWS, head of a safety issues group financed by the aviation industry.  [ 1:5. ]


The Great Social Security Debate: Phase 3
To the Editor:
The eight letter writers who criticized Floyd Norris added further to the overall confusion surrounding Social Security.
For example, they at least implied that "Social Security is an earned right." But the Supreme Court in three key cases -- Helvering v.
Davis (1937), Flemming v.
Nestor (1960) and United States Railroad Retirement Board v.
Fritz (1980) -- decided that the program was a form of "welfare" with benefits to be given (or taken away) by acts of Congress.
In Helvering, Government lawyers themselves argued that ". . . the benefits are not contractual and may be withdrawn at any time," which was upheld by the Court.


ALSO INSIDE
MOVIE CLOCK 26 What's showing at the local movie houses, today through Thursday.
PLAYING IN THE NEIGHBORHOOD 28 Country skating in Prospect Park; "Night Before Kwanzaa" in Jamaica.
LETTERS 31 An economic argument for the abolishment of tipping; when Kmart moved in to Fresh Meadows; a plea to Mayor Giuliani for the preservation of youth and family services.


WHAT'S NEW YORK THE CAPITAL OF NOW?
The range of disciplines represented in your feature on young talent is fairly comprehensive, but two actors from a television cop show?
Give me a break.
MTV's Beavis and Butt-head are going to affect the culture of the next 30 years more than most of the artists you featured.
ANDY FAIR New York


THE VIEW FROM 61
When I worked in Vermont back in 1960, Bennington College had a reputation for being avant-garde (About Men: "The View From 61," by Edward Hoagland, Nov. 27).
I never thought the school would generate such gloom in one of its teachers.
I want to tell Edward Hoagland to perk up and enjoy what sounds to me like a very interesting life.


Editorial Notebook; Russian Improvisations
The economic and political forces reshaping Russia are visible in raw relief in this muscular industrial city on the eastern slope of the Ural Mountains.
The picture shows how far and fast the country has moved since Communism crumpled, and how much distance must still be covered before Russia truly resembles a Western democracy or market economy.
Yekaterinburg, the hometown and political base of Russia's President, Boris Yeltsin, has always been a good barometer of Russian life.


A Plentitude of Handel, Of Festivals of Lessons
IT is usually a toss-up whether the Festival of Lessons and Carols or Handel's Messiah is more frequently performed during the Christmas season; this week, Handel's oratorio seems to be slightly in the lead.
Today at 2:30 the Yale Glee Club invites singers and listeners to its 12th annual Messiah sing-in at Battell Chapel, with the soloists Judith Caldwell, Kyle Pruett and Thom King, Thomas Murray accompanying at the organ.
Podium duties are divided among Marguerite Brooks, the Glee Club's conductor emeritus Fenno Heath, and its present director, David Connell.
The audience may bring a score or buy one there, $10.


The Nation: The Rule Dr. Elders Forgot; America Keeps Onan in the Closet
TO students of sexual politics, it was perhaps no surprise that the remark that finally prompted President Clinton to jettison Surgeon General Joycelyn Elders involved masturbation.
No other sexual practice indulged in by a majority of adults has an image so dark and dirty, so controversial and forbidding that it is seldom mentioned even in today's world of say-anything, show-anything sexuality.
When National Public Radio's "All Things Considered" program reported on the forced resignation of Dr.
Elders, who offered the opinion that masturbation should not necessarily be excluded from sex education discussion in school, it cautioned listeners that the segment would mention masturbation.
Last month, a Minneapolis morning radio show discussing new data on the prevalence of masturbation decided to call it "self-pleasuring," lest it offend listeners.


THE WIDOW GETS HER VERDICT
Thank you for "The Widow Gets Her Verdict," by Claudia Dreifus (Nov. 27) -- a quiet, dignified account in Myrlie Evers's own words.
I liked hearing about something that has come out right after all these years, thanks to Evers's refusal to "just forget about it." There is justice, after all.
JANE COLLINS Woodstock, Ill.


Mr. Assistance Davis
SLY AND ABLE A Political Biography of James F. Byrnes.
By David Robertson.
Illustrated. 639 pp.
New York:  W. W. Norton &amp; Company. $29.95.


Artists' Journal: The Theater of Dining in New York


Why Is That Sushi Bar Glowing?
DAVID ROCKWELL knows why there are five different types of tables in the Nobu sushi restaurant.
He knows why there are three trees ever so vaguely reminiscent of the porch of a Nantucket house.
He knows why the place is brighter than some restaurants and darker than others, and why it sounds like a thunderstorm in the bathrooms.
The food you have to ask someone else about.
Mr.
Rockwell is one of the busiest practitioners in the rather confined field of restaurant design.
What matters to him is the look, the feel, the tiny intangibles that work on the ephemera of human feeling to make one think, hey, this is where I want to eat tonight.
In one city or another (up until late last year in partnership with Jay Haverson), he has done all but one of the Planet Hollywood restaurants, Vong, the Monkey Bar, Le Bar Bat, Tatou and Roseanne and Tom's Big Food Diner. (He also does stores, hotels, apartment buildings and homes.)


Wall Street; A Great Year? You Had Better Check the Calendar
EVERY once in a while, the same tough advertising rules meant to clarify mutual fund performance inadvertently obscure bad performance.
The Robertson Stephens Contrarian Fund has seen bad times for most of 1994.
From a high of $12.39 a share on April 1, it had fallen to a net asset value of $10.33 by Friday.


Melissa Hubsher, Jeffrey Freedman
Dr.
Melissa Shari Hubsher, a clinical psychologist in New York, was married last evening to Jeffrey Jay Freedman, the general counsel in the New York office of Nycomed Inc., an Oslo pharmaceutical company.
Rabbi Paul Teicher officiated at the New York Palace Hotel.
The bride, 34, graduated from Barnard College and received her doctorate in psychology from Yeshiva University.
She is also a director of psychology training and day treatment programs at Manhattan Children's Psychiatric Center.
She is the daughter of Lillian S. Hubsher of Massapequa, L.I., and the late Sydney Hubsher.


The Joy of Ringing Bells
WHEN every spare moment of the holiday season is spent standing and ringing a bell, one has much time to ponder.
Bruce Sprague of Hempstead has been ringing bells for the Salvation Army for 26 years.
He has probably done more thinking than Einstein.
The profound thoughts flow as his kettle slowly fills with quarters, dollars -- and cigarette butts.
From every bad thing can come good, Mr.
Sprague philosophized as he rang his bell in front of the Kmart in Westbury.
Something bad?
"There was the time a woman parked in a no-parking handicapped-zone space," he said.
The woman was not handicapped.
"She walked over to me," Mr.
Sprague recalled, "and she said, 'I'll give you $5 if you watch my car.' " And the good?
"The police came along and gave her a ticket."


A Christmas Goose With Fat Removed
ROAST GOOSE is a traditional Christmas dish in many parts of Europe, usually served with a stuffing of sage and onions.
But like Long Island duck, goose contains a great deal of fat, and this can make the stuffing rather greasy.
I cannot imagine serving Christmas goose without stuffing, however.
So I found a way to prepare this bird that not only eliminates much of the fat but also makes the flesh particularly tender and moist and the skin very crisp.


Several Gunshots Are Fired at the White House as the President and His Family Sleep
At least one bullet struck the White House early this morning, the second shooting incident there in two months.
The authorities were left this afternoon without suspects, eyewitnesses or even a sure sense of whether the Executive Mansion had been the intended target for the four to six shots they believe were fired.
Mr.
Clinton, his wife, Hillary, and their daughter, Chelsea, were asleep in the White House at the time and were unharmed and never in danger, the Secret Service said.
Mr.
Clinton was told of the incident shortly after the shooting occurred at 2:05 A.M.


Residential Resales
In the following reports, the "listed at" price is the asking price when negotiations began that ended in the sale.
Time on market is from most recent listing to contract.
MANHATTAN
FLATIRON AREA  $505,000
1200 Broadway (29th St.)  (Gilsey House)  4-bedroom, 3-bath, 2.600-sq.-ft. duplex, penthouse co-op in a prewar building; fireplace, greenhouse, wine cellar, roof deck; maintenance $1,800, 57% tax-deductible, listed at $599,000, 2 years on market (Broker: Douglas Elliman)


Ex-Communists in Bulgaria Are Poised for Return to Power
During much of the 40 years of Communist rule in Bulgaria, Dora Mitova, an accountant at the main steel works in this industrial town, dreamed of democracy.
But the past five years, when her hopes were supposed to become reality, have been a severe disenchantment.
She will vote on Sunday in the third general election since 1989 with a heavy heart, she said.


Off Welfare, and Into Self-Employment
SUSAN MAYBIN, who is divorced, held three or four jobs at once to support herself and her five children.
Then she burned out.
"I worked seven days a week," said Ms.
Maybin, who lives in Norwich.
"I realized my children were lacking a mother. I became overwhelmed and had to stop working."
Still, she held on to her dream of someday starting a nonprofit agency, a sort of extended family that would provide people who care for others with parenting classes, support groups, help with money management and child care and job information.
"You have to have a stable domestic front if you want to pursue a career and get off welfare," Ms.
Maybin said.


Deals &amp; Discounts
HAWAII PACKAGES Outrigger Hotels Hawaii has introduced a Hawaiian Escape package for the month of January at its Waikiki hotels.
Guests who stay for six nights receive room, breakfast and an air-conditioned, automatic compact rental car daily, plus a credit of $100 a person toward air fare.
The package price is $80 a person nightly at the 445-room Outrigger East and $93 a person at the 625-room Outrigger Prince Kuhio (they are a block to a block and a half from the beach); $99 at the 885-room Outrigger Reef on the Beach, and $110 a person at the 530-room Outrigger Waikiki on the Beach.
The rates are based on double occupancy.
Travel must be completed by Feb. 5.


Boundaries Keep Shifting, But Fears Remain the Same
The residents of Woodside have long used the Brooklyn-Queens Expressway as their eastern boundary, a definitive break between their middle-class, predominantly white neighborhood and Jackson Heights, one of the most ethnically diverse, immigrant-rich neighborhoods in New York City.
But five years ago, Jackson Heights and its problems -- overcrowding, drugs, noisy social clubs and prostitution -- began growing to the west.
Now, Woodside's eastern half, especially along Roosevelt Avenue, is indistinguishable from Jackson Heights.
And, caught between an old Queens increasingly fearful of the new, residents in Woodside are grasping at a different boundary.


The Palm Beach Hotel: Another of Gaza's Many Anomalies
At the tennis courts of the Palm Beach Hotel, an Israeli resort set in a cluster of Jewish settlements on the southern Gaza coast, a ball that goes out of bounds is really out.
At least it was for Hanna Eisenmann, a guest from Jerusalem who said she feared going after balls that sailed over the court fence into what might be unfriendly territory.


I, Fabio
Fabio Picchi, the 40-year-old chef and owner of Cibreo restaurant in Florence waxes like a poet, cooks like a sorcerer and is in every other observable way, irrepressibly Florentine.
There is the thatch of gray-blond hair, the intense hazel eyes, the chiseled jaw that recalls ancient Etruscan statuary.
His starched white jacket, crisp even on a muggy summer day, is further proof of his Florentine nature, a disposition that is, Michelangelo notwithstanding, precise and fastidious and different than other Italians'.


Heather Mee and Glenn Muscosky
SOMETIMES, falling in love means learning to live with your significant other's cats, pit bull, insomnia or collection of lava lamps.
When Heather Mee met Glenn Muscosky, she learned to love his bicycles.
A capital investment analyst with the New York City Transit Authority, Mr.
Muscosky is a serious mountain and racing bicyclist.
He spends almost every weekend either racing in Central Park or riding through forests in New Hampshire, where trees are as close together as people on a rush-hour subway.


The Moment When the World Seemed New
WHITE TWILIGHT, modern dusk: a century of utopian optimism is brought to a quiet, lyrical close in the new ground-floor galleries Gae Aulenti has designed for the historic Palazzo Della Trienalle in Milan.
And the show that inaugurated the new space, "Expressionism and the New Objectivity," intensified the atmosphere of elegy.
Focusing on the pivotal years in the mid-1920's when many European architects embraced the common language of the modern movement, the show, which runs through today, looked back to the dawn of a radiant idea.
The Palazzo Della Trienalle, which was designed in 1931 by Giovanni Muzio, is best known as the site of an international design event that once presented the most innovative ideas in the field.
In recent years, however, the event, the Milan Trienalle, has lost its international luster, just as Milan itself has gone into eclipse as a center for pioneering design.
Aulenti's new galleries have been conceived not only to burnish the Trienalle's reputation but also to reconfigure its mission.


Fashion


Nontraditional Holiday Spin
PROGRAMS evoking celebrations in other times and places sparkle at this time of year.
Today from 1 to 4 P.M., the yearly Texaco Holiday Festival at the Hudson River Museum brings a bit of the Emerald Isle to Yonkers.
There will be a greeting card workshop based on designs from the ancient Book of Kells, and visitors can take Irish step-dance lessons or just sit back and enjoy jigs, reels and Irish tunes performed on tin-whistle, Uillean pipes, bodhran (an Irish drum) and mandolin by Joannie Madden and Lissadell, a quartet from the larger and more famous group Cherish the Ladies.


Anthropologists Talked Human Rights Too
To the Editor:
"A Trans-Narrating, Ethnographic Good Time Was Had by All" (The Week in Review, Dec. 11), on the anthropology convention, was amusing, partly deserved.
However, human rights were the focal issue, with more than 35 sessions and Coretta Scott King and Spelman College's Johnnetta Cole as guest speakers.


How I Built the Bomb
Oral histories are nothing new.
But now a video history is being created -- of the age of the bomb.
The November issue of Physics Today reported that Sandia National Laboratories in Albuquerque, N.M., has begun work on the Knowledge Preservation Project.
Archivists are videotaping the experiences of about 180 of the lab's early nuclear weaponeers.


A Christmas Goose With Fat Removed
ROAST GOOSE is a traditional Christmas dish in many parts of Europe, usually served with a stuffing of sage and onions.
But like Long Island duck, goose contains a great deal of fat, and this can make the stuffing rather greasy.
I cannot imagine serving Christmas goose without stuffing, however.
So I found a way to prepare this bird that not only eliminates much of the fat but also makes the flesh particularly tender and moist and the skin very crisp.


Rules Are Made to Be Blitzed; N.F.L. Defenses Set Out to Put a Stop to Offensive Perks
Each time offenses take one step forward in pro football, defenses shuffle to take two.
Take the 1960's.
That is when Tom Landry, then the Dallas Cowboys' coach, invented the 4-3 flex defense, in which two of the four down lineman played a yard behind the line of scrimmage to confuse the blockers and open gaps for the defense.


Mary Poppins She's Not
NOO YAWK IS FUN CITY.
IT'S A feisty town filled with nutty adventures: phone calls from Barbra Streisand; subway rides spent jawing with picturesque (but ultimately unthreatening) panhandlers; knockdown, drag-out clearance sales at Loehmann's.
The natives sometimes talk tough, but they don't really mean it, because underneath their crusty exteriors lie hearts as big as Lefrak City.
In fact, so all-powerful are the forces of love, family and benign mischievousness -- and so unimportant are factors like income and upbringing -- that a Jewish working girl from Flushing with tight skirts, huge hair and a 100-octane accent can easily get a job as a surrogate parent for a family of up-tight Manhattan-dwelling bluebloods.


'Fire From Heaven'
To the Editor:
In his review of Harvey Cox's new book "Fire From Heaven" (Nov. 20), Gustav Niebuhr writes that when Mr.
Cox attended a Pentecostal service in Kansas City, he encountered a woman who said, "We really had church." Mr.
Niebuhr then adds, "Just what she meant Mr. Cox never learns."
I admire Gustav Niebuhr as a religious writer and Harvey Cox as a great teacher and theologian, but I find it difficult to believe that both of them, in discussing Pentecostalism, had difficulty deciphering the sentence "We really had church."


Dec. 11-17; Visions of Perpetrators Dancing in Their Heads
THE folks down at Gun World in Pasadena don't want the Brady bill's 15-day waiting period to put a damper on the holiday season.
After all, lots of last-minute shoppers forgot they had to purchase their special someone that 9-millimeter handgun by Dec. 9 to make sure it would be nestled under the tree on Christmas morning.
"We're giving them the gun's box, wrapped with holiday paper, colorful bows and a little card," says Paul B. Cole, the president of the seven-store chain.
"Here's the best part: Inside the box is a Polaroid of the firearm their loved one will receive once we complete the background check and make sure they are not a fugitive."


A Concert Series With a View That's Not Always Seen
ONE OF THE GREAT JOYS AND frustrations for a music critic in New York, as for many another concertgoer, no doubt, is the round of concerts at the Metropolitan Museum of Art.
A joy because the programs and performances maintain a high level of artistry overall, and the Grace Rainey Rogers Auditorium, where most of them take place, is a comfortable, attractive setting with decent acoustics.
A frustration because even if time allows a poke through a gallery or two, the main viewing areas are usually closed by concert time.
Then again, some programs take the music into the museum itself, combining the best of both worlds.
A series of holiday concerts in front of the Neapolitan Christmas tree in the Medieval Sculpture Hall this week, for example, leads up to the annual Christmas program by the Aulos Ensemble on Thursday evening, with Julianne Baird, soprano, and Drew Minter, countertenor. (The Aulos event last year, also with Ms. Baird, formed the basis for one of the finest records of this holiday season, "A Baroque Christmas," from Musicmasters.)


As Labor Dispute Flares Up, the Heat Is Felt in Chinatown
Nine months after a bitter, yearlong labor dispute at the Silver Palace restaurant ended, the battle has been reignited, this time creating fear in Chinatown that it could threaten a longstanding Chinese business custom: the gentleman's agreement.
Last Wednesday, the Local 318 Restaurant Workers Union, which represents some 40 waiters and the women who push dim-sum carts at the restaurant, filed charges with the National Labor Relations Board, saying that the management had bypassed the union and negotiated directly with workers last March when it demanded that employees share tips with maitre d'hotels.


To Green, No Settlement Should Mean No Spring
When Dallas Green envisions his Mets' lineup for the 1995 season, he thinks of the veteran Bret Saberhagen as the rock in his rotation.
He sees Rico Brogna, the rookie, blossoming at first base.
And he hopes that Bill Pulsipher, perhaps the Mets' brightest pitching prospect, is ready to step into the bullpen.
All that changes, though, when Green is forced to face the prospect that labor and management will not reach an agreement prior to spring training and that camps will open with replacement players.


G.O.P. IS DETAILING BROAD PROPOSALS TO TRIM WELFARE
In a scramble to keep the political initiative, Congressional Republicans today provided fresh details of sweeping proposals to cut Federal welfare spending, while Administration officials struggled to figure out how they would pay for the tax cuts promised by President Clinton.
The Republicans also staked a claim to the high ground of fiscal responsibility in the coming battle over the Federal budget.
They expressed concern that Mr.
Clinton had not specified how he would pay for the tax cuts promised as part of his "middle-class bill of rights." Senator Bob Packwood, the Oregon Republican in line to become chairman of the Finance Committee, said he saw no evidence that the Administration had figured out how to pay for the tax breaks.


CHILDREN'S BOOKS
THE ANIMALS' GIFT By Szabolcs de Vajay.
Illustrated by Lilian Obligado.
Unpaged.
New York: Simon &amp; Schuster. $15. (Ages 5 to 9)  THE WITNESS  By Robert Westall.
Illustrated by Sophy Williams.
Unpaged.
New York: Dutton Children's Books. $14.99. (All ages)  CHRISTMAS LULLABY  By Nancy Jewell.
Illustrated by Stefano Vitale.
Unpaged.
New York: Clarion Books. $14.95. (Ages 2 and up)


Who Will Step Up And Save Knicks?
The Knicks woke up this morning trailing the Orlando Magic by four and a half games.
New York has never trailed by that much in the Atlantic Division during Pat Riley's tenure as coach.
Meanwhile, Charles Oakley, who went more than three years without missing a game, remained questionable for Sunday night's game against the Portland Trail Blazers because of increased pain in his dislocated right toe.
Oakley's two-game absence from the lineup has forced him to contemplate toe surgery, because his condition has worsened during the past week.


Dec. 11-17; Prehistoric Tree Grows in Australia
To the Aborigines of Australia, the word wollemi means "look around you," which is just what David Noble, a wildlife officer, was doing on a holiday hike in the Wollemi National Park northwest of Sydney.
Entering a damp gorge, he came upon some large unfamiliar trees.
This was the beginning of the discovery of a kind of conifer well known in the fossil record from the dinosaur age but long thought to be extinct.
To find a new genus of conifer is important, botanists said, but to identify one with such a clear link to largely extinct vegetation is exceedingly rare.
One called it "the equivalent of finding a small dinosaur still alive on Earth."


Technology; Time Warner's Ordinary People Plug Interactive TV
MEET the Willards.
For at least one day last week, they were America's most popular TV family.
Obviously chosen for their wholesomeness in the TV tradition of the Nelsons, Cleavers and Bradys, the Willards sat in a model house that Time Warner Inc. called "the home of the 21st century" and described their glimpse into television's future.


Dec. 11-17: Trouble in River City; Drug Use Increases Among Teen-Agers
The latest annual survey of high school drug use conducted by the University of Michigan Institute for Social Research has alarmed educators and drug policy experts by showing that marijuana use by seniors, as well as eighth and tenthgraders, has risen for a second consecutive year.
The survey of nearly 50,000 students in 420 public and private schools also showed that students in those grades were using cocaine and other illegal drugs more often in the last two years.


Playing From the Heart
To the Editor:
I am a jazz musician by profession and would like to offer some of my own experiences in contrast to Peter Watrous's opinions  [ "Why Women Remain at the Back of the Bus," Nov. 27 ] .


Saltzman &amp; Ashley Studios Claudia Lozano, Mauricio J. Wiltz
Dr.
Claudia Marlene Lozano, a daughter of Genaro and Maria Lozano of the Bronx, was married yesterday to Dr.
Mauricio Jesus Wiltz, a son of Dr.
Othon H. and Martha G. Wiltz of Guaynabo, P.R.
Msgr.
Patrick J. Boyle performed the ceremony at the Church of St.
Vincent Ferrer in Manhattan.
The bride graduated from New York University, where she and the bridegroom received degrees in dentistry.
She is a dentist at the Phoenix House Foundation, a drug-rehabilitation program in Manhattan, and at Morris Heights Health Center in the Bronx.


Q. &amp; A.
Roaches Out of Control Q. We are senior citizens living as tenants in a co-op complex.
We have a roach problem that has gone out of control.
It is causing me physical and emotional problems.


Report Exaggerates Navy Yard Hazards, Official Says
The city's top official environmental official said last week that the problem of toxic contamination at the Brooklyn Navy Yard is not nearly as hazardous as indicated in a report made public earlier this month by a nonprofit group.
The official, Environmental Commissioner Marilyn Gelber, said most of the hazards cited in the report had been cleaned up, audited by an environmental specialist or otherwise shown not to be public health risks.


HOW TO GET A MAN PREGNANT
I'd like to volunteer those anti-choice, pro-life males as the first candidates for Dick Teresi's cross-gender reproductive experiments ("How to Get a Man Pregnant," Nov. 27).
If men had to go through pregnancy, would we have a world population problem?
PEPITA JIMENEZ-JACOBS Indiana, Pa.


On Sunday; Cursing The Darkness At Christmas
SELLING stout, pungent Christmas trees on wasted city lots remains one of the nobler forms of resistance to the evils that fester in New York: stand with nature's green in the dead cold.
Thrum the boughs, curse the darkness.
"We would have been in New York now selling Christmas trees, just as in the other years," Donna Wiehaus Walker was saying with an amazing tone of gentleness toward the city, considering it is where her husband, Glenn Walker, a determined entrepreneur, was gunned down before Thanksgiving as he saw to his Christmas tree business.


POSTINGS: New for Einstein College; A Start on a Science Research Building
Yeshiva University's Albert Einstein College of Medicine will soon have a new science research building.
Last month, the university began construction of the Samuel H. and Rachel Golding Building on its Jack and Pearl Resnick Campus at Eastchester Road and Morris Park Avenue in the Morris Park section of the Bronx.


Elegant Tastes of Santa Fe in Garden City
BOWLERS were in for a shock this fall when they pulled up to the Garden City Bowl.
Instead of the familiar snack bar adjoining the bowling alleys there was the lush City Cafe.
A formidable door flanked by brass lanterns, a wall of french doors and valet parking hint at the changes.
Inside, the restaurant is pure Manhattan supper club, with piano music weeknights and a jazz quintet on Saturdays.
The spiffy decor has a sophisticated city-slicker look.
Walls sport striking modern paintings.
Tables are topped with white cloths, votive candles and verdigris bud vases, each holding a single bloom.
The dining room in the bar also has an inviting fireplace.
But diners interested in conversation should choose for the quieter main dining room, away from the music.


Correction
An article on Dec. 4 about Justine Miceli, an actress on the television series "N.Y.P.D. Blue," misstated the surname of a casting agent for whom she auditioned.
The agent is Alexa Fogel, not Alexa Vogel.


A Christmas Goose With Fat Removed
ROAST GOOSE is a traditional Christmas dish in many parts of Europe, usually served with a stuffing of sage and onions.
But like Long Island duck, goose contains a great deal of fat, and this can make the stuffing rather greasy.
I cannot imagine serving Christmas goose without stuffing, however.
So I found a way to prepare this bird that not only eliminates much of the fat but also makes the flesh particularly tender and moist and the skin very crisp.


A High-Tech 'Tinkerer' on a Grand-Touring Scale
CAN a liberal arts graduate of Amherst College build a world-class sports car from scratch on a budget that wouldn't cover Porsche's telephone bill for a month?
Probably not, unless that liberal artist happens to be Reeves Callaway, a 47-year-old self-styled "tinkerer" who has long been known for producing hot-rods on a shoestring.
"He's a specialist in horsepower," explains Bill Ruger Sr., the chief executive of the Sturm Ruger Firearms Company, who is also a Callaway customer.
"If Callaway weren't independent, he could be a top researcher for one of the big auto makers."


New Jersey Q &amp; A: Dr. Marilyn McNeil; Standing Up for Women's Sports Status
DR.
MARILYN McNEIL has made sports history in New Jersey and is now about to make more at the national level.
She is the first woman to be athletic director at Monmouth College here and the first woman to hold that position at any of the state's seven Division I institutions of higher education, which include two large research universities.


Data Bank/December 18, 1994
Data Bank/December 18, 1994
Sales at Retail Outlets
Nov.
Oct.
Sept.
Monthly percent change
1.2
1.3
0.8
Producer Prices
Monthly percent change
0.5
-0.5
-0.5
Consumer Price Index
Monthly percent change
0.3
0.1
0.2
Industrial Production
Monthly percent change
0.5
0.5
-0.1
Housing Starts
Millions of units, annual rate
1.540
1.440
1.509
Gross Domestic Product
III Q'94
II Q'94
I Q'94
1987 dollars, in percent
3.9
4.1
3.4
30-Year Treasury Bonds
Dec. 16
Dec. 9
Dec. 2
Yield in percent
7.85
7.86
7.91
Weekly Jobless Claims
Dec. 9
Dec. 2
Nov. 25
In thousands
323
324
316


Azinger Lifts His Spirits and Confidence With 62
Ernie Els took a little break from his demolition of the Tryall Club today, treading water in a figurative sense and yet extending his lead in a very real sense in the $2.5 million Johnnie Walker World Championship.
It was not surprising that Els, who had scorched the seaside track for consecutive 64's in the first two rounds, would shoot a round of even-par 71.
What was enough to shake the place out of its island torpor, though, was the magical reappearance of Paul Azinger, who set a course record with a round of 62.
He jumped from 17 strokes behind when the day began into a tie for third behind only Els and Nick Price.


Sharing Credit
To the Editor:
Herbert Muschamp gave a generous review to the Leon Battista Alberti show in Mantua, Italy, in "Alberti, on the Road to Cyberspace"  [ Dec. 4 ] .
The joint curator of the exhibition was Prof.
Robert Tavernor of the University of Edinburgh.
Whatever merit the exhibiition has is due to our close collaboration.
JOSEPH RYKWERT  University of Pennsylvania Philadelphia


A Chance to Help Your Neighbors
Expecting a decrease in financing over the next few years, Catholic Charities, Diocese of Brooklyn and Queens, is recruiting volunteers to deliver social services to the poor.
Thomas A. DeStefano, executive director of the agency, said it is relying more heavily on a network of 1,600 volunteers, saving money that would otherwise be spent on salaries or contracted services.
He pointed to the example of a retired couple who cook meals in a center for the elderly in their Brooklyn neighborhood.


Family Money


The Millennium Is Nigh. Very Nigh.
Maybe we should deck the halls with a few more boughs of holly.
From the best evidence, it appears that Jesus Christ was born in 6 B.C.
If a Roman monk hadn't made a simple miscalculation 1,400 years ago, the world would be celebrating the 2,000th Christmas next Sunday.
And the Sunday after that, we'd be celebrating New Year's Day 2000 -- the first day of the third millennium.
How did the mistake happen in the first place?
It started with an attempt to fix the date not of Christmas but of Easter, the holiest and most ancient day of the Christian calendar.


NIGHT OF THE LIVING NEAR-DEAD
As a survivor of three near-"death" episodes, I found David Ives's attempt at humor objectionable in the extreme (Endpaper: "Night of the Living Near-Dead," Nov. 27).
Contrary to the impression he gave, I've never realized a penny from these experiences.
I have, however, lost two jobs and gained scars and handicaps.
FREDERICK B. BREHOB Marblehead, Mass.


Miss Davis, Mr. Rosenberg
Margot Davis, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard Davis of Maplewood, N.J., was married last evening to Laurence Rosenberg, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Nathaniel Rosenberg of Boston.
Rabbi Barry Greene officiated at the Mountain Ridge Country Club in West Caldwell, N.J.
Mrs.
Rosenberg, 27, is an assistant vice president at Christie's, the auction house, in New York.
She graduated from Emory University.
Her father is a partner in Embix, a chemicals brokerage in Mountain Lakes, N.J.
Her mother, Marjory Davis, is a broker at Weichert Realtors in Short Hills, N.J.


Information Highway Access
To the Editor:
"Getting On Line -- the Microsoft Way" (The Executive Computer, Nov. 20) gave me hope that communities nationwide will eventually have true local access to the information superhighway.
I live in a community of 30,000 people; requests to America Online result in suggestions to contact Sprint or another company that provides local access numbers.
When I contact Sprint, I'm told to contact America Online.
If the data highway is to surpass the impact of telecommunications and postal services, I hope on-line companies will quickly plan to include all of the United States.
I am excited about the resources available through on-line services, but I hope that these services will be more easily accessible.
BRIAN A. DOHE  Walla Walla, Wash., Nov. 21  The writer is director of summer programs at Whitman College.


A Big Thank-You For 10 Years of Service
The Children's Museum of Manhattan salutes its chairwoman, at the Plaza, Dec. 12.


A Good Argument for the 'Great Man' Theory
THE TENDENCY NOW, IN MUSIC as in politics, is to distrust the "great man" theory of history.
People are likelier to spout generalities about culture or trends in taste, analyses of sex, economics and race, self-consciously sage comments about the evolution of the art.
Here is an antidote to the contemporary spirit: a 65-CD set from BMG containing all of the great violinist Jascha Heifetz's commercially released recordings, 438 works by 89 composers in 46 volumes, more than 70 hours of music, ranging from Heifetz's first acoustic recordings, in 1917, to his last recital, in 1972.
It includes the Bach solo sonatas and partitas (some in two versions) as well as Heifetz's rendition of "White Christmas," the Beethoven Concerto, conducted by Arturo Toscanini, along with morsels meant to elicit sighs and gasps. (Although BMG has established no list price, the set is selling in some stores for between $550 and $600.) BMG has also released a video of Heifetz in miscellaneous performances.


IN GAZA, PEACE MEETS PATHOLOGY
In his article "In Gaza, Peace Meets Pathology" (Nov. 27), Michael Kelly argues that "it is vastly in the interest of Israel and the United States that Yasir Arafat remain alive and reasonably well in Gaza." Not so.
Unlike Hamas, which is committed to Israel's immediate destruction, Arafat and his supporters are committed to the Palestine Liberation Organization's 1974 plan calling for the destruction of Israel in phases.


RECORD BRIEFS
Andriessen: 'De Stijl,' 'M Is for Man, Music, Mozart'  Schonberg and Asko Ensembles conducted by Reinbert de Leeuw ("Stijl"); Orkest de Volharding conducted by Jurjen Hempel ("M").
Elektra Nonesuch 9 79342-2; CD.


Dec. 11-17: A Nation of Movers; Study Shows America A Land of Transients
In Pennsylvania, there are neither movers nor Shakers.
A new Census Bureau analysis found that the western portion of the state is home to a disproportionate share of households that had lived in the same home for three decades or more.
Everywhere else, though, Americans were on the move.


Sports of The Times; Baseball's Cold Stove League
WHEN there was baseball, its off season was known mystically as the Hot Stove League although the image was outdated: fans sitting around a potbellied stove in a general store, debating trades and phenoms.
But this off season, it's the Cold Stove League.


Ideas &amp; Trends; Fear of Phrases
WHEN Michael Crichton's novel "Rising Sun" was translated into Japanese, some worried that this tale of sly Japanese business samurai taking over America might fan resentments in Japan and worsen relations between the two countries.
But the fears were misplaced.
Most Japanese found the caricatures in the book funny rather than insulting.
And the Japanese publisher had seen to it that the one expression that might really have upset people here had been carefully edited out.
In the English-language version, a half-black, half-Japanese woman describes herself as an outcast in Japan because of her mixed race and a deformed arm.
She compares herself with the burakumin, the rarely acknowledged untouchable caste in a society that insists it is classless.
The mere mention of that emotionally charged word can leave people here paralyzed.
But the Japanese were spared any such awkwardness by the publisher's censors, who removed the reference.
No Offense
"Rising Sun's" fate was merely one of the more visible examples of a trend that, though little discussed until recently, has profoundly shaped broadcasting, journalism, literature and public discourse in Japan over the past several decades.


War Games


BEST SELLERS: December 18, 1994
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
26
POLITICALLY CORRECT BEDTIME STORIES, by James Finn Garner. (Macmillan, $8.95.) Classic tales respun to avoid offending current sensibilities.
2
2
42
THE CELESTINE PROPHECY, by James Redfield. (Warner, $17.95.) An ancient manuscript, found in Peru, provides insights into achieving a fulfilling life.
3
5
3
WINGS, by Danielle Steel. (Delacorte, $23.95.) A woman pursues her ambition to become a record-setting aviator in pre-World War II America.
4
4
16
DEBT OF HONOR, by Tom Clancy. (Putnam, $25.95.) Jack Ryan and C.I.A. agents vs. a Japanese plot to strike America's territory and economy.
5
3
9
INSOMNIA, by Stephen King. (Viking, $27.95.) A widower and a widow, victims of sleeplessness, behold sinister forces at work in their small Maine town.
6
6
6
THE LOTTERY WINNER, by Mary Higgins Clark. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $22.) Stories about a couple who win a lottery and devote themselves to solving crimes.
7
9
4
GOD'S OTHER SON, by Don Imus. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $23.) A 1981 novel about Billy Sol Hargus, a lecherous television evangelist from Texas.
8
10
4
DARK RIVERS OF THE HEART, by Dean Koontz. (Knopf, $24.) A man and a woman, who meet by chance, must flee a powerful Government agency.
9
7
123
THE BRIDGES OF MADISON COUNTY, by Robert James Waller. (Warner, $16.95.) A photographer and a farmer's lonely wife in Iowa.
10
8
11
TALTOS, by Anne Rice. (Knopf, $25.) The survivor of a species of witches copes with his heritage; a sequel to "The Witching Hour" and "Lasher."
11
12
13
NOTHING LASTS FOREVER, by Sidney Sheldon. (Morrow, $23.) Three women doctors in San Francisco contend with lovers, betrayers and killers.
12
11
21
THE GIFT, by Danielle Steel. (Delacorte, $15.) A woman's visit to a small town changes many lives.
13
14
23
THE CHAMBER, by John Grisham. (Doubleday, $24.95.) A lawyer represents a racist who is on death row for his part in a 1967 bombing in Mississippi.
14
15
11
MUTANT MESSAGE DOWN UNDER, by Marlo Morgan. (HarperCollins, $18.) In Australia's outback, an American woman learns about aboriginal philosophy.
15
6
SPENCERVILLE, by Nelson DeMille. (Warner, $23.95.) A cold war veteran returns to his Ohio hometown and rescues an old flame from her sadistic husband.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Nonfiction
1
2
11
DON'T STAND TOO CLOSE TO A NAKED MAN, by Tim Allen. (Hyperion, $19.95.) Anecdotes and meditations on life by the star of "Home Improvement."
2
1
7
CROSSING THE THRESHOLD OF HOPE, by John Paul II.
Edited by Vittorio Messori. (Knopf, $20.) The Pope discusses matters of belief, suffering and hope, and Christianity's relationship to other faiths.
3
4
12
JAMES HERRIOT'S CAT STORIES, by James Herriot. (St. Martin's, $16.95.) A collection of tales by the Yorkshire veterinarian.
4
3
15
COUPLEHOOD, by Paul Reiser. (Bantam, $19.95.) Essays on the ups and downs of marriage by the television star and stand-up comedian.
5
5
14
BARBARA BUSH: A Memoir, by Barbara Bush. (Drew/Scribners, $25.) The former First Lady recalls her life, from childhood to the present.
6
6
10
DOLLY, by Dolly Parton. (HarperCollins, $25.) The autobiography of the country singer.
7
8
52
THE BOOK OF VIRTUES, by William J. Bennett. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $30.) Moral stories adapted from the Greeks, the Bible, folklore and elsewhere.
8
7
7
THE BELL CURVE, by Richard J. Herrnstein and Charles Murray. (Free Press, $30.) Ways in which differences in intelligence affect American life.
9
9
10
THE HOT ZONE, by Richard Preston. (Random House, $23.) The discovery of a lethal virus, more infectious than H.I.V., and the efforts to keep it from spreading.
10
15
3
THE WARREN BUFFETT WAY, by Robert G. Hagstrom Jr. (Wiley, $24.95.) An account of the career of the man said to be the world's most successful investor.
11
11
11
BASEBALL, by Geoffrey C. Ward and Ken Burns. (Knopf, $60.) An illustrated history of the game.
12
10
41
MIDNIGHT IN THE GARDEN OF GOOD AND EVIL, by John Berendt. (Random House, $23.) The mysterious death of a young man in Savannah, Ga.
13
13
9
NO ORDINARY TIME, by Doris Kearns Goodwin. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $30.) The roles of Franklin and Eleanor Roosevelt during World War II.
14
1
IT WASN'T ALWAYS EASY, BUT I SURE HAD FUN, by Lewis Grizzard. (Random House, $20.) A collection of essays by the late Southern humorist.
15
12
8
ALL THE TROUBLE IN THE WORLD, by P.J.
O'Rourke. (Atlantic Monthly, $22.) A humorist considers problems like overpopulation, famine and plague.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous
1
2
34
IN THE KITCHEN WITH ROSIE, by Rosie Daley. (Knopf, $14.95.) Recipes by Oprah Winfrey's cook.
2
1
82
MEN ARE FROM MARS, WOMEN ARE FROM VENUS, by John Gray. (HarperCollins, $23.) Ways to improve communication and relationships between the sexes.
3
3
12
MAGIC EYE III, by N.E.
Thing Enterprises. (Andrews &amp; McMeel, $12.95.) Oscillating designs in color.
4
4
3
THE BUBBA GUMP SHRIMP CO.
COOKBOOK. (Oxmoor House, $14.95.) Seventy-five shrimp recipes, said to have been inspired by Forrest Gump.
Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending Dec. 3, at 3,050 bookstores plus wholesalers serving 28,000 other retailers (gift shops, department stores, newsstands, supermarkets), statistically weighted to represent sales in all such outlets nationwide.
An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
And Bear in Mind (Editor's Choices of other recent books of particular interest) THE COLLECTED STORIES OF LOUIS AUCHINCLOSS. (Houghton Mifflin, $24.95.) Nineteen stories, the oldest from the 1940's, by a writer unfashionably and passionately concerned with the beliefs and behavior of the WASP civilization that until very recently produced America's ruling class.
D.H.
LAWRENCE: The Story of a Marriage, by Brenda Maddox. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $30.) Lawrence's violent life with the formidable Frieda Weekley, who bedded him 20 minutes after she met him, makes for absorbing if unappetizing reading.
THE FIRST WORLD WAR: A Complete History, by Martin Gilbert. (Holt, $35.) Mr.
Gilbert's enormous breadth of view seeks to render this dreadful conflict as soldiers lived it on many fronts, often relying on the poetry and prose of the many gifted writers who saw action.
GENTLEMAN SPY: The Life of Allen Dulles, by Peter Grose. (Richard Todd/Houghton Mifflin, $30.) A biography, full of new information, of the irresistibly charming (and manipulative) man who headed -- and embodied -- the Central Intelligence Agency from 1953 to 1961.
IN PHARAOH'S ARMY: Memories of the Lost War, by Tobias Wolff. (Knopf, $23.) The follow-up volume to Mr.
Wolff's memoir "This Boy's Life" is a series of small, elegant, personal sketches of his year in Vietnam.
THE LAST SHOT: City Streets, Basketball Dreams, by Darcy Frey. (Richard Todd/Houghton Mifflin, $19.95.) Mr.
Frey examines the myth of deliverance through basketball on the courts of Coney Island, where black youths compete to be exploited by coaches, colleges and, in the rarest cases, by professional sports.
LOST PURITAN: A Life of Robert Lowell, by Paul Mariani. (Norton, $27.50.) This approach to the "real" character of a protean confessional poet uses letters and diaries to reveal a writer whose fascination with preachers, statesmen and generals hints at restlessness with his own art.
THE MASTER OF PETERSBURG, by J.M.
Coetzee. (Viking, $21.95.) The hero of Mr.
Coetzee's grimmest novel yet is Dostoyevsky himself, trapped in generational and political clashes, trying to scrape meaning from the death of a son.
MONSTERS OF THE SEA, by Richard Ellis. (Knopf, $30.) A delightful and learned adventure in cryptozoology (the study of hidden life forms, including the leviathan, the sea serpent, the kraken, the blob and the globster).
TOULOUSE-LAUTREC: A Life, by Julia Frey. (Viking, $34.95.) A valuable life of the only great painter of France's golden age who was an aristocrat, incorporating much family correspondence recently made available.
WHERE THE SUCKERS MOON: An Advertising Story, by Randall Rothenberg. (Knopf, $25.) A lively rendition, by a former advertising columnist for The Times, of real life at an agency that tried to sell cars by ridiculing ads for cars.


Orphanage Nostalgia
Orphanages, anyone?
They seem to be a popular topic of conversation these days.
Some conservatives envision their playing a role in welfare reform.
And when Hillary Clinton dared to make some disparaging remarks about institutionalizing children, the new Speaker of the House of Representatives suggested that she rent the movie "Boys Town" to expand her education.
The New York Foundling Hospital has another idea.
Sister Helen Murphy, the executive director, suggests that anyone who is interested in the child welfare movement visit the hospital's free 125th anniversary Commemorative Historical Exhibit.
It's at the Met Life Building, 24th Street and Madison Avenue in Manhattan, through Jan. 31.


Conifers With Some Yardish Promise
THE seasonal deadline is here.
The family must decide on the tree, where to get it, what sort and how last-minute the buying can be.
Just because it has needles, and because of the time of year, it is called a Christmas tree.
Maybe that is what Santa calls it, but in actuality, there is no such thing.
The tree is more properly known as a spruce, a fir, a cedar -- whatever is brought home for the holidays and decorated.


The Practical Mr. Mandela
LONG WALK TO FREEDOM The Autobiography of Nelson Mandela.
By Nelson Mandela.
Illustrated. 558 pp.
Boston: Little, Brown &amp; Company. $24.95.


Carbide Got Off Easy in Bhopal Disaster
To the Editor:
In "10 Years After the Gas, No End to Tears" (The Week in Review, Dec. 11), you tell how "impoverished Indians" died in the shadow of a "sophisticated" Union Carbide Company plant.
The Bhopal plant, you state, "was run entirely by an Indian subsidiary," and "Indian officials had not prevented many of the victims from moving too close to the plant." You report that Union Carbide officials were "denied access to the plant" and that the chemical giant has "never been able to argue its case in an Indian court." And you write of Union Carbide's "agreeing" to pay the Indian Government $470 million in compensation and contributing $40 million to build a hospital and medical research center.


From the Crystal Ball: What's Cooking for '95
NINETEEN NINETY-FOUR was the year of the luxury blockbuster and the mass-market theme palace, the year the Flatiron blazed and TriBeCa heated up.
It was the year cultures crossed and red meat returned.
And most of all, it was the year New Yorkers came back to their restaurants and their restaurants came back.
So what's cooking for 1995?


Kevorkian Vows to Keep Fighting Laws Barring Assisted Suicide
Dr.
Jack Kevorkian has lashed out at the Michigan Supreme Court for ruling that assisted suicide is a crime and has indicated he will continue to crusade for what he calls "a fundamental human right -- the right not to suffer -- that cannot be taken away by any law."
"What happens to me now therefore will be a perfect sign of where your society stands and what it is," Dr.
Kevorkian, a 66-year-old retired pathologist, said at a news conference on Wednesday in the office of his lawyer, Geoffrey Fieger.


PLAYING IN THE NEIGHBORHOOD
CENTRAL PARK More Than One Way To Deck a Hall


K. M. Concannon, David Anderson
Kathleen Mara Concannon, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard J. Concannon of Larchmont, N.Y., was married yesterday to David Thomas Anderson, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
George D. Anderson of Topsfield, Mass.
Msgr.
James P. Cassidy performed the ceremony at the Church of St.
Ignatius Loyola in New York.
Mrs.
Anderson, 27, teaches the first grade at the Chapin School in New York.
She graduated from St.
Michael's College, as did her husband, and received a master's degree in education from Lesley College.
Her father is a senior partner in Kelley, Drye &amp; Warren, a New York law firm.


Dec. 11-17; Must Be Christmas, Must Be L.A.


The Contract Vintner's Motto: What's in a Name?
THE Ravenswood winery in the Sonoma Valley is known for its intense zinfandel.
McDowell Cellars makes a wine in the style of southern France.
Hidden Cellars is a specialist in Mendocino County.
And while all of these wineries make different types of wine, they are following a growing trend in the California wine industry: letting someone else undertake the expensive process of making some or all of their grapes into wine.


Genes Are Not So Smart
HOW THE LEOPARD CHANGED ITS SPOTS The Evolution of Complexity.
By Brian Goodwin.
Illustrated. 252 pp.
New York:  Charles Scribner's Sons. $23.


Russian Ultimatums Sneered At in Rebel Capital
The people of Grozny were ready for war again.
Surrounded by Russian troops for a week, the city had no more hot water, few phone lines and only scarce heat and electricity, but residents seemed in no mood for compromise.
Chechens have been sneering at Russia and its ultimatums for 300 years.
They were proud of their outlaw status when they were stealing Cossack horses, and many are proud now, when the commodities from the north have become Volvos and machine guns.


A Soap Opera For All Italy
Silvio Berlusconi, Italy's billionaire Prime Minister, made much of his money by offering soap operas and game shows and high-kick dancers on commercial television stations that drew almost half the country's viewers.
For a man who won power in part by deploying his vast corporate resources in advertising and television, the unraveling of his political fortunes has seemed an extraordinarily unscripted spectacle.


A City in a City, Bigger Than Many
To the Editor,
Your article about Co-Op City, "A City, Bigger Than Many, Within A City," on Nov. 20 on its surface looks bright but has a much much darker side.


WHAT'S NEW YORK THE CAPITAL OF NOW?
George Gershwin was born in 1898, Stephen Sondheim in 1930.
I've always thought that the 1960's would produce another powerful force in the American musical theater.
Adam Guettel, born in 1965 and a grandson of Richard Rodgers, may prove to be the composer I've been expecting to arrive on the scene.
CHARLES J. O'FAHEY St.
Paul


Wilkins Dominates as Celtics Stun the Rockets
Celtics 112, Rockets 109
Dominique Wilkins scored 43 points last night, making 5 of 6 3-pointers, as Boston came away with a rare victory in Houston, 112-109.
Dee Brown's 3-pointer with 35 seconds left, one of 11 by the Celtics, gave Boston a 108-105 lead.
Brown, who had 16 points, then added 3 free throws and Wilkins sank another with 5.4 seconds left.


For a Former Senator's Daughter, a Solitary Death in the Snow
Normally, the death of Theresa J. McGovern on Tuesday would have gone largely unnoticed, dismissed as the end of another alcoholic found in a snow bank on a cold December morning.
But Ms.
McGovern, 45, was the daughter of former Senator George McGovern of South Dakota, the 1972 Democratic candidate for President.
And her father said he hoped her story would inspire other alcoholics to "try to make a special effort to find treatment and stay sober."


'Teen Court' Gets Tough About Crime
When Michael Cabral, a 14-year-old from East Los Angeles, was caught stealing a car stereo, he, his parents and his parole officer agreed to head for "teen court," an alternative sentencing project in which juveniles charged with misdemeanors are judged by a jury of peers.
Michael in particular embraced the idea; he admits he had expected to skate through the system.


Hey, It's Fashion: Major Protection From Bad Elements
WHAT: The Weathertech 1620 EMS Protective Parka -- the Armani jacket of ambulance-worker wear.
Made of wind- and water-repellent Supplex nylon, the 1620 is said to be both waterproof and breathable.
It is trimmed with 200 square inches of silver Scotchlite reflective material, which makes the wearer visible on a clear night from 675 feet away.
WHY: As authentic, high-tech street wear, it meets the style requirements of both ravers (who like to wear shiny, man-made fibers) and rappers (who have turned blue-collar staples like Carhartt and Dickies into fashion labels.) Patricia Field, the Greenwich Village emporium that specializes in club clothes, has been selling the 1620 jacket ($120) since last fall.
"It was the kids who discovered it and inspired us to buy it," said Annex Song, the manager of the store at 10 East Eighth Street.
"It wasn't something a company came up with to market to them." LIFELINE: The 1620 was conceived four years ago by I. Spiewak &amp; Sons, a 90-year-old New York City uniform manufacturer that supplies clothes for police officers, airline mechanics and toll collectors, among others.
The company spent two years developing and testing the jacket so that it would meet National Fire Protection Association standards.
YOU BET YOUR LIFE: The jacket is designed to protect against blood-borne pathogens, which provides peace of mind to emergency health-care workers in the age of AIDS.
AS SEEN IN SOHO: Phat Farm, on Prince Street, has the Spiewak coat (in blue or red) with the Phat Farm "All City" logo embroidered over the breast pocket; it costs $150.
At the Anna Sui boutique on Greene Street, there is a black nylon coat with reflective tape that mimics the Spiewak version; it costs $415 (but was on sale last week for $335.) AS SEEN IN MILAN: The Spiewak coat has an upscale cousin: the ultra-chic, rather expensive industrial-strength nylon coat from Prada, the 81-year-old Italian leather-goods house.
AS SEEN IN NEW JERSEY: When Katzins Uniform in Newark put the 1620 in its window, the hip-hop crowd, which was already buying coveralls and Carhartt parkas from the store, started making inquiries.
"It just proves that style knows no bounds," said Len Schlosberg, an owner, who is also the chairman of the National Association of Uniform Manufacturers and Distributors.
Katzins sells the 1620 for $181. (For an additional cost, the parka can be accessorized with matching protective pants and Hollofil or Thinsulate liners.) POETIC JUSTICE: At first, the 1620 seems like more protection than anyone but an Emergency Medical Service worker would need.
But, alas, when one considers the dangers of city life today, it makes sense that a jacket designed for bloody medical emergencies would become a contemporary fashion statement.
DAN SHAW


Karen A. Drobeck, Thomas Watson 3d
Karen Ann Drobeck, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
H.
Peter Drobeck of East Greenbush, N.Y., was married on Thursday to Thomas John Watson 3d, the son of Mrs.
Watson of Greenwich, Conn., and the late Mr.
Watson Jr., a president and chairman of the International Business Machines Corporation.
The Rev.
Ralph Ahlberg, a minister of the United Church of Christ, performed the ceremony at Round Hill Community Church in Greenwich.
Mrs.
Watson was until recently the director of marketing in Hartford for Arthur Andersen &amp; Company, the accounting firm.
She graduated from Wittenberg University and received a master's degree in international management from the American Graduate School of International Management.
Her father retired as the director of toxicological research at the Sterling-Winthrop Research Institute.


Enough Already With Wachtler
It is surprising that "The Media Replay the Wachtler Case"  [ Nov. 27 ]  would even waste the space on articles relating to the sordid affair between ex-Judge Sol Wachtler and Joy Silverman and their present doings.
The story of the former judge who served a slap on the wrist 13 months in a playboy facility, instead of the 16 years that his indiscretions and crime called for, and his lover, who is his wife's cousin and involved in her own problems with marriages and divorces script a third-rate television story that would create more yawns then titillation.
If we would want to hear anyone's story it would that of his wife, Joan.
Otherwise let us look for something else or do a rerun on Joey B. and Amy, as they will always maintain the interest of all of us.
ALAN PALL Coram


Striving for That One Singular Sensation
"HELLO. THIS IS JAMIE. I can't answer the phone right now, but please leave a message and I'll call you as soon as I can! Thanks a lot! Bye."
The voice on the answering machine is resonant, that of someone ready for anything.
It is the voice of a Broadway gypsy, a triple-threat performer who has learned to live in roller-coaster bursts of optimism and despair in a world that is becoming an anachronism.


NIGHT OF THE LIVING NEAR-DEAD
I thought Ives's piece was hilarious.
Of course, death is not a subject to be taken lightly, but I find a little humor uplifting.
I have never had a near-"death" experience myself, but my mother-in-law claims that she had one and says it was such a peaceful feeling that she did not want to come back.
What if you couldn't come back?
And what if dying isn't all it's cracked up to be?
And isn't near-"death" akin to being "a little pregnant"?
ROBERTA A. MCQUEEN Amityville, L.I.


A Leaner New York
New York City is heading for its most dangerous fiscal problems in nearly 20 years.
And while this time there is no threat of bankruptcy, the size of the present and future budget gaps -- and some new aggravating factors -- make it clear that the city needs to take prompt and fundamental measures to put its finances in order.
It could do worse than to look at the ways it resolved its desperate plight of the mid-1970's.
When he took office nearly a year ago, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani inherited a perilous situation.
The local economy had never fully recovered from the recession that followed the 1987 stock market crash, nor had successive administrations dealt with the city's structural deficit -- the chronic imbalance between revenues and recurring expenses -- in a serious fashion.


Obsession


Tenant Complaints Activate Heavy State Machinery
WHEN tenants file a complaint with New York State government over services or conditions in their rent-regulated apartment or building, they probably do not say to themselves, "This is a complaint-driven system."
That is the expression state officials use to describe the task of handling complaints within the Office of Rent Administration of the Division of Housing and Community Renewal.
It is a thankless task, though government may not be displeased with that, since it positions itself as an intermediary force in what many New Yorkers seem to believe is an inherent antagonism between tenants and landlords.


Season of Cantatas, Carols and Chorales
MUSIC as evergreen as the decorations will be performed throughout the holiday season in Connecticut's churches, and there will be dancing in the aisles in at least two of them.
Today at 4 P.M., St.
Luke's Roman Catholic Church in Westport will present its annual Christmas Concert featuring soloists, a chamber orchestra, choir and 12 dancers from 10 to 17 years old.
They are all students at the Academy of Dance in Westport, and once the segment was introduced with a single number four years ago it has continued to expand by popular demand.


Four Years for House?
To the Editor:
Congress will consider a constitutional amendment limiting the period for which its members may serve, probably to 12 years.
Why not an increase in the term of members of the House of Representatives to four years?


Helping Immigrants Adjust to U.S.
A record 19,000 immigrants from the former Soviet Union arrived in New York City last year, and UJA-Federation of New York helped many of them find homes and jobs.
Working with the New York Association for New Americans and more than 60 other member agencies, UJA helped immigrants learn English, find work, get counseling and receive proper health care.


IN GAZA, PEACE MEETS PATHOLOGY
There are 22 Arab countries in the Middle East, with combined land areas hundreds of times larger than Israel and many with enormous wealth from oil.
The plight of the Arabs in overcrowded Gaza is due almost entirely to the deliberate policies of these Arab countries to keep Palestinian Arabs in overcrowded refugee camps rather than allowing them to be absorbed into their societies.
In contrast, Israel has absorbed a million Jews expelled from Islamic countries.
After the gulf war, Kuwait expelled 600,000 Palestinian Arabs with no reaction from the Arab world or the West.
GEORGE E. RUBIN New York


RECORD BRIEFS
Reich: 'Tehillim,' 'Three Movements'  Schonberg Ensemble and Percussion Group The Hague conducted by Reinbert de Leeuw ("Tehillim").
London Symphony conducted by Michael Tilson Thomas ("Movements").
Elektra Nonesuch 9 79295-2; CD.


Dec. 11-17: Parcel of Death; Serial Bomber Kills Again, And the F.B.I. Is Stumped
The package bomb that killed Thomas J. Mosser last weekend was crafted by hand from metal, wood, explosives and a few other easily obtainable materials, but it was not crude.
Its trigger was so expertly made that it withstood the jostling of a cross-country trip through the Christmas mails without exploding.
It arrived at the Mosser home in North Caldwell, N.J., looking harmless.
When it did detonate, Mr.
Mosser, 50, a prominent advertising executive, became the latest victim of a mysterious serial bomber who has made 14 other attacks since 1978, killing one other person and wounding 22 in a case hundreds of Federal agents have vainly tried to solve.


Jill Weinstock, Jonathan Ames
Jill Alison Weinstock, a daughter of Marilyn and Leonard I. Weinstock of Jamaica Estates, Queens, is to be married today to Jonathan Rexford Ames, a son of Irene and Jay B. Ames of Dix Hills, L.I.
Rabbi Robert S. Widom is to officiate at Temple Emanuel in Kings Point, L.I.
The bride is an associate at the law firm of Newman Tannenbaum Helpern Syracuse &amp; Hirschtritt in New York.
She graduated from the University of Pennsylvania, and she and the bridegroom received law degrees from Yeshiva University.
Her father is of counsel to Schwartzman Weinstock Garelik &amp; Mann, a New York law firm.
Her mother, who is retired, was a special education teacher at the School of the Holy Child in Old Westbury, L.I.


Monkey Business
IT WAS 1936, THREE YEARS AFTER PROHIBITION ENDED, WHEN MAYER Quain, a corpulent, mustachioed Turk from Izmir, bought the bankrupt Hotel Elysee at 60 East 54th Street for $473,000.
Quain had made a New World fortune in good-time ventures.
He peddled candy outside theaters, ran an an ice-cream-cone factory and held a near monopoly on nightclub hatcheck concessions.
Nightclubs were his passion, and Quain lavished his attentions on the little boite he created in the hotel's lobby.
The bar opened at 10:30 in the morning and, thanks to his after-dark connections, it was three deep when Quain came to close things down at 4 A.M.


Spies &amp; Thrillers
Here's one you won't be able to put down once you start reading.
It might be described as an eco-thriller, but PICTURES AT 11, by Norman Spinrad (Bantam, paper, $12.95), is much more than that.
It is about television, dedicated eco-terrorists, ambition.
It is about the way television can manipulate a vast public.
It is about weak politicians and sleazy television station owners.
It is about the way the F.B.I. and the C.I.A. operate.
It is about a formidable agent who seems to have more power than the President of the United States.
It is grimly funny, satirical, lively, sad and penetrating.
And it is beautifully written.
A group of terrorists takes over a small television station in Los Angeles.
These men, plus one smart and charismatic woman, call themselves the Green Army Commandos.
They demand that KLAX-TV broadcast their messages to the world.
If not, they are prepared to blow themselves up, together with the station personnel.
They also say that the explosives planted around the building contain plutonium dust that will make Los Angeles uninhabitable for a very, very long time to come.


Ready to Party To Help Fight AIDS
A gala preview of the Robert Altman film "Ready to Wear," at the Ziegfeld, Dec. 12.


Four Tiny Isles Off Mozambique
LAST September, Johannesburg, where I was living, was still reeling from its iciest winter in 30 years.
I was cold.
So I packed minimal clothing and some books, and headed for a vacation on the Bazaruto Archipelago, a group of Mozambican islands spread across 230 square miles of the Indian Ocean off the coast of Africa.
Mozambique had endured four centuries of Portuguese domination and two decades of civil war, which ended in 1992, but the islands were insulated by geography from much of the mainland's tortured history.
The archipelago is made up of five islands, one so small it registers on few maps.
The other four -- Bazaruto, Benguerua, Magaruque and Santa Carolina -- are lightly populated, and each contains one lodge for tourists.


The Nation: Matter Over Mind?; The Curse of Living Within One's Genes
THIS is a banner era for the champions of nature over nurture, who think we have much less say over our impulses, our body shape, our choice of mates, our careers, even our attempts at heroism and generosity, than our wistful imaginations might have fancied.
Scientists recently announced, for example, the discovery of a gene that makes mice get fat and that very well could be involved in some types of human obesity.
The most notorious book of 1994, "The Bell Curve," by Charles Murray and Richard J. Herrnstein, insists that there is a strong heritable component to intelligence, and that, sorry, some ethnic groups have a greater share of the bright stuff than others.
Researchers have put forth candidate genes for homosexuality, aggression and criminality, which for most of this century were attributed largely to social conditions and upbringing.
And a steady stream of books about the evolution of behavior -- most notably "The Moral Animal" by Robert Wright -- argues that the hand of natural selection urges powerful men to dump their aging wives for nubile beauties, women to fixate on the thickness of a man's wallet, and both sexes to consider dallying in adulterous waters.


Biggie Smalls, Rap's Man of the Moment
STANDING ON THE CORNER OF 125th Street and Eighth Avenue in Harlem at 3 A.M. one recent Sunday, the 6-foot-3, 280-pound rapper Biggie Smalls appeared not so much large but larger than life.
Moments before, he had finished the third of three sold-out concerts at the Apollo Theater and, wearing the same brown leather Army jacket and pants and beige Kangol cap he had worn on stage, he then slipped out the back door of the theater.
At the corner, he relaxed in the middle of a circle of friends but soon heard his own voice booming back at him from the radios of cars as they stopped at or cruised slowly through the intersection.
As the rapper surveyed the scene, he found himself being inadvertently saluted by his own song "Big Papa."


Business School Publishing
To the Editor:
"Publishing Venture Teaches Harvard a Hard Lesson" (Oct. 30) understated Ruth McMullin's contributions to starting the newly formed Harvard Business School Publishing company.
She was a key contributor to the platform we needed for growth, and I was glad to have her support when I assumed the duties of president.
The change in leadership last March was not a "turning point," but simply another step in a series of steps by which the business school will continue to extend its educational reach through its publishing programs.
In addition, the article reports a rumor that grossly overstates Ms.
McMullin's severance package.
LINDA S. DOYLE  Boston, Nov. 9  The writer is president and chief executive of Harvard Business School Publishing.


Can Reich Again Rescue the Bills?
Frank Reich cemented his image as the "comeback king" when he guided Buffalo from a 32-point third quarter deficit to a 41-38 overtime victory against Houston in a first-round American Football Conference playoff game following the 1992 regular season.
Now, the Bills are asking Reich to perform another miracle -- revive their playoff hopes and steer them to a fifth consecutive Super Bowl appearance.
The first step for Buffalo (7-7) begins this afternoon at Rich Stadium against the New England Patriots (8-6), winners of five straight and one of the hottest teams in the A.F.C.
If the Bills can win this game, and their one next Saturday against Indianapolis, they are guaranteed a wild-card spot.


S. G. Jacobson, Louis M. Bell
Stephanie Gay Jacobson, the daughter of Sherry R. Jacobson of Fresh Meadows, L.I., was married last evening to Louis Michael Bell, a son of Susan Amster and Stephen A. Bell, both of New York.
Rabbi Brooks Sussman officiated at Temple Israel of Lawrence, L.I.


Nets' Encounter Is Too Ugly for Words
One player said he was sure no one had ever experienced anything like it in their professional careers.
Another simply called it "ugly," a post-game locker-room scene gone terribly amok.
No one will say who was involved, but five Nets players, who would not speak for attribution, say a shouting match among players nearly escalated into a physical confrontation after the club's 94-93 loss to the Minnesota Timberwolves on Friday night at the Target Center in Minneapolis.


Churches Abuzz With Holiday Sounds
MUSIC as evergreen as the seasonal decorations will be performed today and throughout the holiday week in Westchester churches, and in two instances the celebration will be extended to its historic conclusion in January, at the time of Epiphany and Twelfth Night.
"Daniel and the Lions," a re-creation of an 800-year-old French music-drama will be presented at the Reformed Church in Bronxville on Jan. 6 at 8 P.M.
Directed by Frederick Renz and performed by the Early Music Ensemble of New York and a large cast of actors and singers, the piece retells the Old Testament story.


Ready for Red Storm: Jaspers Go to 6-0
The Manhattan Jaspers, who are headed for a highly anticipated showdown with St.
John's, proved they were ready for prime time last night with a 73-71 victory over Eastern Michigan at Draddy Gymnasium in Riverdale.
Ted Ellis led Manhattan (6-0) with 26 points and Jason Hoover rose to the occasion -- literally -- in the final seconds to help the Jaspers knock off an Eastern Michigan (4-1) team that had entered the game fresh off a 92-76 upset of 20th-ranked Wisconsin.


Accessible Broadway: The Cheap Seats
Tickets to Broadway shows may cost more than $65 apiece these days, but reduced-price tickets for many shows are available at the two TKTS booths -- the main one in Duffy Square at 47th Street and Broadway, and the satellite booth at 2 World Trade Center.
Tickets for selected shows are sold, beginning at 3 P.M. on the day of performance for evening shows and at 10 A.M. for Wednesday and Saturday matinees, noon for matinees on Sunday.
Tickets cost either 50 percent or 75 percent of box-office prices, determined by the producers, plus a $2.50 service charge per ticket.
Only cash and traveler's checks are accepted.
Information: (212) 768-1818.


Song and Dance in 'Haarlem Nocturne'
WHATEVER "Haarlem Nocturne" is, it is not what it means to be.
In its beginnings, the show was a moonlighting act for Andre De Shields, then starring in the original cast of "Ain't Misbehavin'." Three female backup singers joined him on Manhattan's cabaret circuit.


A Softer Norma Desmond
To the Editor:
As Gloria Swanson's intimate friend for more than 35 years and her archivist during the last two years of her life, I can recall our talks about "Sunset Boulevard" and her hopes for a musical production  [ "A Glittering 'Sunset' Rises," Nov. 27 ] .
She herself tried in vain to produce a stage musical of the film, and even completed a book and score with the songwriter Richard Hughes.
It was to be called "Boulevard."


At Princeton, Computer Quizzes Save Time for Coursework
When it comes time for students in some Spanish classes at Princeton University to take quizzes, they don't need to worry about finding a pencil, or getting to class on time.
In fact, they don't even need to leave their own dorm room; instead they log onto a computer wherever and whenever it is convenient -- even at 3 in the morning.
The computer quiz program, conceived by a Spanish professor, Margarita Navarro, is designed so that students can be tested at any time during a specified 24-hour period.
Each student's score is immediately tabulated and sent to their professor's computer, cutting down on class time devoted to quizzes as well as the tedious work of grading.


POSTINGS: New Downtown Study; An Updating For Brooklyn
The Regional Plan Association, which 11 years ago created a blueprint that spurred a surge of development in downtown Brooklyn, has been called upon again to create an outline for the area's growth.
H.
Claude Shostal, president of the R.P.A., said that that much has changed in downtown Brooklyn since the association's last plan was released in 1983.


Laurie J. Bilik, Robert Romano
Laurie Joy Bilik, a daughter of Lyn R. Bilik of Tamarac, Fla., and the late William Bilik, is to be married today to Robert Michael Romano, a son of Dr.
Frank J. Romano of Brooklyn and the late Bertha R. Romano.
Judge Stanley Sporkin of the United States District Court for the District of Columbia is to perform the ceremony at the Larchmont (N.Y.) Yacht Club.
The bride is the president of Global Human Resources, a management consulting concern, and an associate professor at the College of Insurance, both in New York.
She graduated from Skidmore College and received master's degrees in philosophy from New York University.
Her father owned a construction company in Brooklyn. .


Death and Interactivity
To the Editor:
Even as I scour the computer magazines and general-interest press for advice about the best Macintosh software to introduce to my almost-3-year-old, something is nagging in the back of my mind.
At first I wasn't sure what it was, but after reading Steven Levy's assessment of Mercer Mayer's "Grandma and Me," on CD-ROM by Living Books ("From Page to Screen With Critter and Elf," Nov. 13), I know what the problem is.


Kansas Has Ranking, But Indiana Is Home
Indiana 80, Kansas 61
Indiana figures it can't out-shoot everybody, so the Hoosiers' plan for winning focuses on when they don't have the ball.


Dec. 11-17; Rail Routes Written on the Wind
Hiawatha will no longer roam the land, the Silver Meteor and Silver Star will grow rare, the Desert Wind will blow less often and the romance of the rails will diminish, as Amtrak shrinks itself drastically early next year to trim expenses to fit revenues.
Cuts announced last week amount to more than 20 percent of the train miles, and concentrate heavily on long-distance routes.
The Empire Builder -- perhaps the last non-pejorative use of the word empire -- will run between Chicago and Portland only four times a week in most of its route.
The Hiawatha, 13 trips a day from Chicago to Milwaukee, will cease altogether.
The Montrealer from Washington through New York to Montreal will end in New York.


SNOB APPEAL
Regarding Holly Brubach's Style feature "Snob Appeal" (Nov. 27): Most Americans think of "snobs" as top-drawer folk who look down on everyone else, but in England the word meant just the opposite when it was coined as university slang.
The royal, noble and aristocratic students were called "nobs" (nobilitas), whereas the ordinary students who slavishly imitated the nobs were contemptuously christened snobs (sine nobilitas).
LEON HARRIS Dallas


WHAT'S NEW YORK THE CAPITAL OF NOW?
What kind of values are you supporting when you cite, in your feature on talent, the achievement of an artist who "married and divorced four times in six months, then hung the resulting documents in a gallery"?


THE SHROUD
I share Max Frankel's concern that Americans will become more isolationist as a result of commercial television networks' failure to cover world news (Word &amp; Image: "The Shroud," Nov. 27).
But there is hope for the true world-news junkie.
I found an alternative to television many years ago -- the shortwave radio.
Recently, I've been rewarded with top-flight reporting on Bosnia by way of Canada, Germany and Austria.
I can listen to stations in 30-plus nations (in English) in a week and get breaking news and follow-ups to old stories that the commercial networks often miss.
JOHN E. KRAFT Las Vegas, Nev.


Too Slow on Airline Safety
The Federal Aviation Administration's belated crackdown on commuter airlines and on small planes that may be hazardous in icy weather conditions will upset holiday travelers whose flights have suddenly been canceled.
The inconvenience is unwelcome, but five fatal crashes on major and regional airlines this year have heightened public concern about air safety and moved the F.A.A. to put safety first -- at last.
The response of the agency to new aviation hazards has too often been sluggish.
Following the first of two recent crashes on the American Eagle commuter airline, the agency this month ordered airlines not to fly their ATR turboprop aircraft in icy conditions, or when such conditions are forecast.
Just three weeks earlier it had rejected a National Transportation Safety Board recommendation to do just that, ordering instead that pilots take extra precautions.


A Christmas Goose With Fat Removed
ROAST GOOSE is a traditional Christmas dish in many parts of Europe, usually served with a stuffing of sage and onions.
But like Long Island duck, goose contains a great deal of fat, and this can make the stuffing rather greasy.
I cannot imagine serving Christmas goose without stuffing, however.
So I found a way to prepare this bird that not only eliminates much of the fat but also makes the flesh particularly tender and moist and the skin very crisp.


Karen Rosenthal, R. G. Ebrahimoff
Karen Beth Rosenthal, a daughter of Suzanne S. and Irwin M. Rosenthal of Jamaica Estates, Queens, is to be married today to Reuben Gabriel Ebrahimoff, a son of Sylvia Ebrahimoff of Kew Gardens, Queens, and the late Nissim Ebrahimoff.
Rabbi Eliyahu Ben-Haim is to perform the ceremony at Temple Beth El in Cedarhurst, L.I.
The bride, 34, is of counsel to Black &amp; Katz, a New York law firm, where she specializes in matrimonial law.
She graduated from George Washington University and received her law degree from Yeshiva University.


This Week's Numbers
Last
Consensus
Period
Estimates
(I.D.E.A. INC.)
Wed.
Treasury statement, Nov., $ bils.
-32.5
-30.0
Thur.
G.D.P., 3d qtr., pct. chg.
3.9
3.9
Weekly jobless claims, thousands
323
325
Fri.
Durable-goods orders, Nov., pct. chg.
-1.0
1.0
Personal income, Nov., pct. chg.
1.4
0.4
Tues.
Federal Reserve Open Market Committee meets
Wed.
Two-year Treasury note auction
Thur.
Bundesbank Council meeting
*4*Five-year Treasury note auction
Fri.
Minutes of Nov. 15 F.O.M.C. meeting released


Carolynn A. Cellary, Richard Reynolds
Carolynn Anne Cellary, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
George L. Cellary of Tenafly, N.J., was married yesterday to Richard Henry Reynolds, a son of the late Mr. and Mrs.
Edward H. Reynolds.
The Rev.
Robert Seckinger, a United Methodist minister, performed the ceremony at the home of the bride's parents.
Mrs.
Reynolds graduated from Marymount University in Arlington, Va.
She received a postgraduate certificate in the arts of Asia and a master's degree in archeology from the University of London.
Her father owns Ford Fasteners Inc., a manufacturer and importer in Hackensack, N.J.


Wall Street; Getting the Lowdown on Brokers
WONDERING about the integrity of your stock broker?
Better get going on your research.
In the securities industry, there's a move afoot to restrict the amount of dirt the public can get on a broker.
The campaign isn't immediately apparent: Even as the industry is quietly pushing the idea of denying public access to information about pending actions against brokers, it is trumpeting proposed improvements in the Central Registration Depository (C.R.D.) data bank that tracks brokers.


Better Work Than Welfare. But What if There's Neither?
Mary Ann Moore surrenders her short night of sleep at 3:30 on a Thursday morning and lifts herself, already dressed, from the dining-room couch she uses as a bed.
She rubs her face, groans and moves toward the bathroom, but lands on one of the three small children sharing a mattress at her feet.
"Ooo-wee, sor-ree," she says, then creaks down a dark hallway.
For a moment, the night is still.
The Chicago wind rattles the loose tenement windows, and a grumbling muffler echoes down an otherwise-silent street.
Then Moore slips a Kenny G disc into her oversize player, and a struggle ensues between his soothing sounds and her early-morning flurry.
She flicks on the bare bulbs that glare from the ceiling and marches into the room of her 14-year-old son, Marchello.
"Get your butt up," she says.


When Rights Conflict In Adoption Cases
The civil rights issues surrounding adoption, as explained in the article "Vote Nears on Changes in Adoption Law" (Nov. 20), present a classic dilemma.
Proposed changes in New Jersey's adoption laws that will allow adoptees searching for information about their birth parents access to previously sealed adoption records ask us to choose whose rights are more important, and in each case we are faced with the proverbial Catch-22.
Should the rights of an adoptee to look for birth parents supersede birth parents' rights not to be found?


Lost Innocence


Family Agency Budget Cuts Would Hamper City Plans
To the Editor:
Sharon Wilson's dramatic account of her life and her road to recovery, because of the Family Enrichment Program, makes a strong argument in favor of the family and youth services that Mayor Giuliani has proposed cutting ("The Human Face of a Budget Cut," Nov. 20).


The Tips Line Joins Gun and Nightstick in Fighting Crime
On Sept. 4, a day after thieves fled with $1.25 million in jewelry from Tiffany's, detectives from the New York Police Department's Crime Stoppers Unit fielded a call.
"Teddy did it," the anonymous caller said.


Bookshelf
CHRISTMAS IN THE BIG HOUSE, CHRISTMAS IN THE QUARTERS.
By Patricia C. McKissack and Frederick L. McKissack.
Illustrated by John Thompson.
Scholastic. $17.95. (Ages 8 and up) Using a wide range of historical documents, the authors have imagined the holiday season of 1859 on a fictional Tidewater Virginia plantation, complete with songs, recipes and political topics of conversation appropriate to the Big House and the Quarters.


As Intel Offends Customers, Will Apple Benefit?
CALL it the case of the market that didn't react.
As in a famous Sherlock Holmes mystery, the most important clue about Intel's status as a Wall Street darling was the fact the stock barely budged in the days after it was disclosed -- by a customer and not by Intel -- that its fanciest computer chip had problems with long division.
The complacency about Intel reflects the Wall Street consensus that the personal computer boom will continue for many years and that the winners are and always will be Intel and Microsoft, which got rich by dominating important aspects of the I.B.M. compatible personal computer market.
So even as the jokes began circulating about Pentium chips, including a report that its new chip would be called the Repentium, shareholders did not sell.
Even I.B.M.'s conclusion that Pentium problems were worse than admitted did little to harm Intel's share price.


Julia L. Larson, John Hamilton 3d
Julia Lynn Larson, the daughter of Sarah B. Larson of Chatham, N.J., and Dale A. Larson of Laurel, Md., was married yesterday to John Andrew Hamilton 3d, the son of Elise Wiarda and Mr.
Hamilton Jr., both of Washington.
The Rev.
Dr.
George Chorba 3d officiated at the New Vernon (N.J.) Presbyterian Church.


Now Playing in the West End: DKUK
"I NEVER understand why people drink decaffeinated coffee," said Adrian Brown, an actor, poet and, lately, coffee maker at London's bright new DKNY store, dismissing the beverage as a pointless Manhattan obsession.
"Personally, I'm in a state of permanent exhaustion."
Actually, like all the young staff members at the store, Donna Karan's newest, Mr.
Brown is so garrulous and energetic as to make most shoppers feel annoyingly run-down.
The DKNY salespeople brim with enthusiasm, so full of delight are they at being part of the new Karan experiment.
"Everyone is very happy," said Teresa Boston, who sells suits and dresses.
Even the giddiness seems imported.
"We're on a happy vibe."


A Recovering Restaurantgoer Strikes Back
Q. WHAT does a real New Yorker make for dinner?
A.  Reservations.


Viewpoints; Take My Pentium Chip. Please
Ever since the Intel Corporation announced in November that its Pentium computer chip made some mistakes in arithmetic, the jokes have multiplied.
These were found on the Internet.
Question.
How many Pentium designers does it take to screw in a light bulb?


'The Nutcracker' Is No 'Sleeping Beauty'
"THE NUTCRACKER," TO quote Humphrey Bogart's gloss on Shakespeare in "The Maltese Falcon," is "the stuff that dreams are made of." Every child at heart can identify with the ballet's little heroine, with her growing pains and fantasy image of happiness.
Only the tone-deaf will fail to be won over by a magical score, written by Tchaikovsky for the 1892 premiere, that has found its way into many a home (and television commercial).
What better introduction to ballet than "The Nutcracker"?
And certainly as the New York City Ballet has proved since 1954 with George Balanchine's sublime version, a "Nutcracker" with musical and choreographic integrity is a first-rate spectacle.


Healing Process -- A special report.; While Congress Remains Silent, Health Care Transforms Itself
In the two years that Congress wrangled over health care before quashing proposals for fundamental change, private market forces were acting on their own to transform the country's medical system dramatically.
Indeed, cost cutting, intensive competition and the growing role of large, profit-seeking corporations in health care escalated some of the very trends that many members of Congress said they most opposed, like limitations on the choice of doctors.
Among the milestones American health care reached without fanfare during 1993 and 1994 were these:


Helping Immigrants Adjust
Getting to know America can be difficult for immigrants.
The UJA-Federation of New York helps finance a traffic tour for would-be cabbies, above, and helps immigrants from the former Soviet Union learn English, find work and receive health care.
In Brooklyn and Queens, Catholic Charities recruits volunteers to deliver social services to the poor.
Articles on page 73.


A New Attraction on Tourist Maps: Chinatown East?
A tourist center opened in Chinatown recently. And not on Mott or Canal Streets.
It opened its doors several blocks to the east, on Pike Street, near East Broadway, and the placement tells a lot about how far Chinatown has come on that side of the Bowery and where it seems to be heading.


Showalter Walks Tightrope On Replacement Players
Buck Showalter has three prospective spring training rosters that he constantly tinkers with at his home in Pensacola, Fla., three rough sketches guessing which players might actually be playing baseball for the Yankees in Fort Lauderdale in February.
The lists are highly speculative, but Showalter studies them anyway to prepare for the unknown.
The first list is the preferred list.
It includes the manager's potential roster if the labor dispute is settled and major league players return.
It contains the nucleus of players who helped New York to the premier record in the American League in 1994 before the season ended on Aug. 12.


Sports of The Times; Seeking Enlightenment at -- Where Else? -- the Y
CAN'T anybody explain it to me?
The sporting world is falling apart.
There was no World Series.
There is no hockey season.
Pro basketball is on a one-year truce.
The baseball owners are threatening to truck in desperadoes next spring.
It gets uglier all the time.
The worst part is, I don't understand it.
I see so much money flying around in sports that I keep assuming the owners should balance their budgets without forcing athletes to accept a salary cap.
But I'm willing to concede I'm locked into my own point of view.


Q and A
Through the Panama Canal
Q.
Are there any boats that one can take locally to transit the Panama Canal?
I truly want to make a canal passage but do not want to be involved in a 7-day or 10-day cruise. -- Ted Ayers, Pensacola, Fla.


Gulf War Syndrome
To the Editor:
A possible cause of the Persian Gulf war illness suffered by veterans that you did not mention in your Dec. 14 news article were the experimental drugs given to United States troops.


Koeun Kim, Michael Lee
Koeun Kim, an international conference translator based in Seoul, South Korea, was married there last Saturday to Michael Hong Seok Lee, a documentary film director and producer, who is also based in Seoul.
The Rev.
Sun Hee Kwak officiated at the Somang Presbyterian Church.
The bride, 26, graduated from Seokang University in Seoul and received a master's degree in languages and interpretation from the Sorbonne in Paris.
She is the daughter of Sun-Hee Kim and Brig.
Gen.
Jin-Kyu Kim of Seoul.
Her father, a former brigadier general in the Korean Army, is an educational counselor who places Korean students in schools in the United States and Europe.


Lifting Spirits in 'A Christmas Carol'
ACROSS the Hudson, Marley and helping ghosts are flying high on special effects.
Scrooge flies, too.
On earth he can seem lost in the crowd of 100, ever subservient to the rule of a $12 million production at the Paramount at Madison Square Garden.
Here at the McCarter Theater, Marley is aloft all right, over the bed in solo flight, with chains of old-style rust unframed by a neon horizon.
And Scrooge is always spottable.
He's the sad, hunched, stingy man skulking about in the white nightshirt, heading a supporting cast (which numbers fewer than half a hundred) instead of supporting a prevailing spectacle.


Thrillers With Soul
To the Editor:
In his letter regarding Caryn James's essay on horror films, David Wechsler  [ Letters, Dec. 4 ]  applauds the lack of heart in "The Silence of the Lambs," ignoring the fact that it is the very human bond between Dr.
Lecter and Clarice Starling that elevates the story above most thrillers. (Lecter: "I have no plans to call on you, Clarice. The world's more interesting with you in it.")


Dec. 11-17: Gore Another's Ox; Looking to Trim Benefits, Federal Panel Fails
As Democrats and Republicans rushed to voice their support for tax cuts last week, they all but ignored a plea for fiscal responsibility from a bipartisan Federal advisory panel headed by Senator Bob Kerrey.
Many economists and Government officials agree with the panel's conclusion: that the cost of commitments made through programs like Social Security and Medicare exceeds the money available to pay for them over the next 35 years.
But the problem grows gradually, and Americans are unwilling to deal with such problems until a crisis is at hand, Mr.
Kerrey said.
So the panel concluded its work without recommending a package of specific changes to slow the growth of these programs.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball Eastern League  TRENTON THUNDER -- Named Ken Macha manager; Rico Petrocelli hitting coach; and Al Nipper pitching coach.
Japanese Central League


Hall's Points Come in 3's
The operative word around the Seton Hall locker room these days is relaxed.
As in a more relaxed atmosphere under the new head coach, George Blaney.
"There's a feeling when you're shooting, you know if you miss one, you're not coming out of the game," said Danny Hurley.


Chancellor and Mayor: So Similar in Goals, So Why So Far Apart?
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani's opinion of Schools Chancellor Ramon C. Cortines first began to sour within days of the Mayor's inauguration, Mr.
Giuliani says, following a private meeting at Gracie Mansion in which the Mayor asked Mr.
Cortines to assess the school bureaucracy.
In City Hall's version of the meeting, Mr.
Cortines at first told the Mayor, "The bloat is far worse than anyone understands," and he pledged to dismiss thousands of employees at the Board of Education headquarters.
But he reversed course days later, drastically reducing the number of employees he was willing to let go.


Commitment, Not Crumbling
The article "New Haven Ballet Finds a Home" (Dec. 4) described how the New Haven Ballet was apparently left homeless two years ago when their space in the "crumbling St. Paul's Church" was condemned.
As rector of that St.
Paul's Episcopal Church (now the newly merged congregation of St. Paul and St. James), I write to correct the impression of a crumbling church leaving its folks homeless.
The main sanctuary was indeed closed due to a major repair and restoration process undertaken by the congregation when the ancient roof trusses were found to be unsound.


Streetscapes/33 Union Square West; Islamic/Venetian Sliver, With Minaret
NOT many buildings are designed by anarchist architects.
That is just one reason to look up at John Edelmann's fanciful, Islamic sliver that is the Decker Building, at 33 Union Square West.
The other is that a new owner converting the 1893 structure to apartments may restore the long-missing minaret on one of the most flamboyant skyscrapers in New York's history.


No, the F.D.I.C. Hasn't Decided to Conduct a Sting Operation
To the Editor:
Your article about the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation's efforts to determine if inaccurate or misleading sales practices are being used by banks that sell mutual funds (Business Day, Dec. 14) gives the impression that the F.D.I.C. program is a clandestine sting operation designed to catch criminals in the act.
This is not the case.


Juggling the Needs of Taxpayers and the Poor
KNOWN as Rose City, Norwich was a flourishing industrial center at the turn of the century.
But when Beverly Goulet, who was born and raised in Norwich, returned to her home town in 1985 after a 20-year absence, she was shocked to find empty storefronts and factory buildings and lines of people outside the welfare office.
She watched as members of her family lost their jobs.
"I was taken aback when I returned to a community where the urban centers had been thriving," Ms.
Goulet said.
"The factories went South, and we never replaced those manufacturing jobs. It should be no surprise that we're in this situation now. We haven't invested in human capital in this country for a great many years. Now people are looking for quick fixes."


Guide to New York Dining
UPPER EAST SIDE  ALLA SERA ++ 1481 First Avenue, near 77th Street; (212) 717-5131; all major credit cards; $.
A friendly little Italian restaurant with good pastas and grilled entrees. ($25 and Under: 9/16/ 94)  ARCADIA *** 21 East 62d Street; (212) 223-2900; all major credit cards; $$$$.
Anne Rosensweig's inventive and refined American cuisine is served in a lovely setting. (Review: 4/22/94)  ARIZONA 206 *** 206 East 60th Street; (212) 838-0440; all major credit cards; $$$.
The best southwestern American cuisine in town. (Review: 2/ 19/93)  AUREOLE *** 34 East 61st Street (212) 319-1660; all major credit cards; $$$$.
Elegant setting, excellent service and Charles Palmer's provocative fare. (Review: 5/10/91; article: 4/18/ 93)  AZZURRO ** 245 East 84th Street (212) 517-7068; all major credit cards; $$.
Stylish Sicilian fare is served amid antique maps and nautical charts. (Review: 11/1/91; revisited: 10/28/94)  BARKING DOG LUNCHEONETTE ++ 1678 Third Avenue, at 94th Street, (212) 831-1800; no credit cards; $.
Cheap eats, Southern-style. ($25 and Under: 2/12/93)  BORDER CAFE


INSIDE
Loyalty to Mandela
Despite noise from contentious interest groups, most South Africans are devoted to Nelson Mandela.
Page 3.
Leads That Go Nowhere
Thousands of leads have led Unabom investigators to the same agonizing place: a dead end.
Page 49.


Cabdriver's School Benefits to Public Hardly Need Explaining
The tour bus lurched down Columbus Avenue and stopped near Lincoln Center.
Mor-Sourang Mbaye and his companions stared silently ahead, unimpressed.
Later, when they passed the World Trade Center, not a single neck craned skyward.
But when the bus approached a no-taxi zone, Mr.
Mbaye and the other passengers murmured appreciatively.
And when it hit gridlock on Third Avenue, they leapt to their feet for a better view.


U.S. Demands North Korea Release Helicopter Crew
The United States today demanded the safe release of two American pilots whose Army scout helicopter strayed into North Korean airspace and was either shot down or forced to make an emergency landing.
Defense Secretary William J. Perry said in a statement that the Pentagon did not know the condition of the two crew members, although North Korean news agencies reported that the pilots had been taken into custody for questioning.


Two Distinct Visions In a Singular Show
FATE BROUGHT LUCIE RIE AND Hans Coper together, but their skills made them the preeminent British potters of the late-20th century.
Both fled Nazism for England -- she from Austria in 1938, he from Germany a year later.
They met in 1946, when Coper applied for a job at her London studio.
And while their objects always differed, they shared the same kiln for more than a decade, and their works are often displayed together.
Now this is the case again, in the first major exhibition of their pieces in the United States, "Lucie Rie/Hans Coper: Masterworks by Two British Potters," at the Metropolitan Museum of Art through May 21.
The focus of the show is on their distinct styles: Coper's hefty Cycladic forms seem carved of stone, reflecting his early ambition to become a sculptor; Lucie Rie's elegant vessels are as precisely shaped and richly glazed as the modernist ceramics of 1920's Vienna, where she was born, studied and worked before emigrating at the age of 36.


Beloved Cartoon Characters Star in Two Shows
THE playful ring to Walt Disney's name, plus his chubby signature with a circle over the i instead of a dot, seems of a piece with his accomplishment.
In contrast, the name of Vladimir Tytla evokes Gothic novels set in Transylvania, while his personality seems to have been as complex as the Disney cartoons he worked on were straightforward.
At least, that is the impression conveyed by "Vladimir Tytla: Master Animator," one of the two cartoon shows now at the Katonah Museum of Art here.
As the guest curator, John Canemaker, relates in the catalogue, Tytla's mother was born in Poland, the daughter of an architect with aristocratic pretensions; his father, a Galician, served in the Austro-Hungarian cavalry.
The two immigrated to the United States because their families, practicing different forms of Catholicism, were opposed to the match.


A Lesson in a Virtue
To the Editor:
Milton Petrie's generosity once so impressed the students in my fourth-grade class that they wrote to him, and he subsequently asked me what projects my pupils were interested in ("He Sure Didn't Take It With Him," Nov. 20).
Told that they had raised $2,000 for scholarships for children whose fathers had been killed in the failed attempt in 1980 to rescue American hostages in Iran, he donated $10,000 and made plans to meet the children.


Ms. Cavanagh, Mr. Wilkins Jr.
Elizabeth Anne Cavanagh and Jon Sharp Wilkins Jr., law students at Yale University, were married yesterday in East Northport, L.I.
The Rev.
Richard Hoerning performed the ceremony at St.
Anthony of Padua Roman Catholic Church.
The bride and the bridegroom, both 24, work at the Yale Law Journal, she as an executive editor and he as a managing editor.
They graduated summa cum laude from Dartmouth College, where they were elected to Phi Beta Kappa.
The bride, who is keeping her name, is to begin a clerkship in June with Judge Louis F. Oberdorfer of the United States District Court in Washington.
In September, the bridegroom is to become a law clerk to Judge J. Frederick Motz of the United States District Court in Baltimore.


The World; Demons in Russia's Mind Arise Again -- in the Flesh
ONCE again, in Chechnya, Russia finds itself in conflict with its own demons -- the embodiment of particular national fears and anxieties in what remains a multiethnic empire.
Nationality is not only a category in the Soviet passports that Russians still use as a means for racial and ethnic identification, it is a set of assumptions and ambivalent feelings in Russian heads.
In confronting the latest Chechen challenge to Russian sovereignty and reopening a Caucausian conflict that has simmered for 150 years, the Russians are also reopening a Pandora's box of feelings about the restive minorities in their midst, from Muslim Tatarstan to Yakutia in Siberia.


Yellowstone's Subtler Rites Of Passage
WHEN my classmates and I were finishing high school in a New York suburb after World War II, it was the custom for boys to drive to Yellowstone in the summer, to experience life west of the Hudson.
The Grand Tour the year we graduated was scheduled to include Deadwood, S.D., a magnet less for the graves of Calamity Jane et al. than for its legalized prostitution.
Deadwood's brothels probably outpolled the tattooed lady at Coney Island as an object of the prurient interest of American males just barely too young to have gone for soldiers.
Deadwood became irrelevant because on the meandering route, Missoula, Mont., proved rowdy enough to permit the graduates to shed their burdensome virginity.
Upon their return home, in the interests of science I listened to male classmates' varying accounts.
These were as unhelpful as the medical book a friend's physician brother had lent us.
There had to be more to it.


Are There Books in Our Future
THE GUTENBERG ELEGIES The Fate of Reading in an Electronic Age.
By Sven Birkerts. 231 pp.
Boston: Faber &amp; Faber. $22.95.


Katherine Reed, Ko W. Maruyama
Katherine Hyde Reed, the daughter of Kit Reed and Prof.
Joseph W. Reed of Middletown, Conn., was married there yesterday to Ko William Maruyama, the son of Marianne and David Halpin of San Francisco.
The Rev.
Michael F. Suarez performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at the Wesleyan University chapel.
Mrs.
Maruyama, 27, is a development assistant at Peters Entertainment, a film company in Burbank, Calif.
She graduated from Georgetown University.
Her father is a professor of English and American studies at Wesleyan.
Her mother is a novelist.


Will Lebow Path Circle Onassis Reservoir?
This fall, two months after Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis died, the Central Park Reservoir was renamed to honor the former First Lady, who used to don her sunglasses and jog around it.
Now, a move is afoot to rename the 1.57-mile dirt path on which she trod after another well-loved New Yorker who ran there, Fred Lebow.
Lebow, the creator of the New York City Marathon, died in October, and the legions of runners he inspired have been hunting for ways to memorialize him.
One, a bronze sculpture, is still seeking a home.
The pathway idea belongs to Luise Greiner, who works as an administrator in Manhattan.
She tried to have the path renamed before Lebow died.
But, Ms.
Greiner said, Parks officials said that they could not name anything after a living person.


Armed With Integrity
THROUGH 45 YEARS of cold war rivalry, the superpowers tried only half-heartedly to develop chemical and biological weapons, reserving their true enthusiasm for the perfection of nuclear combat.
Had either side gotten serious about germ attacks or nerve gas, the world might now be bristling withanother means of destruction just as deadly as nuclear weapons yet far less containable.
Broad perceptions of national interest, not philanthropy, fostered this restraint.
But if any individuals deserve credit for shaping those perceptions, a President and a professor did more than most.
In an act of unusual statesmanship, Richard Nixon in 1969 renounced biological warfare, just in time to avert an arms race based on the genetic engineering techniques that were invented a few years later.


Judge Rejects Revised Plan For a Shelter
Turtle Bay residents fighting a 130-bed homeless shelter have accused the city of using a kind of bait-and-switch tactic, revising its plan after it was approved.
And a State Supreme Court Justice has agreed.
Justice Charles E. Ramos said the city's failure to consult the community after revisions "was a flagrant disregard for the fair share criteria and contrary to the concept of a participatory democracy those criteria were intended to foster."


Those Knocking, Unheeded, at U.N.'s Doors Find Champion
Arvol Lookinghorse, a leader of the North Dakota Sioux community called Lakota Nation, is searching for a way to gain international recognition for his culture and religion.
He is not alone.
In Hawaii, Mililani Trask is seeking a forum where the voice of an indigenous nation calling itself Ka Lahui Hawai'i can be heard.
In Taiwan, Tibet, Kosovo and the Chittagong Hills of Bangladesh, among the Crimean Tatars, the Albanians in Greece and the Ogoni of Nigeria, people are perennially frustrated by knocking fruitlessly on the doors of the United Nations and its agencies, asking for a hearing.


IN GAZA, PEACE MEETS PATHOLOGY
Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin's recent meeting with President Clinton, aimed primarily at persuading Clinton to expedite the transfer of promised funds to the P.L.O., underscores one of the many ironies of today's complex and paradoxical Middle East landscape so accurately described by Michael Kelly.
Much of Hamas's success is due, at least in part, to its ostensible involvement in expanding civil services.
The United States and the world community have been reluctant to provide Arafat with large sums of long promised financial aid because they fear that the funds would be squandered by the likes of Nabil Abu Batta and other "tin-pot" sheiks who will strong-arm the money handlers for their own political gains.
Nevertheless, without the promised funds, Arafat has no chance of success, and the simmering pot of hatred and vengeance will boil over with the help of Hamas and other extremist elements.
Perhaps the greatest irony is that Israel, by default, has become one of the most ardent Arafat supporters.


Bradford Morse Is Dead at 73; Held High-Ranking U.N. Posts
Bradford Morse, a former Republican Congressman from Massachusetts who rose to become a top-ranking United Nations official, died yesterday at his home in Naples, Fla.
He was 73.
The cause was heart failure, his family said.


Ernst Home Center Inc.(ERNS,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 29


Engle Homes Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Autistic Youth Held in Death Of an Infant
An autistic teen-ager was charged with murder yesterday in the death of his infant nephew, who the police said was apparently thrown from a window of their family's fifth-floor apartment on the Upper West Side.
The police said that the 5-month-old infant, Stanley Holmes, died on Saturday while only he, Michael Holmes, 17, and Michael's brother, James Bacchiano, 34, were home.
They said that about 5 P.M., while the older brother was distracted by a telephone call, Michael carried the infant to the bathroom and threw him out the window.


Manor Care Inc.(MNR,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Both a Sendup and an Embrace, Based on Bergman Again
After four decades in the American theater, Harold Prince certainly hasn't lost the power to astonish.
This season alone he has generated more than his share of wonder, plying his fabled, high-powered stage wizardry to turn the 67-year-old "Show Boat" into a galloping commercial success on Broadway.
Now with "The Petrified Prince," the musical that opened last night at the Joseph Papp Public Theater, the director is causing jaws to drop anew, though more in consternation than delight.
This misbegotten production, with songs by Michael John LaChiusa and a book by Edward Gallardo, poses a searing question not unknown in the annals of musical comedy or, for that matter, in Mr.
Prince's own oeuvre: how can so much talent, so much flashy stagecraft and so much conspicuous effort come to so very little?


G.O.P. Vows to Make Cuts In Spending Before Taxes
Trying again to outflank President Clinton, the four Republican members of Congress in charge of budget and tax policy said unequivocally today that they intended to cut Federal spending before they cut taxes next year.
House Republicans said that to enforce fiscal discipline they would begin slashing spending next month and would use the savings to pay for tax cuts to be passed later in the year.


National Data (NDC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Colts Halt Dolphins at the Brink
Colts 10, Dolphins 6
Dewell Brewer returned a punt 75 yards for a first-quarter touchdown yesterday and the Colts defense held Miami at the 2-yard line in the closing minutes as the Colts won at home.


Giants Are Good Enough to Look Forward to Christmas Eve
There is a feeling among the Giants that maybe -- just maybe -- destiny is opening a small crack in the playoff door for them.
This whole crazy post-season dream of a team that at one point lost seven straight games is picking up steam, like a boulder rolling down a hill, especially after today's bizarre victory over Philadelphia.
You can't stop gravity.
You can't stop dreaming.
And lately, you can't stop the Giants.


What 'Three Sheets to the Wind' Means
To the Editor:
While seeking to remind us of the origins of phrases and expressions, you perpetuate a faulty connection in "The Gizmo May Die, But Its Spirit Babbles On" (The Week in Review, Dec. 11).


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  Eastern League
TRENTON THUNDER -- Named Ken Macha manager; Rico Petrocelli hitting coach; and Al Nipper pitching coach.
Japanese Central League
YAKULT SWALLOWS -- Signed Tom O'Malley, infielder.


Shutdown Reactors
To the Editor:
Accompanying a Dec. 13 article on plans to halt construction of three nuclear reactors was a graphic on reactors shut in the United States in the last 40 years.
You omit six that have been shut since 1989: Shoreham in New York, Yankee Rowe in Massachusetts, Fort St.
Vrain in Colorado, Trojan in Oregon, and Rancho Seco and San Onofre One in California.
HARVEY WASSERMAN  Senior Adviser, Greenpeace U.S.A.
Columbus, Ohio, Dec. 14, 1994


Television
WHERE have you gone, Tyrone Power?
For the most part, he has gone the way of Coop, Bette, Spence, and Edward G.: He's now playing on the "classic movie" cable channels, either American Movie Classics, the well-established, highly successful purveyor of movies from Hollywood's golden age in the 1930's, 40's and 50's, or its new rival, Turner Classic Movies.


Westchester Trial Illustrates The Burdens of Jury Service
David Alven was the first to speak up on the morning that he and several other haggard jurors asked Judge Joseph Goldstein to join them in the jury room.
Their complaint was simple enough: the grueling four-month civil trial was beginning to take its toll.
"I saw my doctor on Friday," Mr.
Alven, 58, a stockbroker, explained to the judge.
"And I've been under treatment for years and years for high blood pressure. He did a double take and said: 'My God, what's going on here? This is the highest it's been in years. Are you under stress?' "


Johnson Opts for the Easy Life and Remains With TV
Jimmy Johnson will remain a made-for-television event.
He chose broadcasting over coaching today in a staged announcement that began tongue-in-cheek but turned sincere.
In essence, Johnson, who authored the Dallas Cowboys to consecutive Super Bowl titles, has enjoyed his new hobby: vacation.
The Philadelphia Eagles romanced him with an offer of close to $4 million and he held exploratory talks with the Tampa Bay Buccaneers, but Johnson has apparently grown less of a workaholic in his old age.


Before We Open That Genetic Pandora's Box; Unnatural Selection
To the Editor:
With "Adventures in the Germ Line" (Op-Ed, Dec. 11) John Maddox, editor of the journal Nature, has made a valuable contribution toward a more rational debate about the potential benefits and pitfalls stemming from the revolution in genetics.


No Headline
"I just don't want to see us once again send out tax cuts with a lick and a promise and a hope that the spending cuts are coming later. We somehow never quite seem to get to them." -- SENATOR BOB PACKWOOD, incoming chairman of the Finance Committee.  [ B10:5. ]


AAR Corp.(AIR,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Sighs of Relief, With Hopes For Amity From Civic Leaders
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani's decision to back away from his intense challenge to the tenure of Schools Chancellor Ramon C. Cortines was applauded last night by public officials and civic leaders who expressed relief and said they hoped the two leaders would begin working together for the sake of the school system.
Strong support for the embattled Chancellor was voiced by all the officials, and some urged the Board of Education to offer him a contract longer than the one year suggested by the Mayor to give him more time to reform the troubled school system and a measure of insulation against scorching political attacks like those of the Mayor.


Patents; Money Mazes, Pet Carriers, 'High-Five' Machines and Other Inventions for the Gigt-Jaded
IT'S the gift-giving season again, and plenty of inventors have dreamed up gadgets they hope will find their way onto someone's wish list.
Here are just a few ideas that recently won patents: A Microwave Glove To End Ice Scraping
In freezing climates, many people spend mornings scraping and brushing windshields or waiting for a car's defrost system to melt ice on windows.
If you have a microwave, however, Robert M. Gibbon's invention may make de-icing nearly instantaneous.


Privatizing City Services
As hard budget times force deep cuts in New York City government, Mayor Rudolph Giuliani is beginning to turn over an array of services now handled by municipal employees to private companies.
"Privatization," judiciously administered to foster healthy competition between city workers and the private sector, holds real promise for improving services and for saving money.


Knicks Are AWOL Again in Portland
A loss is one thing.
Embarrassment is another.
For a second consecutive game, the Knicks were throughly outplayed, and afterward their emotions ranged from concerned to fiery.
Turning the game into a rout in the second half, the Portland Trail Blazers cruised to a 111-87 victory tonight at Memorial Coliseum, sending the short-handed Knicks (12-9) to their third defeat in four games.
The Knicks were without Charles Oakley (dislocated right toe) and Anthony Bonner, who flew to St.
Louis this afternoon because his father suffered a stroke.
But after beating the Sacramento Kings to start this three-game road trip, the Knicks have been overmatched.
They suffered a 21-point loss to the Phoenix Suns on Friday and followed that with tonight's futile effort.
It was another anemic offensive showing for the Knicks, who averaged just 88.7 points on the road trip.


Rookie Season, Veteran Reason
It is not because he is the rookie Prince of Hoops here that Jason Kidd has a stool to plop down on in the shower room after games.
No, the Mavericks' rookie guard has another reason for sudsing while sitting: He is usually so bone-tired, so powerfully fatigued, so throbbing with aches from elbows to toes following a basketball game that he can hardly stand.
On the court, Kidd, at 6 feet 4 inches and a solid, running-back-like 205 pounds, appears wired to the best batteries.
He moves faster while dribbling a basketball than most guys can run without the ball.
He will come flying to block a shot on an opponent's fast-break layup and makes some people, like his coach, Dick Motta, wonder if he just "didn't fall from the roof."


Minister Brings Anti-Gay Message to the Spotlight
When it comes to rules and regulations that confer equality on homosexuals, the Rev.
Louis P. Sheldon is a tireless crusader.
Against them.
And given the new conservatism of Congress, he may have more influence over such measures than many gay or lesbian leaders have.


Editorial Notebook; Berlin's Biggest Bargain
Americans who temporarily set up house in Berlin experience a succession of shocks, some pleasant, some otherwise.
Certain prices seem outlandish; laundry detergent and postage stamps are four times the U.S. price.
Even so, there are bargains: excellent French table wines at $3 a bottle, smoked salmon at half the American price, the best British marmalade at $2 a jar.
But then this is what you would expect, since the European Union has slashed tariffs.
What you do not expect, and what is a most agreeable surprise, is the excellence of Berlin's public transit system.
It is one of the best urban transport bargains in the world.


Rules of the Game: A special report.; Behind the Glow of Jackpots, Scrutiny for a Lottery Giant
As New Yorkers lined up in October for a crack at a $72.5 million lottery jackpot, there was already one winner: the Gtech Holdings Corporation, king of the government-run lottery business.
Gtech (pronounced JEE-tek) provides computer systems and equipment to 27 of the 37 states that run games like Lotto and also operates lotteries in 28 other countries.
Receiving a few pennies for each lottery ticket bought, its coffers swell.
During the jackpot week, for example, Gtech's take in New York alone was $1.12 million.


Serve Slimmer Portions
To the Editor:
With people eating out more than ever before, coupled with a widespread philosophy in restaurants that more is better, it is little wonder that obesity in America is on the rise (editorial, Dec. 11).
Large portions may attract certain customers.
But if the claim of restaurateurs that very little comes back to the kitchen is correct, perhaps that is because of the upbringing that taught many of us the moral obligation of cleaning our plates.


Central Tractor Farm &amp; Country Inc.(CTFC,NNM) reports earnings for Year to Oct 20


Watching Out for 'Panic Shoppers'
Marian Goodman is waiting for the men to arrive.
"The men'll be here," said the 40-year-old assistant store manager at Bloomingdale's flagship in midtown Manhattan, accelerating past a snow-white Clinique counter toward trays of ties layered like freshly caught fish.
"You see the panic shopper. You can see the look on their faces."


Sports of The Times; For This Little Big Man, 'It's Just Being a Football Player'
DAVID MEGGETT had leveled a linebacker, but now it seemed that Dave Brown's pass was floating to him.
Floating slowly.
Too slowly.
"The ball took so long," the Giants' little big man was saying after yesterday's bizarre 16-13 victory over the Eagles.
"I had a thousand things going through my mind."


Alon Shevut Journal; Thank the Lord for Loopholes: Sabbath Is Safe
When the Israeli Army finally reopened the Cave of the Patriarchs shrine in Hebron this fall, eight months after the massacre there, it installed new metal detectors to make sure no one could smuggle in weapons.
That may be a fine security measure, some Orthodox rabbis said.
But what about the sensibilities of observant Jews?
What if it is the Sabbath and their keys or belt buckles touch off alarms as they walk through the detectors?
Inadvertently, they will have closed an electrical circuit, and on the Sabbath that is an action forbidden them as an extension of a biblical injunction against lighting a fire.


Bramalea Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


People
*
Jeffrey L. Johnson, executive vice president and director for business development at Wells Rich Greene BDDP, New York, was named executive vice president and managing partner-account, succeeding Mark D. Abrams, who left to join a client, the Chase Manhattan Private Bank, New York, as a marketing executive.
Mr.
Johnson will join Frank Sampogna, a co-managing partner at Wells Rich, on the Chase and Dun &amp; Bradstreet accounts. *
Michael Neiss was named to the new position of senior vice president for media research and technology at Lowe &amp; Partners/SMS, New York.
He was previously associate media director at Margeotes Fertitta Donaher &amp; Weiss, New York.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Athletic-wear companies count on the sideline cameras to catch elusive football players.
IF it has been one of the winter's most competitive advertising battles, it was actually decided last May.
Then, five athletic-wear companies put big-money bets on 66 football players who would neither perform in television spots nor pose for print advertisements: they would simply be themselves on the sidelines of National Football League games.
For example: are the cameras panning to quarterback Dan Marino of the Miami Dolphins as he talks to the coaches?
Mr.
Marino is wearing a hat made by Logo Athletic Inc.
Is Emmitt Smith of the Dallas Cowboys doing a post-game interview on the field?
He's wearing a jacket made by Starter Sportswear Inc.


Winnebago Industries(WGO,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 26


ABM Industries(ABM,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


AEP Industries(AEPI,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Corrections
Because of an editing error, a front-page article last Monday about ways in which the Republican-controlled Congress might restrain the Securities and Exchange Commission misstated proposals by the S.E.C. for financing its operations out of its own income.
The commission has sought to keep only the fees it generates, not both its fees and its fines.


Management Shifts At Two Agencies
Two big agencies are making changes in top management.
At the New York office of BBDO Worldwide, Tom Carey, president and chief operating officer, and Ted Sann, vice chairman and chief creative officer, were promoted Friday to co-chief executives, effective Jan. 1.
Mr.
Carey, 50, and Mr.
Sann, 49, will assume those duties from Phil Dusenberry, 58, who will continue as chairman at BBDO New York and vice chairman at BBDO Worldwide.


Shiloh Industries(SHLO,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


CLASSICAL MUSIC
The Christmas Music Of Medieval Hungary  Anonymous 4 St. Michael's Church
The rage for all music early and sacred continues unabated, to judge from the turnout for Anonymous 4's program of Christmas music from medieval Hungary, "A Star in the East," on Friday evening.
Then again, some listeners, perhaps recalling the group's lush and varied program of medieval carols and motets last year, or its recording of the same material, "On Yoolis Night," seemed nonplused by the more austere diet of chant and rudimentary counterpoint here.


Engle Homes Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Yanks' Ausanio Is Ailing
Joe Ausanio has torn cartilage in his right knee and might also have anterior cruciate ligament damage that would cause him to miss at least six months after he slipped on ice while running near his home in Lake Katrine, N.Y., last Monday.
Dr.
Stuart Hershon, the physician for the Yankees, wanted to perform arthroscopic surgery tonight, but the 29-year-old reliever balked because he wants a second opinion from Dr.
Norman Scott of the Knicks this week.
If the Yanks lose Ausanio to reconstructive surgery, they would be losing a capable right-hander from their bullpen.


Dart Group Corp.(DARTA,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Despite Work, Repairs Are Still Undone At A-Plant
The backlog for maintenance on aging, leak-prone tanks filled with highly radioactive nuclear bomb waste at the Hanford nuclear reservation is about 1,500 projects, despite huge investments of time and money to catch up, a report by the General Accounting Office says.
In a report scheduled to be released today, the accounting office says the Department of Energy, which owns Hanford, and its contractor, a subsidiary of the Westinghouse Electric Corporation, have cut the backlog at the complex in Washington State from a recent high of 1,992 items.
But the report says Westinghouse managers said that for work to be done in a timely manner the backlog should not exceed 300 projects.


American Greetings Corp.(AGREA,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


A Houston Suburb That Said No Thanks to a Veteran Democrat
The parking lots of the two big supermarkets in this Houston suburb are crowded with mini-vans and four-wheel-drive wagons like Jeep Cherokees and Ford Explorers.
The average selling price of a house is $100,000.
People brag about the high achievement test scores in the local schools and the low crime rate.
And they are pleased that the new Representative for the Ninth Congressional District lives in town.


4 Branches of the Comedy Family
Mort Sahl, who was puncturing political balloons when Bill Clinton was still a toddler, has come up with one of the year's wittiest definitions of the difference between a liberal and a conservative.
As the last of the four comedians to appear in "Comedy Tonight," a variety show that opened at the Lunt-Fontanne Theater last night, Mr.
Sahl takes a Swiftian look at abortion rights, entitlement programs and political persuasions and finds inhumanity everywhere.
"Liberals are against anybody being born," he announces.
"But if you are, they'll take care of you from the cradle to the grave. Conservatives don't mind your being born if you promise them you won't live long enough to collect your Social Security."


Bramalea Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


In Punjab, Disclosures Stir Anxiety
When a small plane plunged into a Himalayan gorge on a foggy day last summer, killing the Governor of Punjab State, nine members of his family and the three-man crew, India was shocked.
At 68 years of age, Surendra Nath, the Governor, was at the pinnacle of a career that began with 30 years in the police and included top assignments in several of India's most troubled states.
With him on the plane, on a weekend trip to a mountain resort, were his wife, a son and a daughter, each with their spouses, and four grandchildren.


Drug-Assisted Stardom
Prince Albert of Monaco, a member of the International Olympic Committee, rates a gold medal for urging that athletes who use drugs to enhance their performance be banned from the Olympics for life.
The problem has reached such disturbing proportions that only the most draconian penalties for all concerned -- athletes, trainers, coaches, physicians and national sports federations -- can deter further abuses.
The latest outrage is the drug-enhanced performance of the Chinese women's swimming team, which surged from nowhere a few years ago to overpower all other rivals.
The Chinese took four silver medals at the 1988 summer Olympics in Seoul, four golds and five silvers at the 1992 Olympics in Barcelona, and 12 of 16 gold medals at the world championships in Rome last September.
Their dominance was so swift and so awesome that it immediately raised suspicions that they used drugs to build up muscle power.


Anita Zahn, 91, Teacher of Dance
Anita Zahn, a longtime teacher of the technique and dances of Isadora Duncan and her sister Elizabeth Duncan, died on Nov. 3 at her home in Grants Pass, Ore.
She was 91.
The Daily Courier in Grants Pass announced her death.
It said Miss Zahn had moved to Oregon in 1986 from New York City, where she had begun teaching at the Isadora Duncan School of Dance in 1924.


World Economies


Why Refugees Wait
To the Editor:
In "Fleeing Bosnia, Blocked by America" (Op-Ed, Dec. 9), Julie Mertus says that "a U.S. bureaucrat's daily allowance" has put "on hold" the lives of 32 Bosnian refugees in Pakistan awaiting resettlement in the United States.


INSIDE
3 Dead in Shootout
Three people were killed and two police officers were wounded in a gunfight in Queens that began as a robbery attempt.
B3.
Pilot Died in North Korea
The White House toughened its stance over North Korea's downing of a helicopter, saying that one of the pilots had been killed.
Page A8.
White House Mystery
Investigators reviewing the shooting at the White House early Saturday said they had no clues to why the four rounds were fired.
Page B9.


For Yeltsin, Chechen Has Only Scorn and Defiance
Dressed in battle gear and bathed in television lights, Dzhokhar M. Dudayev, the Chechen leader, summoned reporters to a bunker beneath his presidential palace tonight to hear him spurn President Boris N. Yeltsin's latest attempt to resolve the conflict in Chechnya.
Mr.
Dudayev read from a telegram Mr.
Yeltsin sent him today that urged him to agree to peace talks in Mozdok in North Ossetia.


In Iran, the Tortured Is Now the Torturer
To the Editor:
According to your article on Iran's partial opening of its prisons to inspection (Dec. 11), Assadollah Lajevardi, chief of the prison system, said there are "no more than eight political prisoners in Iran," and the "treatment of prisoners is no longer disciplinary, but educational."


Bridge
The Connecticut Bridge Association has announced that one of its major annual tournaments will be named in memory of Jeffrey Feldman, a brilliant player who died on Wednesday at the age of 32. (For information about the memorial service tomorrow and the memorial fund, telephone Judy Prescott at (203) 372-1297.)
During a two-year fight with brain cancer, Feldman continued to win victories, including a successful defense of his Governor's Cup title in Darien in October.
In May, he scored his third consecutive victory in the Eastern Regional Morning Knockout Teams, aided by the diagramed deal.


Only Six More Shopping Days . . .


Fast Start Provides The Edge For Steelers
Somebody had to score first.
Somebody had to play catch-up.
And that is what Cleveland versus Pittsburgh was in essence here this afternoon -- two strong-willed defensive teams often shaky on offense.
Two defensive clubs where the furnace always burns red-hot.
So, get the lead.
Then bear down on defense.
Force the other team to make plays against your strength.


Dividend Meetings
Following is a partial list of dividend meetings this week:  MONDAY  Continental Homes Hldg Raytheon Co Rochester Tel Corp TUESDAY  ABM Inds Inc Bankers Tr NY Corp Citizens Corp CPC Intl Inc Sun Cmnntys Inc Upjohn Co WEDNESDAY  Ameritech Corp  Federal Paper Brd Inc Puerto Rican Cem Inc Rochester Gas&amp;Elec Corp Shopko Stores Inc Stone &amp; Webster Inc THURSDAY  La Quinta Inns Inc Hyland Group Inc


Before We Open That Genetic Pandora's Box
To the Editor:
It is accurate but potentially misleading to suggest, as John Maddox does in "Adventures in the Germ Line" (Op-Ed, Dec. 11), that experiments to replace sperm-forming cells of mice will only have application to "the improvement of commercial livestock."


Last-Gasp Negotiations Are Scheduled to Start
Like the managers of their teams, when their teams are playing, most members of the owners' negotiating committee will take the last four days before impasse and salary-cap implementation one at a time.
Last-gasp talks begin today in Washington, but only one member of the six-person committee will attend the session.
Dave Montgomery of the Philadelphia Phillies will join the top two management lawyers, Chuck O'Connor and Rob Manfred, and a couple of club financial officers.


Micron Technology Inc.(MU,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 1


A Show for Harding (Alias Mrs. Claus)
TONYA HARDING, in her first public performance since the Winter Olympics, will skate two days before Christmas dressed as the wife of SANTA CLAUS.
The performance, scheduled for Friday afternoon at the DOROTHY HAMILL Skating Center in suburban Portland, Ore., will have a Christmas theme.
CINDY STARR, publicist for Tonya's Golden Blades fan club, said yesterday that the skater will perform alone and then with the local pairs instructor PATRICK PAGE for her debut pairs performance.
Tentative plans call for Harding to dress as Mrs.
Claus.


Material Sciences Corp.(MSC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Confusion Reigns Before the Giants Do
When Philadelphia kicker Eddie Murray took the field with 2 seconds left, getting himself ready to perhaps tie the game with a 44-yard field goal, he looked over toward the Giants players.
According to them, he began to talk trash.
"He said he was going to beat us just like he did last year," said one Giants player.


As Deng Fades, China's Leaders Tighten Grip on Power
With a new wave of repression and nationalistic bluster on issues like trade and national defense, China's Communist Party leaders are asserting their authority in ways that Western diplomats attribute to the further decline of Deng Xiaoping's health.
As Mr.
Deng's health has deteriorated through the fall, the Chinese leadership has handed down long prison sentences to dissidents, increased overall security in Beijing and threatened trade retaliation against the United States if Washington cracks down on the rampant pirating of compact disks in China.


Dart Group Corp.(DARTA,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


METRO DIGEST
GIULIANI CHANGES COURSE ON CORTINES
Acknowledging that he will not be able to block the reappointment of the Schools Chancellor, Mayor Giuliani called for Ramon C. Cortines to be granted a contract for only one more year.
He said the contract should be tied to the condition that the Chancellor show measurable progress in four areas of management and budgeting.
Mr.
Giuliani's decision to support the Chancellor's reappointment represented a reversal of his efforts over the last week to convince Mr.
Cortines to step down on his own.
A1.


New Tactic In Bid for Santa Fe
Determined to beat back the Union Pacific Corporation's hostile takeover bid for the Santa Fe Pacific Corporation, Burlington Northern Inc. and the board of Santa Fe Pacific revised their merger deal yesterday -- and added a twist.
The new proposal, which the companies said would be valued at $3.8 billion, includes an offer to buy $1.26 billion in Santa Fe Pacific stock -- or about one-third of its shares -- directly from shareholders in a sweetened merger bid.





An Experimental Rite of Passage
The common wisdom is that only a painter knows when a painting is finished.
A choreographer might feel the same about a dance work.
But if viewers have any say in the matter, then Elisa Monte's latest premiere for the Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater could stand more work or at least some revision.
"Mnemonic Verses," which the troupe presented on Friday night at City Center (131 West 55th Street, Manhattan), is at best an impressionistic rite of passage in the choreographer's mythical Asia Minor, and at worst a sketch of an idea that dwindles dauntlessly into a murky mess.
In all, it appears irrelevant to a title about triggering memory.


Biomet Inc.(BMET,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Best Buy Co.(BBY,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 26


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
Federal authorities are examining the way Gtech Holdings plays the lottery game as a domestic provider of computer systems and equipment and an operator of foreign lotteries.
The scrutiny follows investigations that led to the indictment on kickback charges of a former Gtech executive who played a central role in winning state contracts for the company.  [ Page A1. ]


If PBS and Newt Gingrich Go Head to Head
What does the Gingrichizing of America portend for public broadcasting?
The new Speaker of the House has already called for its privatization as part of the pulverization of the public trough, and the debate to come may occupy Jim Lehrer even after Robert MacNeil privatizes himself.
Newt Gingrich's intention seems to me misconceived, but difficult though it may be for friends of public broadcasting to get these words out, the man has a case.
To begin, why is it necessary, say in the New York City area, for a half-dozen public stations to carry so many of the same programs?
Public broadcasting remains a set of uncoordinated, chronically uncooperative fiefdoms.
If Mr.
Gingrich can bring order to a messy system by sorting out educational programming, community programming and national programming and by reducing duplication (without eliminating competition), who, besides the people who may have to find more productive jobs, will object?
PBS would be doing itself a favor if it came up with a comprehensive and comprehensible reorganization plan.


Crown Books Corp.(CRWN,NNM) reports earnings for 13wks to Oct 29


Clinton Expected to Appoint Head for Policing Program
The Clinton Administration is preparing to name the police chief of Hayward, Calif., Joseph E. Brann, to manage a prominent criminal justice program intended to put 100,000 police officers on the nation's streets, his associates said today.
Mr.
Brann is expected to be named on Monday afternoon at a Justice Department ceremony that could include President Clinton.
His presence would underscore White House efforts to portray the Administration as tough against crime at a time when Republicans in Congress are making similar efforts.
Justice Department officials would not comment on the appointment.


An Algonquinite's Screen Anthology
"A great many people have come up to me and asked me how I manage to get so much work done and still keep looking so dissipated," Robert Benchley wrote in "How to Get Things Done," a short essay that typifies his self-deprecating, breezy insouciance.
"My answer is 'Don't you wish you knew?' and a pretty good answer it is, too, when you consider that 9 times out of 10 I didn't hear the original question."
That tone, which was second nature to Benchley on the page, also made him famous on screen.
As the star and writer of nearly 50 short films (as well as a minor player in many full-length features), he perfected a tongue-in-cheek comic persona that still has its influence today.
Benchley's idea of the seemingly instructive little lecture, which is in fact hilariously unhelpful, has become a staple of late-night television comedy.
And Benchley himself, as played so appealingly by Campbell Scott, is a haunting figure in "Mrs. Parker and the Vicious Circle," a film that excites strong interest in the Film Forum 2's current three-part series of Benchley shorts.


Ernst Home Center Inc.(ERNS,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 29


ABM Industries(ABM,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Corrections
An article on Friday about plans to close a jail in Brooklyn misidentified the president of the Correction Officers Benevolent Association.
He is Stan Israel, not Stan Isaacs.


Unflappable Author Of Blueprint for Future
How will George E. Pataki design his government?
Well, just look, he says, holding up the homemade flowchart he has sketched on the back of a memo, a blur of blue lines and boxes crisscrossing and interconnecting and descending down the page like a pyramid.
The scribbling, while enthusiastic, is indecipherable except for a single word framed by a rectangle at the very top: "ME."
If Mr.
Pataki is at all uncomfortable occupying the top box in New York's flowchart, he is not showing it these days.
In a 45-minute interview last week in his State Senate office, where he was packing books and discarding files, he seemed unfazed by the political challenges that lie ahead and eager to begin the Republican reformation he has promised.


Skyline Corp.(SKY,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Cabletron Systems Inc.(CS,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Accounts
*
Hunter Fan Co., Memphis, to McKinney &amp; Silver, Raleigh, N.C., to handle its account, which had been at Young &amp; Rubicam Chicago for the last 13 years.
Billings were estimated to exceed $6 million. *
Scott Paper Co., Philadelphia, to J. Walter Thompson New York, to handle the broadcast media buying portion of its account in North America and Mexico, previously handled by various agencies.
Thompson New York has the creative and print media buying duties for several Scott brands with billings estimated at $9 million.


Caring at Home, and Burning Out; Tending for Infirm Relatives, Guardians Suffer Themselves
The women sat in a circle and talked about the pains that age and disease had forced on their lives.
There was the sleeplessness, the sore backs and the strained shoulders.
All felt dogged by anxiety.
They would pass days, they said, sometimes weeks, depressed.
But it was not their own aging bodies that had caused them such aching and fatigue.
Each woman said she had become exhausted -- mentally, physically and emotionally -- caring for a husband weakened by age and illness.


Western Publishing Group Inc.(WPGI,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 29


AAR Corp.(AIR,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Chaparral Steel Co.(CSM,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


A Strange Bond: Officer's Widow And Air Hijacker
They are in their mid-40's, two American women whose destinies were fused in an instant 18 years ago by a terrorist's bomb.
One, Kathleen Murray, is the widow of a New York City police officer who was killed while trying to deactivate the bomb.
The other, Julienne Busic, is the convicted airline hijacker whose husband built the fatal device.


CHRONICLE
NANCY KISSINGER, the wife of HENRY A. KISSINGER, the former Secretary of State, is being treated for an intestinal problem at New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center.
Mrs.
Kissinger was admitted to the hospital on Dec. 11 for treatment of intestinal problems and was in stable condition yesterday, said Carolyn Migliori, a hospital administrator.
Mr.
Kissinger and Nancy Maginnes were married in 1974, when he was Secretary of State and she was a foreign policy aide to her longtime employer, Nelson A. Rockefeller.
She directed international studies for Rockefeller's National Commission on Critical Choices for America.
The Kissingers live in Manhattan and Kent, Conn.


Bulgaria's Communists Claim Parliament Election Victory
The former Communist Party took an early lead in parliamentary elections here today and its leader claimed victory.
The party leader, Zhan Videnov, a 35-year-old former Communist official who is likely to be the next Prime Minister, said his party would reverse the country's deep economic decline.


A Chorus of Young Voices Fills a Passion for Singing
Some nights, when her mother works late, Monique Terc wanders through their apartment and sings.
As Monique, an eighth grader, cooks dinner and does her homework, she performs from a diverse repertory: French carols, Latin processionals, African lullabies.
The clear notes echo through the rooms, and suddenly they do not seem so empty.
"It doesn't matter if I'm alone or in front of an audience," said Monique, who is 13.
"Singing relaxes me and puts me in a good mood."


Corrections
A report by Bloomberg Business News on Saturday, about the troubled investment portfolio of Orange County, Calif., misstated remarks by a United States bankruptcy trustee, Marcy Tiffany.
Ms.
Tiffany said she was describing an argument made by others when she said that local government agencies might be entitled to recover their investments in the fund before Orange County could recover any money.
She did not assert that state law required such a procedure.


Colorized Films Losing Appeal
If movie buffs wonder where the yellow went, they can probably thank the surging popularity of movie channels like American Movie Classics.
The mad dash to "colorize" classic black-and-white movies appears to be over.
Though some studios, like Fox, are still colorizing some films, Turner Broadcasting System, which led the charge and issued colorized versions of about 120 movies, has shut down its colorizing operation.


Suing New York City
The amount of money paid by New York City each year to settle lawsuits and other claims against it continues to set records.
The bill for fiscal 1994 is estimated to be 20 percent higher than 1993, with the cost of personal injury judgments up 23 percent.
The city spent twice as much money in fiscal 1994 defending itself and paying claims against it as it did running the entire Parks Department.
The Giuliani administration would like the State Legislature to limit awards for pain and suffering, but any change is vigorously opposed by personal-injury lawyers and some consumer protection groups.
Alan G. Hevesi, the City Comptroller, has proposed making individual city agencies accountable for the cost of claims against them.


Eagles Can Find Nothing to Rely On
For 15 years, Eddie Murray of the Eagles has been one of the National Football League's most reliable kickers.
He had made 76 percent of his field goals, including 2 today, 67.5 percent of his attempts from 40 to 49 yards, including 1 today.
So when Murray lined up on the last play against the Giants for a 44-yard attempt that would have tied the score, the odds were that he would succeed.
Instead, the kick drifted wide left.
So the Giants escaped with a 16-13 victory that kept their tentative playoff hopes alive and the Eagles lost their sixth straight game and their last chance to make the playoffs.


AEP Industries(AEPI,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


One Aviator Was Killed in North Korea Helicopter Downing
The White House announced today that the pilot of an Army helicopter that was shot down or forced down in North Korea was killed in the incident, while the second pilot was alive and apparently unharmed.
"This tragic loss of life was unnecessary," President Clinton said in a statement today, taking a tougher tone toward the Korea than American officials did when they first learned of the incident late Friday.


Carter Is in Sarajevo, But No Progress Is Reported
Former President Jimmy Carter stepped into the war-torn vestiges of Sarajevo today, proclaiming that Bosnia was a "fine country" but saying nothing to suggest that he could resolve its deep divisions.
After 32 months of a war that has scarred Europe, Mr.
Carter's visit indicated a new level of American involvement to end the conflict.
But his arrival came on a day in which a mortar fired from Serbian positions hit the Holiday Inn, home to many journalists and diplomats, and sniper fire wounded a French United Nations soldier outside the hotel.


Great Atlantic &amp; Pacific Tea Co.(GAP,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 3


Central Tractor Farm &amp; Country Inc.(CTFC,NNM) reports earnings for Year to Oct 20


Young Looks To Stay On
If the Giants will have him -- which they almost definitely will -- General Manager George Young will probably stay at least two more years in his current role, according to several people familiar with the situation.


Fretter Inc.(FTTR,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Chic by H.I.S. Inc.(JNS,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 5


In 'Cry, the Beloved Country,' A New Voice From the Past
James Earl Jones recalls that when he was offered the lead in a new film adaptation of Alan Paton's classic, "Cry, the Beloved Country," his first reaction was: "Wouldn't that be a museum piece?"
The novel, after all, is so old that it predates the official racist order called apartheid.
It has been for decades a staple of high school and college reading lists.
It has been dramatized twice before, as an acclaimed Broadway musical and a rather less-acclaimed film.
What can it possibly say afresh to a world that has watched South Africa's convulsive rebirth as a democracy?


Commercial Intertech Corp.(TEC,N) reports earnings for Year to Oct 31


'Lemons' Issued To Advertisers
Advertisers including the Walt Disney Company and the R. J. Reynolds Tobacco Company were among those singled out for criticism at the 10th annual Harlan Page Hubbard Lemon Awards ceremony last week, sponsored by the Center for Science in the Public Interest.
The "awards" are designated by a group of national consumer, environmental and health advocacy organizations, which name marketers that created what the groups consider the year's "most misleading, unfair or irresponsible" campaigns.
They are named for Harlan Page Hubbard, a 19th century adman who helped create sensationalist methods to peddle patent medicines.


Best Buy Co.(BBY,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 26


Werner Enterprises Inc.(WERN,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Reporter's Notebook; Observing a Man's Daily Transformation From Suspect to Defense Lawyer
When Colin Ferguson arrives at Nassau County Court, he is accompanied by blaring sirens, flashing red lights and bomb-squad dogs sniffing for explosives.
Mr.
Ferguson, who is accused of killing six people and wounding 19 others on the Long Island Rail Road a year ago, is paranoid and fears for his life, his lawyers say.


Saving What Fire Did Not Destroy


Corrections
An article on Dec. 8 about a teaching assignment on journalistic ethics at the University of California at Berkeley for Jeffrey Masson, the former psychoanalyst and Freud scholar, referred incorrectly to the course in which he will take part next semester.
The course is not required; it is on a list of six classes from which each student must select two.


American Greetings Corp.(AGREA,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Stewart Enterprises Inc.(STEI,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


New President of Conde Nast Predicts Clear Sailing Ahead
Reflecting the new upbeat mood spreading through the magazine industry, Steven T. Florio, who became president of Conde Nast Publications Inc. in April, said that in 1994 the company experienced its largest financial improvement in years.
"And as we go into 1995, it is my belief that every single magazine will be up in ad pages for the first quarter," Mr.
Florio said in an interview last week.
"We are just closing the March issues, and we will have a better idea by the first week in January. But right now it looks as if we will be up 20 percent in advertising pages for all the magazines."


Mexican Banking's New Scorecard
Moving boxes were stacked by the reception desk and no one knew the number of the telephone in the conference room, but the new J. P. Morgan financial group in Mexico City opened for business anyway this month as one of the first new American banks in Mexico since 1932.
The arrival of Morgan, along with a pack of other foreign competitors, has opened a new era of global competition in Mexico's financial sector.
The new institutions could push Mexico's 36 banks, which were privatized or created in the last few years, to become more aggressive and efficient.
The Government sold the country's large national banks to private investors starting in 1991 after a disastrous period of Government ownership.


DANCE
A Case of Poor Publicity For Pride and Gluttony  Susan Hefner and Dancers Samuel Beckett Theater
Susan Hefner examined pride and gluttony in her choreographic revue called "Eve of Consumption" on Thursday night.
And what did she think of these deadly sins?
She was against them.


CLASSICAL MUSIC
One Grand Statement, A Ballade and 2 Fantasias  Seymour Lipkin, pianist Juilliard Theater
Seymour Lipkin, now 67, gives few recitals at this stage of his career, but when he does perform, he tends to venture a grand statement.
In his recital on Wednesday evening, the big entry was Beethoven's "Diabelli" Variations, a conceptual and technical challenge for any pianist.


Former Irish Leader Is Criticized for Remarks on I.R.A. Talks
Political leaders here and in Northern Ireland charged today that Albert Reynolds, the former Irish Prime Minister, was threatening Northern Ireland peace efforts by remarks he made on the sensitive issue of disarming the Irish Republican Army.
Officials say that disarmament is the most imminent and difficult hurdle in the peace effort, and that failure to surmount it could delay the talks and lead hard-line I.R.A. commanders to return to violence.


Abroad at Home; Leading From Behind
In the final part of his speech to the nation last Thursday hardly mentioned in press reports -- President Clinton spoke with eloquence about the need for civility and community in our politics.
"Citizens have to listen as well as talk," the President said.
"We need less hot rhetoric and more open conversation, less malice and more charity. . . . we have got to be a community again."


Capitol's New Jobless Greet the Future
Boxes were packed, the desk was bare, and the Rayburn House Office Building was no longer home to Representative Dan Glickman, Democrat of Kansas.
Along with Congressional aides, press officers, staff assistants, secretaries and elevator operators, Mr.
Glickman was joining the ranks of the 3,600 Capitol Hill workers left unemployed by the demise of the Democratic majority.
Even worse, so was his wife, Rhoda, who for the last 13 years has headed one of the 28 Congressional caucuses whose financing the new Republican-controlled Congress plans to eliminate.


Suburbs, Especially in the South, Are Becoming the Source of Political Power in U.S.
While the 1990 census found that most Americans live in the suburbs, last month's election demonstrated a ramification of that phenomenon: suburban voters -- particularly those in the South -- now hold the key to political power.
Indeed, politicians have already begun to see their fortunes shifting, with Republicans predicting a rosy future among the land of malls and Democrats bemoaning their fate.


One Who Will Miss The Quindlen Touch
To the Editor:
Anna Quindlen's conversations in print have touched the lives of millions of people.
Whether addressing the day-to-day vicissitudes of family life, the plight of crack-addicted babies and those who lovingly tend them, or the rape and slaughter of innocents in Bosnia and this country's response, she brings to her essays a lucid mind and an elegance of prose that to me have no equal.


Conflict With Greece Leaves Some in Albania Perplexed
There are many ethnic disputes that keep Balkan governments at loggerheads, but the one between Greece and Albania seems to find little echo among the people themselves.
Greece and Albania speak to each other harshly, have expelled diplomats and ended military cooperation.
There have been a fatal border raid, repressive measures against ethnic minorities and a political trial that recalled the practices of Albania's Communist rule.


Troops Clash in Chechnya as Peace Efforts Falter
Russian troops were reported today to be moving toward the outskirts of the capital of the breakaway Chechen region against strong resistance, according to the Itar-Tass news agency.
But there was no indication that a full assault on the capital, Grozny, had begun.
The troop movements were reported after an aide to President Boris N. Yeltsin said no Russian envoy would be sent to Grozny to talk to the Chechen President, Dzhokhar M. Dudayev (pronounced ZHO-kahr doo-DYE-yev).


Economic Calendar
Listed below are the scheduled release dates for major economic indicators this week.
Monday  None  Tuesday  U.S.
Balance of Trade . . .
Oct.
Wednesday  None  Thursday  Gross Domestic Product . . . 3d Qtr.
Weekly Jobless Claims  Friday  Durable-Goods Orders . . .
Nov.
Personal Income . . .
Nov.


Packers' Milwaukee Farewell Not Goodbye to Playoff Hopes
Packers 21, Falcons 17
The Green Bay Packers said farewell to Milwaukee after 61 seasons but Brett Favre's fantastic finish kept them from also kissing their playoff hopes goodbye at the same time.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-13  RUSSIAN TROOPS ADVANCE
Russia said that no envoy would be sent to the capital of a separatist region to negotiate with its leader, and Russian troops were advancing toward the capital, but were meeting strong resistance.
A1


Treasury Schedule Includes Auctions of Bills and Notes
The Treasury's schedule of financing this week includes today's regular weekly auction of three- and six-month bills and two- and five-year notes being auctioned on Wednesday and Thursday.
At the close of the New York cash market on Friday, traders said, the rate was 5.53 percent on the outstanding three-month bill and 6.20 percent on the six-month bill.


GOLF  Victory Brings a Milestone for Davies  Laura Davies became the first golfer to win on five tours in one year and tied a record for the lowest 72-hole score by a woman while prevailing yesterday in the Australian Masters in Gold Coast. Playing in difficult, windy conditions, the 31-year-old English player birdied four of the final six holes for a six-under-par 67 and a 20-under 272 total. Only Nancy Lopez, Beth Daniel and Dale Reid of Scotland previously finished that far under par. Davies won eight tournaments this year: three on the L.P.G.A. tour, plus triumphs on the Australian, European, Japanese and Asian tours. (AP) MEN'S COLLEGE BASKETBALL


Indresco Inc.(ID,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


A Dose of Candor About an Unsettling Giant of Theater
Tennessee Williams (1911-1983) continues to rattle the cage of American theater.
He burst onto the scene in 1944 with "The Glass Menagerie," currently on Broadway in a Roundabout Theater Company revival with Julie Harris.
That was followed by such landmark dramas as "A Streetcar Named Desire" and "Cat on a Hot Tin Roof." His final decade, shakily navigated through a haze of pills and liquor, dwindled into a series of theatrical flops.
He was savaged in the press.
Yet there is no denying the genius of this strange, haunted, self-destructive man who once quite simply explained that "I found life unsatisfactory."
His story is finally unfolding with unapologetic candor in tonight's "American Masters" presentation, "Tennessee Williams: Orpheus of the American Stage." This film by Merrill Brockway, a television veteran whose distinguished credits encompass CBS's "Camera Three" and PBS's "Dance in America," was written by Brooks Haxton.
Among those interviewed was Maria St.
Just, a protective executor of the Williams estate, shortly before her death.
Her weird stranglehold on Williams and his legacy is described in eye-popping detail by the critic John Lahr in a recent issue of The New Yorker.


North West Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 29


Robert Scevers, 54; Active in Dance
Robert Scevers, a dancer, choreographer and teacher who worked extensively with Rebekah Harkness, died on Thursday at his home in Dallas.
He was 54.
He died after a long illness, said Nikita Talin, a colleague.


3 Left Dead and 2 Officers Injured in Shootout in Queens
Three people were killed and two police officers were shot and wounded yesterday in what witnesses described as a running gunfight that raged along five blocks of Queens Boulevard as several police officers chased a man with an automatic pistol.
The shootout apparently started at about 9:40 P.M. when the gunman walked into a popular Chinese restaurant, Tung Shing House, on the corner of 64th Road and Queens Boulevard and without saying a word shot the cashier, a woman in her 40's, in the chest as she sat behind the register near the door.


Schneider Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 29


Crown Books Corp.(CRWN,NNM) reports earnings for 13wks to Oct 29


Punk Craft With Tune And Snarl
Compulsion, in the middle of a triple bill on Friday night at Irving Plaza, outstripped the headliners, Pop Will Eat Itself.
This band of three Irishmen and a Dutch drummer, based in London, joins the current punk-rock resurgence with all the right ingredients: tuneful songs, disciplined aggression and a stage show that was ferocious, blase and sometimes both at once.
Compulsion has learned from the Beatles, the Pixies, Nirvana, the Psychedelic Furs and the Buzzcocks, among many others, but the band's craft and fervor make the music explode.
Josephmary, Compulsion's singer, spent a good part of the set on his knees, howling toward the floor; Garret Lee on guitar and Sid Rainey on bass leaped into the air, collided with Josephmary, or stood and stared at the audience.
On the band's album, "Comforter" (Interscope), the lyrics are about unhappy characters -- a mall developer dead of a heart attack, a compulsively clean housewife, a man with a fat and suicidal daughter -- but the songs don't brood.
They commiserate as they snarl, defying cynicism along with everything else.


New York 1 News Becomes Global Role Model
New York 1 News, the 24-hour local cable channel that has been in existence since September 1992, has not yet turned a profit.
Neither has any similar enterprise in the United States.
But a small and encouraging new source of revenue has materialized for the channel, which is owned by Time Warner Inc. and is available to 1.3 million cable subscribers in the five boroughs of New York City.


CLASSICAL MUSIC
Charpentier, as Louis XIV Might Have Heard Him  The Virgin Consort and Orchestra Church of St.
Mary the Virgin
Christmas has become less a remembrance of Christ's birth than a revival of Christmases past.
But if the tradition growing from the event ends up obscuring the event itself, history can at least provide lovely evenings of music.
One was offered on Thursday night by the Virgin Consort and Orchestra directed by Kyler Brown.


Riding to Hound the Hounds, Despite British Law
A curious ritual plays out these early darkening Saturday afternoons on rural England's rolling green hills.
Figures dart back and forth across the landscape, through the woods and across the glades.
Everybody seems to be chasing everybody else.
The chain-of-being goes like this: First comes the fox.
Then the hounds.
Then the hunters on horseback.
Then the hunt saboteurs.
Then the police.


Youth Charged In Baby's Death After a Fall


CLASSICAL MUSIC
From Red River Valley To the Lovelorn by Guitar  New World Guitar Trio Miller Theater
The most focused playing in the New World Guitar Trio's concert on Wednesday evening came just after the intermission, when the ensemble played recent works by David Leisner and Chiel Meijering.


A New Twist in an On-Line Libel Case
A man named as a co-defendant in a $200 million electronic libel lawsuit filed against the Prodigy Services Company will be dropped from the suit, the plaintiff's lawyer said on Friday, adding a twist in a case that is viewed as a battleground of libel and free speech on commercial computer networks.
David Lusby of Key West, Fla., a former Prodigy employee, had been named in the lawsuit filed last month by Stratton Oakmont Inc., a brokerage firm in Lake Success, L.I., and its president, Daniel Porush.


Acquisitions Set By Two Companies
The acquisition of an advertising agency and a public relations agency were announced on Friday.
Joel Babbit, an advertising and marketing executive who most recently was president and chief marketing officer at Channel One, has acquired Thinc Communications, a creatively-focused ad agency in Atlanta with billings estimated to exceed $5 million from clients like Cox Enterprises and Dayton Hudson.
The terms were not disclosed.


Agra Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Texas Industries(TXI,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


CHRONICLE
Officials at Emma Willard School, a small preparatory school for girls in Troy, N.Y., are amazed at the publicity the school is getting without a football team.
But the school does have a famous and generous graduate in JANE FONDA, Class of '55.
In announcing a scholarship challenge grant for her alma mater recently, Ms.
Fonda said, "I'm proud to be in a position to help other girls have the powerful experience that Emma Willard can provide."


LCF&amp;TL Gets Mercedes Work
Three additional Mercedes-Benz independent dealer groups have selected LCF&amp; L in New York to handle their accounts, bringing the total LCF&amp; L handles to four with combined billings estimated to exceed $5 million.
LCF&amp; L was awarded the accounts of the dealer associations in Dallas, the tristate New York region and Pittsburgh; the agency was named last month to handle the metropolitan Washington dealer group.


Biomet Inc.(BMET,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


TransTexas Gas Corp.(TTXG,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Orange County's Emergency Expert
Thomas W. Hayes, the former California state treasurer hired to help salvage Orange County's loss-plagued investment fund, is no stranger to fiscal emergencies.
Gov.
Pete Wilson, upon taking office in 1991 just as California plunged into a recession that shattered the state's economy, turned to Mr.
Hayes as the principal architect of his $55 billion state budget, which required both painful spending cuts and tax increases.
Earlier, Mr.
Hayes defied state tradition by putting the underwriting of its bonds up for public bid.
Along the way, he developed a reputation as a better financial expert than as a politician.


Esiason and Jets Suffer a Double Knockout
It has been played out in so many Decembers, it is almost an act that Jets fans can recite by heart.
The players added some twists today, but the result was the same: the Jets officially eliminated themselves from the playoffs with a fourth straight loss, this one a dismal 21-6 defeat by the San Diego Chargers.


Chic by H.I.S. Inc.(JNS,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 5


When Smallness Transcends Itself
History has made an entrancing paradox of the Petite Messe Solonnelle.
In Rossini's swan song of 1863, solemn liturgy takes to the stage, if not literally at least in spirit.
The Mass seems to dance from behind the footlights.
It sings songs as only Rossini could sing them.
Yet in this amazing piece, which the Chamber Music Society of Lincoln Center brought to Alice Tully Hall on Friday night, Rossini's "actors" speak also in a learned counterpoint reminiscent of the 17th century, not the 19th.
Startling harmonic changes make Rossinian simplicity not so simple at that.


G-III Apparel Group Ltd.(GIII,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Chaparral Steel Co.(CSM,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Tax Break for College Would Merely Raise Tuition, Some Fear
College presidents and economists are debating if colleges will eventually swallow the savings of middle-income parents under the President's higher-education tax break, if it is enacted, by simply raising tuition accordingly.
Under the tax break, proposed last week, families making up to $100,000 a year will be able to deduct up to $10,000 that they pay for college tuition, whether a vocational certificate or a Harvard Ph.D.


Gtech Holdings Corp.(GTK,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 26


Cabletron Systems Inc.(CS,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Sports of The Times; More of the Same for the Flock as Even the Jet Loyalists Run Out of Ifs
AN army of loyal Jets fans came to Giants Stadium yesterday afternoon in what has become a dreadfully familiar New York state of mind: no control of their destiny; clinging to a sliver of thinning hope, counting on someone else's misfortune to salvage a miserable season.
Fans riding up the escalator before yesterday's game went over fleeting options: "If Seattle beats the Raiders" or "If the Jets win today and Saturday and if the Patriots lose . . . "


Agra Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Police in New Orleans: Film Noir in Real Life
With the trained eye of a veteran investigator, Officer Len Davis gave a detailed description of Kim Groves over his cellular phone, right down to the bleach stains on her trousers.
But Officer Davis made the call, larded with profanity and secretly recorded by Federal agents, not to aid fellow officers in an arrest, prosecutors say, but to demand that the young woman be murdered.
Federal prosecutors assert that the recording, made on Oct. 13 by agents of the Federal Bureau of Investigation eavesdropping on Officer Davis's calls as part of a drug investigation, revealed a contract killing ordered by Officer Davis.
Twenty minutes later, Ms.
Groves was dead, and an exultant cry of "Yeah!" crackled over Officer Davis's phone.
"Rock, rock-a-bye," he said cheerfully from his patrol car.


Commercial Intertech Corp.(TEC,N) reports earnings for Year to Oct 31


The Young and Restless Maul Old and Helpless
For the past four years Rich Stadium has been Buffalo's impregnable fortress.
Three of the four times they've made the Super Bowl, the drives have been launched with home-field advantage.
This afternoon the Patriots turned that fortress into a tomb.
New England buried Buffalo, 41-17, and helped eliminate them from the playoffs before 56,784 fans, well below the 80,000 capacity.


Despite Request for Freeze, Cuomo Is Filling State Jobs
Despite a request for a hiring freeze by Governor-elect George E. Pataki, the Cuomo administration has hired hundreds of people in the five weeks following the Nov. 8 election.
Most of the new state workers were hired to fill relatively low-level positions, the kinds of jobs that state officials say are necessary to insure that roads are cleared of snow, sheets are changed at psychiatric centers and bathrooms are cleaned at state buildings.
But others have filled jobs considered less essential to the public's health and safety.


Some Companies Report Pentium Problem
A major New York City bank says it has discovered calculation errors that it attributes to the Pentium chips inside some of its computers.
A multimedia developer and training company on Long Island says the Pentium caused a miscalculation in a graphics program, although the error was discovered before the program was shipped to customers.
Scientists at the Brookhaven National Laboratory on Long Island got wrong answers in calculating the impact of colliding subatomic particles, Newsday reported.


Premier Industrial Corp.(PRE,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


NCI Building Systems Inc.(BLDG,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


For One Night, Nets Hold On as Benjamin Pours It On
Derrick Coleman was already finished having sutures sewn into his left hand.
Benoit Benjamin was upstaging the finest performance of the season for himself with a costly turnover.
And the Nets, who have become very good at sabotaging their own victories, could only watch in agony as Glen Rice squared up for the 3-pointer on the left wing.
They had played rugged defense the final 12 minutes and had even built a 9-point lead with 4 minutes remaining, but, as usual, it was not enough.


Jabil Circuit Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


On a White-Water Advertising Ride
WHERE THE SUCKERS MOON An Advertising Story  By Randall Rothenberg  478 pages.
Alfred A. Knopf. $25.
"When business is good it pays to advertise; when business is bad you've got to advertise," an old adage holds.
By the late 1980's business had finally gone bad for Subaru of America, which sold 183,242 of its practical if unsexy Japanese-made sedans and wagons in 1986 but saw sales drop to 108,547 in 1990.


Gore, the Soldier of Streamlining, Returns to Lead Clinton's Charge
The hand that held the hammer over David Letterman's desk to mock Government rules for ashtrays is poised to strike again -- this time as President Clinton's right hand in the battle to prove that his Administration can shrink the bureaucracy and was doing so long before the Republican electoral triumph last month.
Vice President Al Gore will be in the spotlight on Monday when Mr.
Clinton outlines the next round of budget cutting to finance his proposed tax breaks for the middle class.
And Mr.
Gore's effort to "reinvent Government" is no longer derided by some Presidential advisers as a political nonstarter, but embraced as perhaps their best chance to stay in the hottest game in town.


Equity Offerings
The following equity and convertible debt offerings are expected this week:
Coleman Wood Products Inc., Carroll, Tex., an initial public offering of 340,000 units, each representing three shares and two warrants.
Dillon-Gage Securities Inc.


Another December, Another Early Frost
The sign on the locker-room door this afternoon announced to all who cared to look: "It's a matter of respect." By the time the last Jet player had showered and left, the sign had been torn down and presumably thrown away.
Frustration, not respect, was the dominant theme in the Jet locker room at Giants Stadium.
Frustration at a fourth straight loss, another losing season, another early vacation, another December swoon.


A Personality Contest: The Mayor Was Losing
IN the end, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani lowered his voice and, however reluctantly, extended a vaguely conciliatory hand toward Schools Chancellor Ramon C. Cortines.
Their feud had turned into a personality contest and the Mayor was losing.
Once he realized it, compromise, while not exactly his favorite tactic, was the only recourse.
Now, even if the Board of Education rejects his proposal to limit Mr.
Cortines's contract renewal to one year with conditions attached, even if Mr.
Cortines decides to resign, the Mayor can claim that he is flexible and reasonable and was only interested in education issues, not personalities.


GIULIANI GIVES UP ATTEMPT TO OUST CITY SCHOOL CHIEF
Acknowledging that he will not be able to block the reappointment of the Schools Chancellor, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani yesterday called for Ramon C. Cortines to be granted a contract for only one more year.
He said the contract should be tied to the condition that the Chancellor show measurable progress in four areas of management and budgeting.
Mr.
Giuliani's decision to support the Chancellor's reappointment represented a reversal of his efforts over the last week to convince Mr.
Cortines to step down.
Mr.
Giuliani said his conditions would be offered to the Board of Education by his two appointees, Ninfa Segarra and Dr.
Irene H. Impellizzeri.


Market Place; At Lehman Brothers, the smart money is on the firm's shares.
THIS is a sorry time for owners of financial services and securities firms.
In the wake of this year's bond-market plunge and the uproar over the bankruptcy of Orange County, Calif., most securities-industry stocks are now trading near their 52-week lows.
That smells like a good opportunity to some investors.
They have been buying Lehman Brothers Holdings because, as the perceived weakling of the major international firms, Lehman appears to have the most to gain from the industry's next upturn.


Els Wraps Up a Productive Year With a Convincing 6-Stroke Victory
When Ernie Els won the United States Open in June, there was a great deal of talk about his being the player of the future.
Never mind the future.
In the final tournament of the year, Els has stated a very strong case for being the golfer of today.
Playing in -- or, more accurately, playing over -- an elite field of 24 players with $2.5 million at stake and paired with Nick Price, the No. 1-ranked player in the world, the 25-year-old Els was transcendent.


No Clues in 2d White House Shooting
Federal investigators said today that they had no idea who shot four bullets at the White House early Saturday and no clue as to why they were fired.
One bullet pierced a window in the first-floor State Dining Room.
A second stopped beneath a Christmas tree outside the building's diplomatic entrance.
A third was discovered on a first-floor balcony, and a fourth was found in the driveway that curves beneath the President's bedroom, the Secret Service said.


Colleges Need to Question, Not Just Celebrate, Western Values
To the Editor:
Your Dec. 12 news article on the problems associated with a gift of $20 million by Lee M. Bass to support a curriculum in Western civilization at Yale gave fair and accurate treatment to what has been presented polemically by The Washington Times and The Wall Street Journal.
Still, the tendency to see the issue as a debate between partisans of Western civilization and devotees of multiculturalism calls on a shorthand that only approximates the complicated questions involved.


Essay; Whom to Root for in Chechnya
The Chechens are a bunch of born hoodlums and religious fanatics.
Their criminal clans are running an island of banditry within the Russian Federation.
Their gross national product is stolen goods.
What's more, they were on the side of the Nazis in World War II.
That's what Moscow wants the world to believe, as the Red Army moves to crush the secession of Chechnya, a republic of a million fiercely independent Muslims.


Saatchi Faces Uncertainty With Ouster of Its Chairman
The ouster on Friday night of Maurice Saatchi as chairman of the Saatchi &amp; Saatchi Company may have satisfied disgruntled shareholders of the advertising agency group.
But it has created a whole new set of problems that could cost the company dearly.
Mr.
Saatchi's ouster has also angered two of the company's biggest clients: British Airways, which is handled by Saatchi &amp; Saatchi Worldwide, and Mars Inc., which has been handled for four decades by Bates Worldwide, the company's other major agency.
Both clients had warned the Saatchi board before Friday's meeting that they would reconsider their relationships with their agencies if Mr.
Saatchi was forced out.


Party Looks Beyond Era Of Mandela
Nothing on the program says so, and few of the 3,000 delegates would put it this way, but as the African National Congress met here for its first national conference as a governing party, the unspoken topic was: What happens after Nelson Mandela?
The subject was implicit in the sense of generational change, including the consecration of Thabo Mbeki, a wily diplomat who spent the apartheid years in foreign exile, as the heir apparent to President Mandela.


Woman Slain in Brooklyn
A woman was shot to death yesterday morning in Bushwick, Brooklyn, by a neighbor to whom she owed $3,000, the police said.
The victim, Elicea Boatswain, a 40-year-old mother of three, was shot twice in the chest just after 9 A.M. in front of Intermediate School 291.


No Headline
Peter Hebblethwaite, a British scholar, Vatican watcher and papal biographer, died on Sunday in Oxford.
He was 64.
The cause was not disclosed.


William Walton Is Dead at 84; Headed Federal Fine Arts Panel
William Walton, who as chairman of the Federal arts commission presided over the construction and restoration of several of the best-known monuments in Washington, died in his sleep and was found on Sunday at his loft in the Chelsea section of Manhattan.
He was 84.
Although the cause of death was not immediately known, Mr.
Walton had suffered a heart attack in 1993, his family said.


Talks on Northern Ireland to Continue Despite Planting of Bomb
British officials and representatives of Sinn Fein, the political wing of the Irish Republican Army, agreed today that peace talks on the future of Northern Ireland would not be sidetracked by the discovery on Sunday of a powerful bomb in a town near the Irish border.
British Army bomb experts who defused the explosive described it as the largest such bomb planted in the province in several months.
But even without going off, the bomb has badly rattled political leaders anxious about holding together Northern Ireland's nearly four-month cease-fire.


The Giants' Battle Cry: Beat Dallas, Go Bucs
Might Dan Reeves pick up the telephone and call Tampa Bay Coach Sam Wyche to wish him luck in his game this week against the Green Bay Packers?
Send him a telegram of encouragement maybe?
Some cash?
How about a new car?
"No," Reeves said, smiling.
"Sam knows what he needs to do. He doesn't need any help from me."


Knicks-Nets a Modest Matchup This Time
When they last traded hanging jumpers in the lane seven months ago, the stakes were markedly different.
The Knicks were beginning the first leg of a championship run.
The Nets, with a native New Yorker guaranteeing an upset from the end of the bench, were enjoying some much-needed attention from across the Hudson River.
Everything changes.


Roland Ciaranello, Psychiatrist, 51
Roland D. Ciaranello, a Stanford University psychiatrist who conducted research on infantile autism in an effort to find a gene that may cause the disorder, died on Thursday in San Juan, P.R., where he was attending a conference.
He was 51.
Dr.
Ciaranello was jogging when he appeared to suffer from cardiac arrest, university officials said.


Corrections
A brief report by Bloomberg Business News in the Company News column of Business Day on Saturday about the acquisition of Hauser Elektronik G.m.b.H. by the Parker Hannifin Corporation misstated Hauser's line of business.
The company manufactures automation components and systems; it is not an auto-parts maker.


Jets Fail to Grasp Big-Bang Theory
The reality of what the Jets have become -- a 6-9 team that has stopped scoring -- may finally force Coach Pete Carroll to stop sugarcoating the performance of the perennially flawed team he has inherited.
Carroll used his own more polite words today, saying that the Jets simply have no players making the big offensive plays that win games.


Harsh Wind From Beijing
It is extraordinary and more than a little alarming.
The world's most populous country, a nuclear power with a booming, internationalized economy, is frozen into hard-line immobility on a wide range of policies because its nonagenarian supreme leader lies dying and those beneath him fear jeopardizing their own political futures by appearing too flexible.
Some of the effects of this succession crisis are now being felt throughout the world.
But the primary and most brutal effects are felt in China itself.
Crucial reforms of state industry have been postponed repeatedly.
Arbitrary challenges and revisions have left foreign investors questioning the reliability of their contracts.
Most recently, human rights and democracy activists have been subjected to a new round of repression that is ferocious even by China's harsh standards.


A Return To Quiet Rage
The season's first performance of "Masekela Langage," presented by the Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater on Saturday night at City Center, was a triumphant occasion.
The 1969 piece, set to and inspired by the music of Hugh Masekela, the South African trumpeter, is one of Ailey's finest.
"Masekela Langage" was created at a time when dances about black rage were plentiful.
But few of those other dances had the quiet, angry power of the Ailey piece.


For Artists, There's No Art in a Wrecking Ball
When Nicolas Rule went looking for his first studio a decade ago, the ramshackle building at 233 West 42d Street seemed a godsend for an unknown painter with no money but lofty dreams.
The street was filled with peep shows, seedy theaters and sex shops, a precarious place where street-corner preachers vied with drug pushers and prostitutes for the souls of passers-by.
But the studio spaces were cheap, and the landlord understood the unpredictable income of artists.


Putnam County Trash Hauler Accused of Arson and Intimidation
The owners of Putnam County's largest trash hauler were accused today of using arson and intimidation to retain customers and scare off competitors.
In a 27-count racketeering indictment unsealed today, Federal prosecutors charged that owners and employees of the company, the Nello Carting Corporation, firebombed the cars and trucks of competitors and customers and extorted thousands of dollars from them.


Fedex's Rise In Retailer Shipments
United Parcel Service, which once all but owned the retail industry's delivery business, is now fighting off Federal Express to maintain the market.
"From what I understand, Federal Express has just been more aggressive about going after the business," said Robert DeLay, who publishes the DeLay Newsletter, a trade publication about the mail-order industry.


CLASSICAL MUSIC
A Kaleidoscopic Dream With a Heroine Named Alice  'Wonderglass' St. Clement's Church
No one ever expected that David Del Tredici's "Final Alice" would be the last musical word on Lewis Carroll's "Alice" stories, not even from Mr.
Del Tredici.
But here is something altogether different: Susan Botti's "Wonderglass," a chamber opera in progress that was given its New York premiere on Thursday evening.


Merchants of Firearms Death Gain From Sorrow in Our Streets
To the Editor:
Like many senescent reporters, I grieve over the press's declining standards.
But the old breed is not dead, and Bob Herbert has proved it.
He has identified the true assassins of innocents in our schools, streets and homes.
They are (surprise!) the manufacturers and hucksters of firearms (columns, Dec. 7 and 14).


Fantasies and Dark Truths in an Artists' Colony
"I know I'm not so much depressed as depressing," says a young woman, after announcing she plans to hang herself, in Harry Kondoleon's play "The Little Book of Professor Enigma," which is having its premiere at the Theater for the New City.
In the brittle fictional worlds of Mr.
Kondoleon, this is a reasonable motive for suicide.
This gifted, language-besotted playwright, who died of AIDS in March at 39, presided over his creations like the exacting host of a salon, insisting that his largely unhappy characters at least be entertaining in their misery.
He knew that an agile epigram was a solution to nothing, but in its precision and self-contained shapeliness it could give the illusion of being so.


California Car Rules Set as Model for the East
In an effort to pressure auto makers into selling cleaner cars nationally, the Environmental Protection Agency announced yesterday that it would allow 12 Eastern states to impose California's strict tailpipe emission standards on cars sold within their borders.
The agency said it hoped the move would persuade the car companies and the 12-state bloc, which includes New York, New Jersey and Connecticut, to compromise on a plan the E.P.A. prefers: a new national standard that it said would be less costly to motorists than the California one but that would also help the 12 states and the rest of the country meet Federal air-quality laws.
Part of that national standard would involve the development of cars that run on alternative fuels and produce fewer pollutants.


Accounts
*
Detroit Tigers to Young &amp; Rubicam Detroit, to handle its account, previously handled in-house and assigned outside on a project basis.
Billings were not disclosed. *
Norwalk Furniture Corp., Norwalk, Ohio, to Wyse Advertising, Cleveland, to handle its account, previously at W. B. Doner &amp; Co., Cleveland and Southfield, Mich.
Billings were not disclosed.


A Wild Sleigh Ride at Federal Express
It is midnight at Federal Express's main terminal here and about 1.4 million packages and letters are whizzing around -- some traveling on conveyors at up to 700 feet a minute.
Among the boxes of medical equipment, envelopes of financial documents and computer components that are the company's bread-and-butter cargo are cartons of merchandise from L. L. Bean, Neiman Marcus and Williams-Sonoma.
There goes a box of Durango cowboy boots, followed by two green plastic pouches that could only be goods from Bean.
Then comes a box of barbecued ribs from one of Memphis's fabled eateries.


This Time, the 1-14 Oilers Didn't Fumble the Baby
This past weekend, Houston Oiler cornerback CRIS DISHMAN reaped the benefits of last year's "Babygate" incident.
Dishman learned at 11:37 P.M.
Saturday that his wife, KAREN, was going into labor.
He contacted Oiler officials, who chartered a plane for him from Kansas City, Mo., to Houston, according to The Kansas City Star.
Dishman left Kansas City at 2:30 A.M.
Sunday and watched the birth of his son, CRIS DISHMAN Jr., at 7:12 A.M. in Houston.
Dishman then returned to Kansas City at 1:30 P.M. and started the game at 3 P.M.


DANCE
A Rousing Debut With a Nod to the Past  Marjie Citron and Dancers Merce Cunningham Studio
Marjie Citron made her debut on Friday night while honoring modern dance's recent past.
The program was her first full evening of choreography.
It also included a revival of "Clearing," a solo to Bach created in 1979 by Viola Farber, who performed with the Cunningham company before embarking on her own notable choreographic career.


RUSSIANS BOMBARD CHECHENS' CAPITAL FROM LAND AND AIR
Russian jets struck the center of this separatist Chechen capital tonight after helicopter gunships and artillery units hit the villages that ring it.
The first bombing began late on Sunday as soon as it became clear that negotiations between the Russian Government and the leader of Chechnya, Dzhokhar M. Dudayev, would not continue.


Patterns
Fashion on Film
If Robert Altman's movie "Ready to Wear" did nothing else, it at least excited interest again in how fashion is captured on film.


Nike Inc.(NKE,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


RESULTS PLUS
COLLEGE BASKETBALL  Syracuse Cruises  Otis Hill and Lazarus Sims led host Syracuse on a 20-4 run late in the first half as the 14th-ranked Orangemen defeated Robert Morris by 103-67 last night for their sixth straight victory.
John Wallace scored 16 points and was one of six players in double figures for Syracuse. (AP)


School Board Rebuffs Giuliani On Terms of Cortines's Contract
The New York City Board of Education yesterday brushed aside Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani's demand that Schools Chancellor Ramon C. Cortines, if he stays on, be limited to a one-year term and meet specific performance goals.
The board president, Carol A. Gresser, said the Mayor, who had backed down from his opposition to a contract renewal for Mr.
Cortines, was in no position to dictate conditions.
She said she would urge the board, which has sole legal authority to hire and fire chancellors, to offer a two-year contract, at least.
And although Mr.
Giuliani outlined "worthy suggestions" for budget and administrative reforms, she said, the board and Mr.
Cortines had developed similar initiatives on their own.


OLCO Petroleum reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Duplex Products Inc.(DPX,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 30


The Boys and Girls of Summer In Another Field of Dreams
Take the kids.
"Baseball," a new mixed-media dance piece for Momix by Moses Pendleton, is a true family show.
This is not simply because the protagonist is a human baseball roller-skating around the stage of the Joyce Theater (175 Eighth Avenue, at 19th Street, Chelsea) with a bat-wielding crew in pursuit.
It is rather that Mr.
Pendleton's two-hour look at the conventions and legends of baseball is fun on a multitude of levels, a meditation both antic and lyrical.


ADC Telecommunications Inc.(ADCT,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Seoul's Leader Visits the DMZ


Yankees Are Still Waiting For Pitch From McDowell
Gene Michael is not averse to signing Jack McDowell to a multiyear contract and he would prefer to complete the deal before the owners possibly implement their salary plan.
But the Yankees' general manager needs input from the pitcher and his representative to complete the equation and so far that has been a methodical process.
Jim McDowell, the brother and agent for the 28-year-old right-hander who was obtained by the Yankees in a trade with the Chicago White Sox last Wednesday, did not speak to Michael yesterday.
Since the McDowells are still analyzing the aspects of Jack's unique position, Jim figured he would contact Michael today or tomorrow.


World News Briefs; Two Political Tempests Dwindle Away in Israel
Two noisy disputes that had roiled Israeli politics came to a quiet end today.
In one, the Israeli Government easily defeated a parliamentary no-confidence motion introduced by religious parties because of questions raised about the moral character of the biblical King David.


A Silly Random Walk Through Life
SILLINESS is rarely associated with computers, except, of course, in their manuals and user interfaces.
But inspired silliness is the very soul of Dazzeloids, subtitled CD-ROM Superheroes on a Binge Against Boredom and masquerading as a work for children.
Dazzeloids may indeed appeal to bright juveniles, but it could well become a cult hit with grown-ups.
This is a children's program for adults, a spiritual descendant of Rocky, Bullwinkle and the brothers Warner that manages both to celebrate and to send up Saturday morning cartoons.
From animation to music, this Center for Advanced Whimsy Production is essentially the one-man show of an artist named Rodney Alan Greenblat.


Company Reports
BABBAGE'S INC., Dallas, which owns retail stores specializing in computer software, completed a merger with Software Etc.
Stores Inc., with the companies becoming units of the new holding company Neostar Retail.
FEDERAL EXPRESS CORP., Memphis, said its subsidiary Federal Express Europe Inc. had sold two divisions in Britain to Ryder P.L.C., a unit of Ryder System, for more than $10 million.
PITTWAY CORP., Chicago, a leading maker of burglar and fire alarm equipment, agreed to acquire an American Trading and Production Corp. unit, Javelin Electronics division, which makes closed circuit television systems.
Terms were not disclosed.


INSIDE
Step on Air Standards
The Environmental Protection Agency allowed 12 states to impose stricter auto pollution standards in a move intended to bring about a new national standard.
Page A16.
CNN Issues Apology
After being found in contempt of court for using tapes of Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega, CNN issued an apology and was fined less than it would otherwise have been.
Page B7.
Colombian Guilty in Bombing
A Colombian said to be the most feared assassin of the Medellin drug cartel was convicted of blowing up an Avianca jetliner over Bogota in 1989, killing all 107 aboard.
Page B3. 4 Dead in Queens Shootout
A Taiwanese couple who rented rooms to fellow immigrants were killed by a tenant in a shooting spree that left four dead in three locations throughout central Queens.
Page B1.


Valentine to Attend Rutgers
COREY VALENTINE, who led Lincoln High School in Brooklyn to two Public Schools Athletic League championship games and a 27-3 record in his three years as a starting quarterback, has given a verbal commitment to attend Rutgers next fall.


Assistance or People, However They Need It
TERRY ORZECHOWSKI lies on the bed, full of questions.
What's going on with the Christmas party?
How are the donations coming?
And what's with the rumors? "I'm not dead yet," she says.


Victory and Defeat In Simpson Rulings
The judge in the double murder case against O. J. Simpson ruled that prosecutors cannot hear a potentially incriminating remark the defendant shouted to a minister during a conversation in jail.
The ruling by Judge Lance A. Ito was a rare victory for the defense, but in another ruling, Judge Ito turned down a motion by Mr.
Simpson's lawyers to meld a hearing on the admissibility of DNA evidence into the trial itself.
The ruling on the motion seemed to promise a prolonged hearing on that potentially crucial evidence in a case with no witnesses.


J. Kingston Herbert Jr.; Harvard Fund-Raiser, 62
J.
Kingston Herbert Jr., a fund-raiser for Harvard Medical School, died last Tuesday in his office at the school in Boston.
He was 62 and lived in Milton, Mass.
The cause was a heart attack, his family said.


U.N. Will Help Refugees Return to Rwanda
In a policy reversal, the United Nations refugee agency said today that it would assist Rwandan refugees who wish to return home.
In an internal paper on the repatriation, the agency, the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, advised its officers in the field to "explore judiciously all avenues to facilitate return, in safety and dignity."


Anne Klein's Designer Departs
Anne Klein &amp; Company and its designer, Richard Tyler, said yesterday that they were ending their relationship after only 19 months.
Like a cheating celebrity husband who lets his wronged wife have the last word with the press, officials at Anne Klein declined to comment further, leaving the painful job of spin control to Tyler/Trafficante, Mr.
Tyler's own design house.
For both parties, the moral of the story could be best expressed in the words of Oscar Wilde: "When the gods wish to punish us, they answer our prayers."


Corrections
An article in Business Day on Saturday about the financial problems of Hoffritz, a specialty retailer of knives, referred incorrectly to the company's plan for an initial public offering of stock.
The Securities and Exchange Commission has taken no action on it; it has not been approved.


New Baseball Talks Are in Warm-Up Stage
In the ebb and flow of negotiations in the baseball strike, many lows seem to be the result of failed expectations.
Last week, one of those failed expectations came when the owners thought players would walk into a final session at Rye Brook, N.Y., with a new proposal.
The players didn't, the owners went away angry and a total meltdown in negotiations nearly occurred.


7 Stabbed and 5 Others Hurt in Rikers Clash
At least seven inmates were stabbed and five others also injured last night when two rival gangs clashed in what is regarded as Rikers Island's toughest prison unit, New York City correction officials said.
The stabbing victims were taken to Elmhurst Hospital Center in Queens where Beverly Fong, a hospital administrator, said that none of the men were seriously injured and that all would probably be treated and returned to Rikers.


Moving Day for 7,000 Books


A Folksy Legislator With Power Over Industries
He is an undertaker whose family has run the most prominent funeral home in Richmond for more than a century.
He is so loyal to his roots in tobacco country that he keeps a framed picture with every brand of cigarette made by Philip Morris in his Congressional office.
Few people outside of Richmond have heard of Representative Thomas J. Bliley Jr.
But they soon will.


President's Suggested Reductions Face Many Obstacles
Even as senior Clinton Administration officials explained the broad details of proposed budget cuts in energy, transportation and housing programs, they conceded today that there were many potential obstacles to some of the ideas.
And although the basic orders about where to cut have been handed down by the White House, there are many decisions yet to come on exactly where and how to cut.


Signing Off on Television, at Least for Now
ITT's announcement yesterday that it was buying Caesars World sent a clear signal to Wall Street that ITT's chairman, Rand V. Araskog, has tabled any plans to expand into the television business.
It was only four months ago that the ITT Corporation announced its deal with the Cablevision Systems Corporation to acquire Madison Square Garden, the New York Knicks and New York Rangers professional sports teams and the MSG cable sports network for a total of $1.1 billion.


Toyota's Tercel infomercial draws a significant response from its youthful, hungry audience.
THE Toyota Motor Corporation believes it may have hit on the right technique to get through to young people today: a combination of daytime television, computer software and free food.
Groping for a fresh way to promote the 1995 model of its small car, the Tercel, Toyota decided to try its first infomercial, testing a 28-minute advertisement in New York and Los Angeles during November.
Toyota was hoping for a way to make the Tercel stick out from among its numerous competitors, which include Honda's Civic, Chrysler's Neon and General Motors' Saturn.
The results were so encouraging that last week Toyota began broadcasting the advertisement in 15 markets around the country.


Open the Books on Newt Inc.
Speaker-designate Newt Gingrich is entitled to boast that the Republican resurgence in Congress is the product of "ideas." But as Stephen Engelberg and Katharine Seelye detailed in The New York Times on Sunday, the G.O.P. takeover was helped by Mr.
Gingrich's success in raising money -- much of it in large, still-undisclosed gifts from special interests.
The money, and there was lots of it, flowed to support the interlocking set of political and financial entities dubbed "Newt Inc." by Washington insiders. (See chart.) Mr.
Gingrich's refusal to disclose fully this financial network raises the ugly possibility that he will copy the seedy tendency of the Democrats in Congress to stall on campaign finance reform.


BASKETBALL: A Freshman Light at Colgate; Just Another Basketball Star, Foyle Reads Faulkner for Pleasure and Writes Poems
Adonal Foyle had not heard of Michael Jordan when Jay and Joan Mandle approached him one summer afternoon and offered him a future he had never dreamed of.
He did not know about the National Basketball Association.
He did not know Magic Johnson from Larry Bird from Julius Erving.
He was 16 years old, and he had first set eyes on a basketball less than 12 months before that eventful meeting, which took place on the island of Dominica in the Caribbean.
At the time, Foyle was a raw basketball talent, a 6-foot-9-inch, 240-pound kid with breathtaking athleticism and an underdeveloped sense of the game.


Corrections
A brief report in the Company News column of Business Day on Nov. 19 about an offering of common shares in the Sports Authority retail chain by its former parent company, the Kmart Corporation, referred incorrectly to an earlier offering of another unit, Officemax Inc.
A letter from Officemax dated Nov. 30 points out that Kmart kept a 25 percent stake in Officemax, not 30 percent.
This correction was delayed by an editing oversight.


Systematic Search For a Home
IF the home computer market is finally taking off, what better uses are there for a computer than finding a home or fixing it up?
The program Smart Moves explains that it helps you "identify those communities and neighborhoods within a metropolitan area that best meet your requirements related to housing, schools, costs of living, demographics, personal security and/or location." (The metropolitan area I explored was San Francisco's.) A tutorial then explains how to use Windows menus, icons and buttons.


Most Precise Gauge Yet Points to Global Warming
DURING the first two years of its operation, the most accurate system ever devised for measuring changes in global sea level has discerned a steady rise of more than three millimeters, or about one-tenth of an inch, a year.
It may not sound like much, but if this trend continues for another few years, scientists say, it will be solid evidence that the earth is undergoing a long-term warming trend, probably related to increases in atmospheric carbon dioxide.
Older and less reliable data had strongly suggested that global atmospheric and ocean temperatures were rising, but doubts about the reliability of these measurements had lingered until now; the new satellite measurements enormously improve the precision and reliability of such estimates.


Three Lives, One House, Very Different Worlds
As wisps of incense smoke coiled into the air, the cooks and waitresses of the Tung Shing House lovingly laid out small plates of fried fish, boiled chicken and roast pork as an offering to send their friend Shelley Yin into the next world.
A Taiwanese immigrant, she had been a cashier at the restaurant for years, and now, one by one, her co-workers walked solemnly to the counter and prayed for a safe and peaceful journey.


Will Jesse Jackson Beat Queen in British Ratings? Stay Tuned
One of Britain's most familiar holiday rituals -- the annual Christmas Day television broadcast by Queen Elizabeth II -- will run up against some unexpected and, in some quarters, unwanted foreign competition next Sunday: a pre-recorded, nationwide lecture by the Rev.
Jesse Jackson on the sorry state of British race relations.
At the same time the Queen is scheduled to appear delivering her Christmas Day homily, at 3 P.M. on Channel One and Channel Three, the American civil rights campaigner will be making his own 15-minute appearance on Channel Four, one of Britain's four nationwide broadcast television networks.


Europeans To Build Powerful Accelerator
THE long-term future of high-energy physics research was assured on Friday when the 19 member nations of CERN, the European Laboratory for Particle Physics, voted to spend about $15 billion over 20 years for the most powerful particle accelerator in the world.
By their representatives' vote, Europe's governments committed themselves to build and operate the accelerator, called the Large Hadron Collider.


ITT Plans to Buy Caesars World for $1.7 Billion
In a move that immediately positions the ITT Corporation as a major player in the gambling industry, ITT said yesterday that it had signed an agreement to acquire Caesars World for about $1.7 billion.
ITT, which owns the Sheraton hotels, entered the gambling industry last year by paying Kirk Kerkorian $160 million for the Desert Inn Hotel and Casino in Las Vegas, Nev.
The acquisition of Caesars World would give ITT one of the premier names in the gaming industry and the opportunity to expand gambling in hotels around the world.


METRO DIGEST
SCHOOL BOARD REBUFFS GIULIANI
The Board of Education brushed aside Mayor Giuliani's demand that Schools Chancellor Ramon C. Cortines, if he stays on, be limited to a one-year term and meet specific performance goals.
Carol A. Gresser, the board president, said the Mayor, who had withdrawn his opposition to renewing Mr.
Cortines's contract, was in no position to dictate conditions.
A1.


Russians Watch First War on Uncensored TV, to Yeltsin's Alarm
Wounded soldiers being interviewed in field hospitals.
Bloody corpses being pulled from a shot-down helicopter.
Russian officers refusing to advance.
Baby-faced boys digging trenches in the snow.
Women begging Russian soldiers not to kill their children or cursing the Russian President for trying to stamp out their independence.
This is Russia's first opportunity to watch a real war as it happens on officially uncensored Russian television.
Those are the images the public is seeing of the Russian offensive against separatists in Chechnya, and they are not making the Russian Government very happy.


Harvard Chief Is to Return Next Semester
The president of Harvard University, Neil L. Rudenstine, is recovering from what officials here describe as "severe fatigue and exhaustion" that led him to take a leave of absence last month.
He is expected to return to work next semester, the university said today.
Harvard's announcement on Nov. 28 that its 59-year-old president was too tired to perform his duties surprised the academic world and led to speculation about what caused him to leave, and to discussions about the difficulties of managing a modern university.


Colombian Guilty In Jet Bombing
A Colombian said to be the most feared assassin of the Medellin drug cartel was convicted by a Federal jury in Brooklyn of blowing up an Avianca jetliner over Bogota in 1989.
All 107 people aboard, including two United States citizens, were killed.


Journalists Covering Bosnia Win Access to U.N. Aircraft
During the conflict in Croatia and Bosnia, at least 44 journalists have been killed and others beaten, robbed and harassed.
Many of those incidents occurred, according to a committee of American journalists, as reporters traveled overland to get to besieged Sarajevo while United Nations aircraft flew overhead with many of their seats empty.
Yesterday, Kofi A. Annan, the United Nations Under Secretary General for Peacekeeping Operations, said the United Nations has now changed its longstanding policy that barred reporters from those planes.
Under the new policy, reporters will be permitted in United Nations Protection Force planes in Bosnia on a "space available" basis, making their passage into many war zones safer.


Trouble on the New Canaan Line


Wall St.'s Rescue Squads Also Turn A Tidy Profit
The investment-fund disaster in Orange County, Calif., is shining a spotlight on a little-noticed corner of brokerage firms' trading floors: the investment rescue desk.
It is there that financial instruments that have gone sour can be repackaged as something sweet enough for a bank, mutual fund or other investor to want to buy.


U.S. Cautious On New Offer By the Serbs
The White House responded cautiously tonight to the new cease-fire proposal from the Bosnian Serbs, with a senior official saying that the Administration was holding out hope that the offer brokered by former President Jimmy Carter might represent "positive vibrations" in the Balkans.
"There's a lot of effort to maneuver for public opinion here," the senior Administration official said.
"But we do see a possibility that this could lead to movement forward."


Dow Off 16.49 as Stocks Await Fed's Plan on Rates Today
Stock prices fell across the board yesterday in sluggish trading as traders awaited the outcome of the Federal Reserve's policy-setting meeting today.
Bond prices and the dollar were basically steady.
The Dow Jones industrial average fell 16.49 points, to 3,790.70, while the broader Standard &amp; Poor's 500 fell 0.89 point, to 457.91.
The smaller-company Nasdaq composite index fell 1.18 point, to 727.89.


SOCCER REPORT
United States
It appears very strongly that Bora Milutinovic, who piloted the Americans through the second round of the World Cup last summer, will be the coach of the United States for the 1998 World Cup as well.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy  Main Street has been awash in derivatives as brokers making sales pitches for the risky, complex investments besieged municipal officials for the last few years.  [ Page A1. ] The next chairman of the House Commerce Committee, Representative Thomas J. Bliley Jr. of Virginia, has made it clear he intends to push for much lighter regulation of business.  [ D1. ] Wall Street's rescue desks can find opportunity even in Orange County's investment-fund disaster.
The desks buy loss-plagued bonds like those held by the California county at a deep discount and repackage them for a profitable sale.  [ D8. ] The Orange County treasurer's and auditor's offices were searched as part of an investigation of the bankruptcy.  [ D8. ] The E.P.A. will allow 12 Eastern states to impose California's strict tailpipe emission standards on cars.  [ A16. ] Companies  ITT agreed to acquire Caesars World for $1.7 billion.
A combination of the Caesars name and ITT's Sheraton hotels is expected make ITT a force in the gaming industry.  [ D1. ]  The deal dashed expectations that ITT would shop for a television network.  [ D6. ] More retailers are relying on Federal Express, especially in the busiest time before Christmas.
Fedex has successfully wooed some big customers from United Parcel Service.  [ D1. ]  Fedex has been able to win retail clients by better controlling its costs, and hence its fees.  [ D2. ] Philip Morris will sell a food-service business in an effort to focus on its brand-name foods.
The sale of Kraft Foodservice to Clayton, Dubilier &amp; Rice is estimated at $700 million.  [ D1. ] BMW will supply Rolls-Royce with its engineering expertise and with components for future Rolls-Royce and Bentley models.
The deal represents a victory for BMW over Mercedes-Benz.  [ D1. ] Mattel plans to eliminate 1,000 jobs, or 4.5 percent of its work force.
The company also announced a 5-for-4 stock split.  [ D5. ] Xerox sold Constitution Re, a reinsurance company, to Exor America for $400 million.  [ D5. ] Shares of Cyrix tumbled after the company said earnings would be lower than expected.
Stocks of other chip makers fell.  [ D5. ] LTV, Sumitomo and British Steel will join in a venture to build a $450 million mini-mill in the United States.  [ D5. ] Ben &amp; Jerry's expects to post a loss for the quarter, its first since going public in 1984.
Its stock fell sharply.  [ D5. ] The chairman at Saatchi &amp; Saatchi's New York agency said he would relinquish his post if Maurice Saatchi, who was ousted as chairman of the parent company, wanted it.  [ D22. ]
After impassioned protests, Wal-Mart rescinded for the first time a planned store closing in Bridge City, Tex.  [ A16. ] Markets  Treasury prices were little changed ahead of a meeting today of the Federal Reserve's policy-making committee.  [ D8. ] Stock prices were lower in sluggish trading.
The Standard &amp; Poor's 500 index declined 0.89 point.  [ D10. ] Natural gas prices tumbled on forecasts for mild winter weather.
Heating oil prices fell.
Orange juice prices surged.  [ D19. ] The dollar climbed against the Italian lira.  [ D19. ] Today's Columns  Expansion has helped Regis, the nation's largest operator of hair salons, draw a following among analysts.
Market Place.  [ D10. ] Toyota says its attempt to sell the Tercel to the twentysomething market through an infomercial has met with positive results in tests.
Advertising.  [ D21. ]


A Portion of Playoff Puzzle
What if the Giants upset the Cowboys on Saturday and finish the regular season with a 9-7 record?
And what if the Vikings, Lions and Bears of the N.F.C.'s Central Division all lose and also finish at 9-7?


A Tale for the 90's From Louisa May Alcott
More than a century after its author's death, a manuscript by Louisa May Alcott that was rejected in the 19th century as too sensational is to be published by Random House.
Titled "A Long Fatal Love Chase," it is the tale of a young woman stalked by a former lover.


New Shot at Cold Fusion By Pumping Sound Waves Into Tiny Bubbles
EVER since the first hydrogen bomb was detonated in 1952, scientists have sought to harness thermonuclear fusion as a peaceful power source, but that goal has proved tantalizingly elusive.
Now, however, there seems to be an outside chance that a wholly new technique could achieve it.
Bombarding microscopic bubbles with intense sound waves could convert the bubbles into minuscule fusion furnaces.
Recent experiments by a half-dozen laboratories suggest that a mysterious phenomenon called sonoluminescence may be capable of raising the temperature of gas trapped in a tiny bubble to 1.8 million degrees Fahrenheit or more -- enough, in principle, to ignite fusion.


Raise Retirement Age?
To the Editor:
Proposals to avert the Social Security System's expected budgetary crunch by raising the retirement age to 70 are based on two faulty assumptions -- that the labor market can readily absorb the resultant influx of 65- to 70-year-olds and that almost all workers in that age category will be medically and physically able to work full time.


CPI Corp.(CPY,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 12


President Outlines Cutbacks To Pay for Tax Relief Plans
President Clinton today outlined plans to reshape, abolish or sell off scores of Federal programs as a first step toward financing his proposed tax breaks for the middle class and remaining competitive with the Republicans in the race to shrink the Government.
With Vice President Al Gore and top officials from five Federal agencies beside him, Mr.
Clinton sketched out proposals that he said would yield $24 billion over five years by reorganizing the way the Government delivers services in fields as diverse as transportation and housing and by farming out other operations to the private sector.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League
BALTIMORE ORIOLES -- Acquired John DeSilva, pitcher, from the Los Angeles Dodgers for John O'Donoghue, pitcher.
Named Steve Pastorino general manager of High Desert of the California League.


Paychex Inc.(PAYX,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Farah Inc.(FRA,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 4


JAZZ
Looking for Repetition? It Won't Be Found Here  Bruce Barth, pianist Smalls
There isn't much point in waiting for Bruce Barth to repeat himself: he doesn't.
Mr.
Barth, best known for his membership in the trumpeter Terence Blanchard's quartet, has lots of resources, and he isn't shy about using them.


DANCE
Beauty and Intelligence From a Former Hawkins Dancer  Lifedance/Gloria McLean and Dancers Dia Center for the Arts
A program of new dances by Gloria McLean presented on Friday night lived up to the promise of earlier work by this former Erick Hawkins dancer.


Lilia Skala, Actress Best Known For Work in 'Lilies of the Field'
Lilia Skala, a stage and screen actress best known for her portrayal of the headstrong Mother Superior in the 1963 film "Lilies of the Field," died on Sunday at her home in Bay Shore, L.I.
She was in her 90's, but her exact date of birth was unknown, her family said.
Miss Skala's performance in "Lilies of the Field," which also starred Sidney Poitier, earned her an Oscar nomination and a Golden Globe Award.
She appeared in numerous other movies, including "Call Me Madam" with Ethel Merman (both in roles they had in the original Broadway stage version), "Ship of Fools," "Roseland," "Flashdance," "Heartland" and "House of Games." Her last screen appearance was in the 1991 film "Men of Respect."


Serbs, Meeting With Carter, Agree to Bosnian Cease-Fire
Cajoled by former President Jimmy Carter, the Bosnian Serbs today offered a four-month cease-fire in Bosnia and agreed to open peace negotiations based on an international plan they rejected in July.
After more than eight hours of talks, during which Mr.
Carter suggested the Serbs had been misunderstood by people in the United States, the Bosnian Serb leader, Radovan Karadzic, said that new American interpretations of the international peace plan had transformed it into "a basis for further development."


International Jensen Inc.(IJIN,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Laughter And Joy, And Then Gunfire
At the birthday celebration in a Queens steakhouse, the three couples ate and laughed, and through it all, 31-year-old Laakhraj Dalipram snapped pictures.
Finally he thought of himself. "What about me?" he said.


U.S. Says Pilots Thought They Were Over South Korea
The Pentagon said today that the last radio message from two Army pilots whose helicopter went down in North Korea showed that they were not on a hostile surveillance mission, and thought that they were flying over South Korea.
Asserting that the helicopter pilots had unwittingly strayed north of the demilitarized zone, Pentagon officials made public details of the pilots' last radio message.
In it they reportedly said they were at a checkpoint in South Korea, while they went down minutes later more than 10 miles away, in North Korea.


A Welcome Respite in the School Feud
After weeks of public criticism aimed at getting New York City's Schools Chancellor to leave town, Mayor Rudolph Giuliani now says that Ramon Cortines should get a one-year extension on a contract that expires next June 30.
The Board of Education will offer Mr.
Cortines a new contract this week that runs for at least another two years.
For the good of the school system, he should stay and Mr.
Giuliani should endorse the board's two-year extension.
The essence of Mayor Giuliani's criticism is that Mr.
Cortines has failed to squeeze more fat out of the board's bureaucracy.
The Mayor's attacks, particularly in recent days, left him increasingly isolated as parents and civic and business leaders rallied around Mr.
Cortines.


Gun Exchange Program Returns


Chongqing Journal; Chinese Enshrine Stilwell (His Cross Was Chiang)
Gen.
Joseph W. Stilwell, commander of American forces in the China-Burma-India theater during World War II, has made a return of sorts to this wartime capital.
Communist Party authorities here have evicted the workers of a small factory that makes steel rims for motorcycle wheels to set up a museum to the American officer who struggled from 1942 to 1944 to get Chiang Kai-shek's Nationalist army to fight the Japanese, not the Chinese Communists.


Washington a Starter Again
There's nothing like a blown coverage by the backup player to get a benched starter back in the coach's good graces.
So Brian Washington was reinstalled today as the Jets' strong safety for Saturday's finale in Houston, even though he was so annoyed at not suiting up for Sunday's game that he didn't even bother to attend.
"Brian's going to work this week with the intention of starting," said Coach Pete Carroll, who met with him this morning.
"I expect him to work real hard and get into the game plan and fit back in."


Frazier Stops Medication
Nebraska quarterback TOMMIE FRAZIER was taken off an anticoagulant drug yesterday and cleared to scrimmage with the Cornhuskers in Miami on Saturday.
After the scrimmage, Frazier will begin taking a different anticoagulant until about 24 hours before the Orange Bowl eight days later.
He will resume taking the medication after the Jan. 1 game.


Military Officials Hold Talks On Bolstering U.N. Bosnia Force
Military chiefs of European countries contributing to the United Nations force in Bosnia began two days of discussions here today with American and Russian officials on how to improve the force's ability to protect civilians from the fighting.
American officials said that Gen.
John M. Shalikashvili, the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, presented a long list of measures to make the force better able to withstand military pressure from the Bosnian Serbs and other parties to the conflict.


Super Rite Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 26


Intensity and Intimacy From a Single Voice
Three or four tunes into her first set at Tramps on Friday, the singer Chaka Khan let rip a high note that had all the impact of a bullet hitting a plate-glass window.
Suddenly everything changed.
Ms.
Khan had been struggling with a reluctant sound system.
Then she bloomed.
And she has something to bloom with.
Although Ms.
Khan is capable of vocal virtuosity, she's after something else.
Ever since her first recordings, in 1974, she has had an easy way with intimacy, using an enveloping voice that equates closeness with sexuality.
Ms.
Khan is sexual when she sings, but not in an obvious way; instead of the raucousness of the bump and grind, or even the eroticism of secrecy a whisper can suggest, she manipulates by being a friend.


Most Parents Want Sex Education in Schools; A Dangerous Ignorance
To the Editor:
In response to "We've Educated Sex to Death" (Op-Ed, Dec. 13) by Kay S. Hymowitz, I would like to point out that ignorance does not equal passion, nor does it equal love.


Some of the Fog Clears From Playoff Scenarios
A week ago the National Football League post-season picture was a muddled mess of tedious scenarios.
But it cleared up significantly over the weekend.
The 49ers, National Football Conference West Division champions, have home-field advantage throughout the playoffs.
Pittsburgh, which clinched the A.F.C.
Central Division by beating Cleveland on Sunday, has home-field advantage in the A.F.C.
The Browns and Dolphins are in the playoffs.
Dallas is the only other team in the N.F.C. to have clinched a playoff berth.


Most Parents Want Sex Education in Schools; Aftermath of 60's
To the Editor:
Kay S. Hymowitz disparages Surgeon General Joycelyn Elders's efforts in sexuality education along with those of Planned Parenthood and Antioch College (Op-Ed, Dec. 13).
Ms.
Hymowitz indicates that she prefers ignorance to these activities and others she describes.
This attitude leads to the acquisition of avoidable and sometimes incurable diseases and unwanted pregnancy.


CHRONICLE
When BILL ADLER was working on his new book, "The Uncommon Wisdom of Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis: A Portrait in Her Own Words," the quality about Mrs.
Onassis that most surprised him was her wit.
"I never realized how humorous she was," Mr.
Adler, the editor of the book, said yesterday.
The book, published by Citadel Press, includes quotations from Mrs.
Onassis during every period of her life, from childhood through the White House years, her two marriages and her life in New York as an editor.
Mr.
Adler, a book packager who has written or edited more than 100 books in his 38-year career, did not set out to pull together Mrs.
Onassis's lifetime of words.
After she died of non-Hodgkin's lymphoma in May, he was invited to talk about her on a radio talk show in West Palm Beach, Fla.


Chess
Mexico is progressing in chess by strengthening its Copa Gobernador Tournament in Nueva Leon, year after year.
This time, in its fall running, 10 of the 14 entrants were grandmasters, making it one of the strongest in the Americas.
They were topped by the Spanish grandmaster Miguel Illescas Cordoba, who posted a 9-4 score on his way to victory.
Gennady Sagalchik, an American international master originally from Russia, and Walter Browne, a Berkeley, Calif., grandmaster, each tallied 8-5 to tie for second and third.
This amounted to a third norm for Sagalchik, who will soon be officially elevated to the grandmaster rank by the International Chess Federation.


At Long Last, New Jersey Gets a Statewide System for Courts
Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman today signed legislation that will finally give New Jersey the statewide court system envisioned in the 1947 Constitution and that holds out the hope of property tax relief as well.
The new law will shift 7,700 county employees who work in the court system to the state payroll by 1999, for an annual saving to the counties of $326 million.


Ingles Markets reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 24


No Headline
"The Russian empire was never capable of using a scalpel. It has always barged into other people's gardens with a bear's claw." -- MUSA MIRZHUYEV, military adviser to the leader of Chechnya.  [ A1:6. ]


Swinging Under Planets' Plane, Spacecraft Studies Sun's Poles
MORE than four years and a billion miles out from Earth, a spacecraft appropriately named for the legendary wandering hero, Ulysses, is traveling in previously unexplored parts of the solar system.
These are regions above and below the plane in which the Sun's retinue of planets reside, empty quarters dominated by the magnetic fields and streaming particles from the Sun's poles.
It took the gravity of mighty Jupiter to bend the Ulysses spacecraft's trajectory "downward" and away from this plane of the ecliptic, sending it off where no craft had ever traveled.
In observations over the last four months from this completely new perspective, the spacecraft has presented scientists with a wealth of data about solar dynamics and some findings that they did not expect, and have yet to understand.


Rite Aid Corp.(RAD,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 26


Simpson Judge Sets Date for Pretrial Hearing on DNA and Rules on Jail Outburst
Judge Lance A. Ito handed opposing sides in the O. J Simpson case a split decision today.
Prosecutors will not be able to hear the possibly incriminating remark Mr.
Simpson shouted to a minister, Roosevelt Grier, Judge Ito ruled.
But the judge rejected a defense motion to meld a hearing on the admissibility of DNA evidence into the trial itself.
Judge Ito's decision to keep the Simpson-Grier conversation private was a rare victory for the defense in the case, which has seen the judge allow a variety of disputed materials into evidence.
But Mr.
Simpson's statement to Mr.
Grier last November -- its contents have never been disclosed -- would have been gravy for the prosecution; its case never really hinged on it.


Municipal Investment Managers Get Taste of Wall St.'s Hard Sell
The brokers besieged Judy Comstock, who manages a $350 million investment pool for Idaho municipalities.
They wanted to sell her investments of the sort that later helped to send Orange County, Calif., into bankruptcy.
"They were like camels," Ms. Comstock said, "trying to put their nose in our tent."


3 Steelmakers in $450 Million Mini-Mill Pact
In an indication of how the two sectors of the basic steel industry are converging, three integrated steel companies announced plans yesterday to build a $450 million mini-mill in the Southeastern United States.
The new mill will be half-owned by the LTV Corporation of Cleveland, with the remaining half split evenly by Sumitomo Metal Industries and British Steel P.L.C.
Although joint undertakings involving Japanese and American steel companies have become common, this is the first time American, Japanese and European steelmakers have invested together in a new production plant.


E.M.S. Criticized On Arrival Time
Employees and customers of the Tung Shing House restaurant in Queens asked yesterday why ambulances raced by to care for other victims of a gunfight but did not stop to help a dying co-worker.
One patron, Representative Gary Ackerman of Queens, said he called 911 three times to report the shooting of Shelley Yin, the cashier.
He said it was at least 40 minutes after the last call before an ambulance arrived.


Car Insurance Covers Shooting, Court Says
The New Jersey Supreme Court, in a 4 to 3 opinion, ruled today that a victim of a drive-by shooting was entitled to medical benefits under his father's automobile insurance policy.
The case involves Kurt Lindstrom, who has been a quadriplegic since April 15, 1989.
His spinal column was injured by a random shot fired from a passing car while at he was attending an outdoor party at the University of North Carolina-Wilmington, where he was a student.


Job at Saatchi in New York Awaits Founder, if He Wants It
There were significant personnel developments yesterday at two agencies owned by the Saatchi &amp; Saatchi Company, Saatchi &amp; Saatchi Advertising Worldwide and Bates Worldwide.
Following the forced resignation on Friday of Maurice Saatchi as chairman at Saatchi &amp; Saatchi, Edward L. Wax, chairman and chief executive at Saatchi &amp; Saatchi Advertising in New York, said he would relinquish his position as chairman of the agency holding company's flagship subsidiary if Mr.
Saatchi wanted it.


Sirhan Parole Denial Ignored Crucial Evidence
To the Editor:
The brief Dec. 2 Associated Press item about the denial of parole to Sirhan B. Sirhan on Dec. 1 leaves out the most interesting events at the parole hearing, which was broadcast live by Court TV.
As Mr.
Sirhan's lawyer, I pointed out some important facts about the evidence.


Ailey Troupe Honoring A 30-Year Veteran
Small, neat and bespectacled, Dudley Williams looks very like one of William Steig's thoughtful mice or a scholarly expert on some long-buried language.
But he is a modern dance legend, both for his artistry and his longevity.
Tonight at City Center, the Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater will pay tribute to Mr.
Williams for his 30th anniversary with the company.
Mr.
Williams is an anomaly in modern dance.
At an unhesitatingly volunteered 57 years old, he continues to perform frequently and remains a company star, renowned for the eloquent reserve and physical control of his dancing.
In a time when dancers are expected to be razzle-dazzle technicians, Mr.
Williams has been celebrated for his sense of the power of the small detail.


Hardee's Selects Evans Group
Hardee's Food Systems in Rocky Mount, N.C., said yesterday that it had named the Evans Group in Denver to handle its Midwestern regional advertising account, previously at Chuck Ruhr Advertising in Minneapolis.
Evans was awarded the account, covering 27 markets with billings estimated at $20 million to $25 million, after an informal review in which the names of the other participants were not disclosed.


Bridge City Journal; In Taking On a Corporate Goliath, A Small Town Saves Its Wal-Mart
Maybe it was the 2,064 signatures on the petitions in this East Texas community of 8,000 people.
"Don't do it! Will shop Kmart if you do," one person added.
"Don't want a Super store, want this one," wrote another.
"I have to have you here!" said a third.
Or maybe it was the impassioned letter from Libby Mitchell and Cheryl Meeks, two housewives who led the protest against the planned closing of the Bridge City Wal-Mart.
"Wal-Mart was built on small towns like ours," they said.
"Now all over America, corporate Wal-Mart is chipping away at their own foundations, store by store."


BMW to Help Rolls-Royce Develop a New Model Line
Rolls-Royce Motor Cars Ltd., perhaps the quintessential British company, said today that it would turn to BMW of Germany for help in building a new generation of luxury cars.
After months of negotiations, BMW beat out Mercedes-Benz to supply engineering expertise and key components, including engines, for future Rolls-Royce and Bentley models.


Truce? Expect a Wider War
Jimmy Carter's success in getting a renewable four-month cease-fire between the Bosnian Serbs and Muslims is no great accomplishment.
The Balkan winter imposes a virtual truce -- and warmer weather is sure to bring renewed Serbian aggression.
Besides, the Serbs had been willing to agree to a truce before Mr.
Carter arrived.
The Serbs have conceded little by declaring a willingness to renew talks on dividing Bosnia and to stop harassing United Nations peace- keepers.
The big issue is whether they will accept the so-called contact group's plan that gives them 49 percent of Bosnia and the Muslims 51 percent.
Mr.
Carter's intervention may well have made such an agreement less likely.


An Afternoon of Bands And Good Intentions
Sunday afternoon's concert of young jazz artists at Davis Hall at City College, called "New York Jazz Today!" and produced by Alexa Birdsong, a young promoter who has previously worked for George Wein's Festival Productions and for Jazz at Lincoln Center, was ambitious.
It was also warranted and timely: young players are one of the more important stories in jazz now, and they deserve a forum in concert halls.
But the six bands didn't perform up to their abilities.
At its best, the concert featured the pianist Eric Reed and his band turning the gospel standard "Wade in the Water" into a post-Coltrane exploration, with percussive, vague chords underlining a relationship between Coltrane's music and the church.
At its least, it presented the vocalist Tess Marsalis, the former wife of Branford Marsalis, who, on the basis of this performance, isn't yet at the level of her peers.
In between, a host of young musicians put forth oddly uninspired, short sets that rarely caught the vibrancy of their performances in clubs.


How to Save a Season in 2 Days
When the National Hockey League Players Association meets in Toronto today and tomorrow, the locked-out players will fine-tune their strategy to attempt to salvage the remainder of the season.
How much have they given so far in collective bargaining?
Plenty, especially with the entry-level salary cap and the elimination of free agency for young players and the elimination of arbitration for that same group.
These concessions will hold down the wages of more than only young players for years to come.


Border Path Is Deadly for 3 Elephants
SMART and trainable though they may be, elephants have no way to recognize international borders that run through their stamping grounds.
So when three of the largest and longest studied bull elephants in Africa wandered from their primary territory in Kenya into neighboring Tanzania, they were greeted by three hunters, an American and two Germans, armed with permits and high-powered rifles who killed them for sport.
Although Americans cannot import anything made of ivory or buy a new piano with ivory keys, the United States Fish and Wildlife Service issues import permits that allow hunters to bring back elephant tusks from animals they have shot legally.


Peasants Block Roads in Troubled South Mexican State
Peasants who said they were part of a mobilization ordered by the rebel Zapatista National Liberation Army blocked several highways in the southern state of Chiapas today and took over the town hall in at least one community outside the zone that the rebels have held for almost a year.
But no shots were reported, and Government officials insisted that the actions were a civil protest by peasants and Indians and not the resumption of the insurrection that began in Chiapas on Jan. 1.


Autistic Teen-Ager Arraigned in Death of His Infant Nephew
As he was arraigned on a charge of throwing his 5-month-old nephew to his death from the window of their Upper West Side apartment, Michael Holmes, an autistic teen-ager, saw his mother in the courtroom yesterday, her body sagging with grief, and he began wailing loudly, waving his arms and bobbing his head back and forth.
After Judge Michael A. Gross of Criminal Court ordered that the 17-year-old defendant be sent to Bellevue Hospital for a psychiatric examination, Michael's 18-year-old brother, Frederick, screamed, "You can't do this, he's my baby brother, please don't take him away!"


Cuba's New Cardinal Leads a Bolder Church
The occasion was one of celebration, and so many of the faithful turned up that they spilled out of the main cathedral here and into the surrounding square, where they cheered and waved Cuban and Vatican flags.
Inside, jubilant worshipers hoisted banners that proclaimed "Cuba has a Cardinal!" and chanted "Long live the Church!"
Appointed last month as Cuba's first Cardinal in more than 30 years, Jaime Cardinal Ortega y Alamino returned last week from his investiture in Rome to find his flock looking to him for leadership and spiritual sustenance.
The passionate reaction to his designation was one of many recent signs of the reinvigoration of the Roman Catholic Church here.


Edward J. DeBartolo, Developer, 85, Is Dead
Edward John DeBartolo, a real estate developer who helped create the suburban shopping mall and used his success to invest in horse racing and professional sports teams, including the San Francisco 49ers, died yesterday at his home in Youngstown, Ohio.
He was 85.
The cause was complications of pneumonia, according to a statement released yesterday by the Edward J. DeBartolo Corporation.


Going Off the Beaten Path to Track Down Clues About AIDS
OF all the enigmas of AIDS, few match that of Kaposi's sarcoma, which has stumped the best scientific minds investigating AIDS.
Once a rare cancer in the United States, Kaposi's sarcoma became epidemic along with AIDS about 1981.
No one has figured out why the sarcoma is far more common among gay men than all other types of AIDS patients.
There has long been ample epidemiologic evidence to suggest that some infectious agent, quite apart from the AIDS virus, plays a role in causing Kaposi's sarcoma, but the nature of this second agent has baffled the experts.


POP
With Lame and Combat Boots And Much Singing Along  Cranberries Beacon Theater
One can tell a lot about performers by the way they choose to present themselves.
On Friday night, Dolores O'Riordan of the Cranberries, the Irish alternative pop group that played before an enthusiastic and appreciative audience, performed most of the show in a silvery lame evening dress that hung daintily from two straps on her shoulders.
On her feet, however, were two huge black combat boots.


Corrections
An obituary on Saturday about Prof.
Arthur Bestor, a constitutional historian, omitted a survivor.
Professor Bestor, who died last Tuesday, is also survived by a sister, Mary Frances Cram of Advance, N.C.


Sudbury Inc.(SUDS,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Cyrix Shares Drop a Third on Lower Earnings Outlook
Shares of the Cyrix Corporation lost about a third of their value today after the microchip designer said that its operating profit margins and earnings would be lower than expected in the first half of 1995.
The disclosure -- which came in the midst of reported problems with the Intel Corporation's flawed Pentium chip and market worries about its reverberations through the semiconductor and computer industries -- pushed down the shares of other semiconductor companies as well.


By Design; Romance, Thy Name Is Lace
Clothes seem to be getting more romantic and feminine by the minute.
For spring, designers went wild with fabrics like chiffon, satin and lace.
Satin skirts were everywhere, often trimmed with petticoat lace.
And there were featherweight dresses that combined chiffon and fine lace.
For holiday parties, lace can be combined with any number of other fabrics to make a personalized statement.
Maeja Knits, a shop at 1061 Madison Avenue, near 80th Street, has a number of hand-loomed lace tunics, blouses and jackets in black, navy or pale teal blue.
They can give a new look to velvet pants, leggings, satin skirts, bodysuits or slip dresses.
There are long tunics with side slits, and one with deeply ruffled cuffs; kimono-style jackets, to be worn loose or sashed, and one knee-length poncho coverup (at $700, the most expensive item).
Most styles range from $215 to $400.


Franklin Quest (FNQ,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


SCIENTISTS AT WORK: Kathy Schick and Nicholas Toth; Recreating Stone Tools To Learn Makers' Ways
LAST summer Kathy Schick and Nicholas Toth drove out to Oregon, bought 2,000 pounds of obsidian, quartzite and basalt from three quarries, hauled it back to their home here in a rental truck and dumped it in their backyard.
For Dr.
Toth and Dr.
Schick, a husband-and-wife team of archeologists at Indiana University, the load of rocks is a vehicle in interpreting human evolution.
Over the next few years they, their students, volunteers and a pygmy chimpanzee named Kanzi, well known in the anthropology community for his participation in language experiments, will flake the stones into tools, just as humans' hominid ancestors did beginning 2.5 million years ago.
The lithic experiments are part of their project to investigate human origins and evolution through technology.


Most Parents Want Sex Education in Schools; Public Policy Issues
To the Editor:
Kay S. Hymowitz(Op-Ed, Dec. 13) is incorrect.
Sex is not at all traditionally rooted in "love," "romance," "idealism," "passion" and similar emotions, as she believes.
Universally the traditional purpose of sex is procreation.
In many cases that has involved contract marriages arranged by parents for sons and daughters who have not met.


Which Came First? This Chicken.
A new analysis of the DNA of both Western and Asiatic breeds of domestic fowl suggests that their ultimate maternal ancestor belonged to a single subspecies of red jungle fowl, Gallus gallus gallus, similar to the cock above.
The study by Prince Akishinonomiya Fumihito, the second son of the Emperor of Japan, and colleagues appears in the current Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences.
It also says that mitochondrial DNA evidence indicates the domestication took place even earlier than the 8,000 years ago previously estimated, probably in the area of Thailand, where the species is still found in the wild.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-14  RUSSIA ATTACKS SEPARATISTS  Russia bombed the capital of a separatist area and attacked villages after it became clear that negotiations with the Russian President would not continue.
A1


Vallen Corp.(VALN,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Song Fest Co-Founder To Direct Arts Center At the 92d Street Y
Michael Barrett, a conductor and pianist who was a co-founder of the inventive New York Festival of Song, has been appointed director of the Tisch Center for the Arts at the 92d Street Y. Mr.
Barrett, who is 37 years old, is to begin his duties immediately, although he pointed out yesterday that because the center's programming was planned more than a season in advance, his own stamp would not be seen until at least 1996.
Mr.
Barrett's association with the Y began this season when his New York Festival of Song took up residence there.
He will continue to share the direction of the vocal music series with Steven Blier, and he will maintain a performing career outside the Y. Besides his work with the Festival of Song, he has conducted several music theater productions and is an adviser to the estate of Leonard Bernstein, for whom he was an assistant in the late 1980's.
He also directs the Moab Festival in Utah with his wife, Leslie Tomkins.


Most Parents Want Sex Education in Schools
To the Editor:
"We've Educated Sex to Death" (Op-Ed, Dec. 13) by Kay S. Hymowitz is yet another example of the myths and distortions about sexuality education.


Brett Lindros Misses Cut
The Islander rookie BRETT LINDROS failed to make the final cut Sunday for Canada's world junior team.
Asked whether he was bitter, Lindros, the 19-year-old brother of the National Hockey League star ERIC LINDROS, said: "Big time."
Lindros, selected ninth over all in the 1994 N.H.L. entry draft, was among six players cut by Coach DON HAY as the team reached the 22-player limit.


Q&amp;A
Winter Light
Q.
Does winter light from my southern window make vitamin D or prevent seasonal affective disorder?


Mayor and Medicaid: Old Puzzle, New Approach
The Giuliani administration's call for sharp reductions in health and welfare benefits for the poor represents a new approach to an old problem: how to get New York City out from under the burden of Medicaid.
With the cost of Medicaid steadily rising over the years, New York City mayors, Rudolph W. Giuliani included, have long battled for the state to pay the city's share of these health care costs for the poor.
But now Mr.
Giuliani has opened a second front and is seeking state approval simply to slash city spending on the Federal program by nearly a third.


Mattel Plans to Eliminate 1,000 Jobs in Revamping
Mattel Inc. announced a restructuring plan today that would eliminate about 1,000 jobs, or 4.5 percent of its total of 22,000.
Analysts described the layoffs as an attempt to cut costs after a year of acquisitions and record profits.


Kenneth Haskins; Educator, 71, Urged Decentralization
Kenneth W. Haskins, an educator who advocated greater community control over public schools, died last Tuesday at his home in Lithonia, Ga.
He was 71 and lived in Lithonia since his retirement in 1987.
The cause was cancer, said his daughter Verna Haskins Denny, of Manhattan.


Visit by Gore to China Is Under Study
The United States and China are discussing a visit to Beijing next year by Vice President Al Gore or Hillary Rodham Clinton, as a "trial run" for a state visit by President Clinton, Western officials here say.
Mr.
Clinton has been reluctant to visit China because of the country's still-repressive human rights practices and has privately admonished the Communist Party leadership to make further improvements before any presidential visit can be considered, Western officials say.


McNair and Tressel Honored
STEVE McNAIR, Alcorn State's record-setting quarterback, and Youngstown State Coach JIM TRESSEL are the winners of the WALTER PAYTON and EDDIE ROBINSON awards as the top player and coach in National Collegiate Athletic Association Division I-AA football.
McNair threw for 4,863 yards and 44 touchdowns, leading Alcorn State to an 8-2-1 record.
He also ran for 936 yards, finishing with 5,377 yards of total offense and pushing his career total offense to 16,823 yards, an N.C.A.A. record.


Government Securities Hold Steady
Prices of government securities were little changed yesterday, holding to very narrow trading ranges ahead of today's meeting of the Federal Reserve's policy making committee.
The 30-year bond rose 4/32 , to a price of 964/32 for a yield 7.84 percent, down from 7.85 percent on Friday.
In the shorter-maturity bill market, rates were up a few basis points.
A basis point is one-hundredth of a percentage point.


A Man of His Words; In Continuing to Attack Chancellor, Giuliani Is Playing by His Own Rules
This weekend, when he dropped his effort to oust Schools Chancellor Ramon C. Cortines, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani made no pretense about dropping his critical view of the Chancellor.
"If the decision was mine alone, I would say he's had his 18 months and not shown an ability to create the change the system needs," the blunt-spoken Mr.
Giuliani said Sunday night.
"If I had my druthers, I would say we should find someone who wants to make changes, rather than someone who has to be forced into it."
These are not the words of a peacemaker.
The Board of Education, rejecting Mr.
Giuliani's proposal to reappoint Mr.
Cortines to a one-year term with conditions, is poised to renew the Chancellor's contract for two years.
If Mr.
Cortines accepts, it is clear he will have to put up with continuing opposition from City Hall.
Can a Chancellor function effectively without the confidence of the Mayor?


Slow-to-Change Riley Says It's About Time
It will take more than a return home to fix what's wrong with the Knicks.
New York (12-9) is off to its slowest start in Pat Riley's four seasons as coach, and the team has multiple problems to address heading into tonight's game against the Nets at Madison Square Garden.


Pedro Collor, 43, the Brother And Nemesis of Brazil's Ex-Chief
Pedro Collor de Mello, who made public the political scandal that forced his brother, Fernando, from the Brazilian presidency, died of brain cancer in New York today.
His death, at 43, came a week after his brother was acquitted of corruption charges.
In an epic clash between brothers, Pedro Collor single-handedly unveiled two years ago a multimillion-dollar kickback ring that operated at high levels of President Collor's Government.


Drug Trafficker Convicted Of Blowing Up Jetliner
A Colombian said to be the most feared assassin of the Medellin drug cartel was convicted by a Federal jury in Brooklyn yesterday of blowing up an Avianca jetliner over Bogota in 1989.
All 107 people aboard, including two United States citizens, were killed in one of the worst acts of drug-trade terrorism.
The 29-year-old defendant, Dandeny Munoz-Mosquera -- who reputedly killed 50 police officers, judges and other officials in a ruthless career launched at age 12 -- was also convicted of smuggling tons of cocaine into the United States over a decade, and of racketeering and conspiracy that included murders and other acts of terrorism to promote international drug trafficking.


CHRONICLE
KATE FRENCH, who is the executive director of Wave Hill, the 28-acre botanical garden and cultural center in Riverdale, the Bronx, received a gift that she didn't expect the other day: the presidency of Wave Hill.
"For the last five years DAVID BEIM has been both chairman and president, and at the last board meeting he said he wanted to give me a present: one of his titles," she said.
"I was thrilled and also surprised -- because I usually put together the agenda for the board meetings."


Mild Weather Puts Chill on World Cup Races
No matter how much snow falls on Europe between now and the World Cup final in March, the mild winter here has been a blow to the finances and tradition of Alpine ski racing and given rise to talk of holding more early-season events in North America.
Plagued by a nearly total lack of snow in the Alps and temperatures that made snow-making all but impossible, not one of the first eight resorts scheduled to be the sites of World Cup men's events before Christmas was able to keep its commitment.


Ready for Combat? The Situation Isn't So Simple
On the icy, windswept Kansas plain here, Maj.
Gen.
Randolph House today was relishing the ominous "thump, thump, thump" from mud-spattered M1-A1 battle tanks blasting at pop-up targets of a mock enemy.
"Land warfare is a complex business that you have to practice regularly," said the 49-year-old commander of the Army's First Infantry Division, the fabled "Big Red One," the Army's oldest active division, which has fought in every American war since World War I.


The Neediest Cases; Woman Receives Help To Raise Her Little Girl
The first signs of her illness appeared a decade ago, when she would inexplicably lose her balance and fall.
Soon after, Sally P. was found to have multiple sclerosis, a disease that affects the central nervous system.
Now, at age 37, Mrs.
P. depends on a walker and struggles with the simplest of tasks.
But she has refused to let the painful disease keep her from raising her little girl.


On My Mind; Missing at The White House
The three men, New Yorkers of the center-right, had voted for Bill Clinton.
"Do you think he can be salvaged?" one of them asked.


Sports of The Times; Is This The End Of Romance?
"AFELLA had a flat tire in front of an insane asylum," P. K. Wrigley, the late owner of the Chicago Cubs, once began a story.
"Several of the inmates came to the bars and watched him take off the bad tire and start to put on the spare. But he accidentally kicked all of the nuts down an open manhole. He didn't know what to do.
"One of the inmates called out, 'Why don't you take one nut from each of the other wheels and put them on the fourth and then fix it up as soon as you get to the nearest service station?'


Open Office Windows Save on Energy
To the Editor:
Re your Dec. 14 new article on the new Federal courthouse in Manhattan's Foley Square:


General Truths From a Novel's Specific Kooks
HUNTERS AND GATHERERS  By Geoff Nicholson  215 pages. Overlook Press. $21.95.
What do novels, encyclopedias and collections of beer cans all have in common?
As Geoff Nicholson, a British writer, demonstrates in his delightful new novel, they are all methods of organizing the chaos of the world: human means of forging connections, creating order and making sense.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.50
8.50
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
4.75
4.75
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
5.38
5.34
3.03
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.59
5.53
3.04
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
6.30
6.20
3.21
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.80
7.80
5.80
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.84
7.85
6.30
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.72
8.72
7.31
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.97
6.99
5.56
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


From a Landlord-Tenant Dispute, 4 Fatal Shootings
Yesterday was the day that Charles Chang-ming Lee and Shelley Yin, husband-and-wife landlords from Taiwan, were going to evict a problem tenant from a cubicle in the basement of their Elmhurst duplex.
But their tenant, Hsu Wen-ping, put a violent end to their plans on Sunday night in a shooting spree that left death in three locations scattered through central Queens.
By the time it ended late Sunday, the landlords and their tenant were dead.
So was a Mount Vernon man who happened to cross the gunman's path on his way home from a steakhouse.
And two police officers were wounded, one so seriously that his blood left a dark trail through a blocklong parking garage as he was pulled to safety.


Market Place; Regis and its hair salons are attracting investor attention.
AN expansion by the Regis Corporation has attracted interest in the company, the nation's largest operator of hair salons, from Wall Street analysts and large investors, who see further growth ahead.
Regis, based in Edina, Minn., has 1,479 hair salons, most in shopping malls and all owned by the company.
In the last year, the company has opened or acquired 256 outlets, and analysts say it has attained a size large enough to reduce expenses to absorb smaller operations more easily.


It Might as Well Be Spring


CNN Is Sentenced for Tapes And Makes Public Apology
A Federal judge gave the Cable News Network a choice today: pay a hefty fine for broadcasting jailhouse telephone conversations of Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega or publicly apologize and be fined far less.
The network began broadcasting its message of regret on its 6 o'clock news tonihgt.
The text was shown on the screen as a news anchor read it off camera.
After 22 hours, CNN will pay the Federal Government $85,000 to cover legal fees incurred as it was being convicted of criminal contempt of court for using the tape recordings in violation of a Federal judge's order.


A Xerox Insurance Unit Is Sold to the Agnellis
The Xerox Corporation said yesterday that it had sold part of its insurance operations, Constitution Re, to Exor America, an investment arm of the Agnelli family of Italy, for more than $400 million in cash.
The sale marks the first breakthrough in Xerox's nearly two-year effort to extricate itself from the insurance business.
The Constitution Re Corporation is a profitable reinsurance company that provides insurance to other insurance companies, either for specific risks or for the entire company.


Tobacco Giant Plans Sale of Unit
The Philip Morris Companies announced yesterday that it planned to sell its Kraft Foodservice division for an estimated $700 million to Clayton, Dubilier &amp; Rice Inc., an investment partnership, in a further attempt to reinvigorate the company's food business by sharpening its focus.
Kraft Foodservice, which distributes more than 160 products manufactured by many suppliers that include Kraft General Foods, its corporate parent, has $4 billion in sales and 250,000 customers ranging from restaurants and hotels to hospitals and schools.


Hysterics All Dressed Up for the Holidays
The dead man wears tennis shoes and stands on his head, covered with branches and disguised as a Christmas tree.
"Mixed Nuts," Nora Ephron's frenetic comedy about a suicide hot line in Venice, Calif., is about as funny as that corpse, and about as natural.
Adapted from the French film "Le Pere Noel Est une Ordure," it has a farcical tone that loses everything in translation, with only hand-waving, door-slamming and zany costumes left behind.
A title song incorporating the names of nut varieties is only one of the film's desperate ploys.
Ms.
Ephron is generally so much funnier than this that "Mixed Nuts" leaves a mystifying impression.
Not even its screenplay, which she adapted with her sister Delia Ephron, shows much comic style.
The film's modus operandi is unleashing a horde of not-so-cute eccentrics in a confined setting and encouraging them all to talk, fuss and gesticulate at the same time.
This leads to a scene with five people crammed noisily into the same bathroom, four of them oblivious and the fifth using the toilet.


Merck Is Selling a Chemical Unit for $1.08 Billion
Merck &amp; Company said yesterday that it was selling Kelco, the last of its noncore chemical businesses, to the Monsanto Company for $1.08 billion, a price that some analysts said was much too high.
Monsanto shares plummeted $4 a share yesterday to close at $68.875 on the New York Stock Exchange.
Merck rose 37.5 cents, to $38.625 a share, on the Big Board.


Corrections
An article on Dec. 13 about increased drug use by teen-agers referred imprecisely to a recent decline in the television visibility of the National Partnership for a Drug-Free America.
Media support, primarily through free network air time, is down; the organization has not relaxed its efforts.


CABARET
Nostalgic Movie Songs Of the 1930's, 40's and 50's  Maureen McGovern, singer Rainbow and Stars


From a leader in moderation messages, an aggressive new campaign against drunken driving.
THE Seagram Company, the worldwide alcoholic beverage marketer, is introducing the most pointed and aggressive campaign to combat drunken driving in 60 years of sponsoring moderation messages.
Print advertisements that begin running this week, timed to coincide with the party-hearty holiday season, take a sharper, harder tone.
The tougher tack, which emphasizes the consequences of driving while drunk with vividly morbid imagery, is aimed at eliciting the attention of an audience that has proved stubbornly resistant to pleas to curtail drinking and driving: younger men.


Another Delay at Microsoft
The Microsoft Corporation may yet rue the day it decided to call its new operating system Windows 95.
Microsoft said today that the software -- it is the much-anticipated successor to Windows 3.1, the most successful computer operating system yet -- may not be available until August, the third delay for a product that was originally supposed to be shipped this month.


Reinventing the Soup Kitchen
GOLDIE KEY, a retired nurse who lives in Greenwich Village, was finishing lunch at One City Cafe, which just opened at 240 West 14th Street in Manhattan.
She was pleased with her meal, she said, because "I can afford it, and the service is as good as you could want."
One City Cafe, which opened last week, is one of a growing number of nonprofit restaurants around the country that are reinventing soup kitchens, turning them into respectable places to eat for poor or homeless people as well as trying to draw those like Ms.
Key, who are looking for appealing but inexpensive meals.


Bosnian Serb Leader Offers His Revisions to Peace Plan
The Bosnian Serb leader, Radovan Karadzic, set out his ideas for radical changes to an American-backed international peace plan in a document he handed to former President Jimmy Carter today.
The document, labeled a "memorandum of understanding" and shown to The New York Times during an interview with Dr.
Karadzic, contains five points that would, if carried out, substantially redraw the map that redistributed Bosnian territory and resources as part of a peace proposal.
The Bosnian Government accepted the original map in July, but the Bosnian Serbs have rejected it repeatedly.


Of Wise Men and Wise Guys; Wrapped Up In Anxiety
THERE is one holiday gift whose purchase causes me more anxiety than any other.
Appropriately, it's the present for my psychotherapist.
The first gift I ever gave him was a box of pears from Harry &amp; David.
I wanted a present that could be mailed to avoid the possibility of an awkward moment when he would unwrap my gift and be unable to hide his disappointment.


Motivations for Giving As Varied as the Donors
Four weeks into its 83d annual appeal, The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund has received nearly 3,000 contributions -- 1,000 more than last year at this time.
As in past years, donors have written letters with their checks, describing a wide variety of reasons for giving.
"New York is a wonderful city where it is possible to see evidence of great wealth," wrote Arthur D. Tenenholtz of Brooklyn, who gave $80.
"Yet often in sight of the citadels of wealth, it is possible to see the poor and the homeless sleeping on gratings or begging. New Yorkers should clearly know the needs of the poor."


Analyst Says a State-Run Lilco Could Cut Electric Bills by 13%
A state takeover of the Long Island Lighting Company could save customers up to 13 percent on their electric bills over the next four years, according to an analyst hired by the Long Island Power Authority.
But under the analyst's proposal, Lilco stockholders would receive only $17.50 a share, or $4 a share less share than Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo recommended when he proposed the takeover in October.
Lilco shares closed unchanged today on the New York Stock Exchange at $15.625.


CLASSICAL MUSIC
In Between the Arias, Gags and Pratfalls  B. J. Ward, soprano and comic Weill Recital Hall


CHRONICLE
CHRISTIE BRINKLEY, the model, and RICKY TAUBMAN, a real estate developer, plan to be married tomorrow atop Telluride Ski Mountain in Colorado, reportedly in the presence of 150 guests and choirs flown in for the event.
The couple, who have been the source of much speculation since Ms.
Brinkley's separation last year and subsequent divorce from the singer Billy Joel, were in a serious helicopter crash along with three other people in April during a heli-skiing expedition on a nearby mountain.
Ms.
Brinkley suffered minor injuries.


Stocks Mostly Lower in Heavy Trading
The stock market closed mixed but generally lower in heavy trading yesterday after the Federal Reserve took no action on interest rates, a move that, at least in the short run, should have helped lift stock prices.
But several weeks ago, the market had begun to anticipate the Fed's possible reluctance to raise rates and therefore lifted prices in advance of a deferred action, some analysts said.


No Headline
For the third time in two months, shooting erupted near the White House today.
This time a Park Police officer critically wounded a homeless man holding a hunting knife.
President Clinton, who was working in the Oval Office when the shooting occurred at 9 A.M., was not in danger, officials said, and witnesses said he was not the target of threats by the homeless man.


Elders Stood Too Far Ahead of the Rest
To the Editor:
Frank Rich's "Last Taboo" (column, Dec. 18) hit the nail on the head: Surgeon General Joycelyn Elders is just the latest victim sacrificed to appease the moral majority.


Edwards (A.G.) Inc.(AGE,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Agreement Reached on Steps to Strengthen U.N. Force in Bosnia
Top military commanders of the United Nations, NATO and countries contributing to the United Nations peacekeeping force in Bosnia met here today and said they had agreed on measures to strengthen its effectiveness, come peace or more war.
Their recommendations included proposals to increase the force's size from the current level of 24,000 and to provide it with new transport helicopters and other aircraft and with armed NATO escorts.
That would enable the United Nations force to get supplies into towns by air when convoys are blocked on the ground.


Corrections
An article on Friday about efforts to attract development to lower Manhattan referred incorrectly to the city's estimate of lost revenue from proposed reductions in commercial rent and real estate taxes.
The city said the projected reduction, of $234 million, would occur over 12 years, not 3.


2 Die in Robbery Attempt at Brooklyn House
Two people were killed and three seriously wounded early yesterday, when gunmen burst into a Brooklyn home during a robbery attempt, the police said.
Fouad Ellayan, 57, was shot at least twice and died at his home on 1028 40th Street, in Borough Park.
One suspect, who was not identified by the police, was shot in the head and was pronounced dead on arrival at Brookdale Hospital Medical Center.


At the Nation's Table: Boston; They Don't Call It Beantown Anymore
Boston, once synonymous with stodgy, Yankee-style cooking, has a new generation of chef-restaurateurs, many of them proteges of the city's most respected chefs.
"The recent restaurant boom signifies a temporary end to the recession here," said Jane Lavine, a co-editor of the Zagat Guide to Boston Restaurants.
"The audience has grown considerably through the years and is now younger and more sophisticated."


Kansas Avoids an Upset
Kansas 80, Santa Clara 75
Greg Ostertag, benched at the start of the game, hit a momentum-shifting turnaround jumper at the two-minute mark as host Kansas overcame Santa Clara, 80-75, last night.


Food Notes
For Tasty Stockings
Food items make perfect last-minute gifts to tuck into stockings.


Dean Foods Co. (DF,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 27


For Dancers and Stage Managers With Ballet Theater, a New Voice
The American Guild of Musical Artists first took dancers under its wing in 1939.
Today, 1,000 of its 5,500 members are dancers and the union represents 24 ballet and modern-dance companies.
But the guild lost a major constituent when the 75 dancers and stage managers of American Ballet Theater broke away in June and then voted this month to ratify a contract negotiated by a new union, the Independent Artists of America, which represents only Ballet Theater.
Behind the break, which is the talk of the dance world and performing-arts unions, are problems that threaten the survival of ballet and modern-dance troupes around the country.
Those problems demand a new spirit of cooperation with management, the Ballet Theater members say.


U.S. Petroleum Data
In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
Dec. 16
Dec. 9
Dec. 17
1994
1994
1993
Gasoline production, daily
7.6
7.9
7.6
Distillate production, daily
3.2
3.3
3.4
Gasoline stocks
211.8
213.0
225.0
Distillate stocks
142.1
142.1
142.0
Crude imports, daily
6.7
7.2
6.8
Product imports, daily
1.2
1.9
1.7
Crude stocks
336.3
338.3
346.9
Crude production, daily
6.7
6.7
6.9
Refinery utilization (%)
93.5
92.2
91.7
Source: American Petroleum Institute


METRO DIGEST
COURT PROTECTS FREE SPEECH IN MALLS
Declaring that shopping malls have replaced the parks and squares that were "traditionally the home of free speech," the New Jersey Supreme Court ruled that the malls must allow access to protesters who want to distribute leaflets on social issues.
A1.


Players and Owners Still Remain Deadlocked Over Tax on Teams' Payrolls
As the players' strike matched the length of the abbreviated 1994 season, major league club owners turned to Jerry McMorris today as their latest hope for a settlement.
But after McMorris and Donald Fehr met one on one for three hours tonight, the owner of the Colorado Rockies and the players' labor leader agreed that the two sides remained deadlocked over the critical payroll tax issue.


Morrison Restaurants Inc.(RI,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 3


Mets Sign Birkbeck
MIKE BIRKBECK, a 33-year-old right-hander who had a 13-6 record with the Richmond Braves last season, has rejoined the Mets.
Birkbeck, whose 2.73 earned run average was the second lowest in the International League in 1994, was signed on Monday as a six-year minor league free agent.
In 1992, the Mets signed him as a free agent and he was 0-1 in the majors, while going 4-10 with the Mets' Tidewater farm team.


Behind a Deadly Shootout, a Troubled Life of Desperation
In the cramped basement cubicle where Hsu Wen-ping lived out his final days, a scroll hangs on the wall with two lines of Chinese characters that seem to cry out with the desperation of his life: "If the wrongs against me cannot be righted with a pen, then only a gun can defend my honor."
On Sunday, Mr.
Hsu apparently took those words into the streets, gunning down three people in a wild attack in Queens that culminated with his own death in a burst of police gunfire, the police said.


E. W. Swackhamer; TV Director Was 67
E.
W.
Swackhamer, who directed popular television series and movies, died on Dec. 5 in Berlin, where he was on location for a new film.
He was 67 and lived in Encino, Calif.
The cause was a ruptured aortic aneurysm, said his wife, Bridget Hanley.


INSIDE
Data on Smoking Is Faulted
Data frequently cited by the tobacco industry to show that secondhand smoke is not hazardous in the workplace were falsified, say three workers who made the measurements for a private company.
Page D23.
Tough Sailing for the QE2
The Queen Elizabeth 2, due in New York tomorrow, had rough seas and left behind about 500 angry passengers because of unfinished renovations, one more episode in a bad year for the cruise industry.
Page A19.


Ruling on Newcombe
A Federal judge yesterday said he would dismiss a civil lawsuit involving claims that an advertisement produced for the Coors Brewing Company had misappropriated the likeness of DON NEWCOMBE, the former Brooklyn and Los Angeles Dodgers pitcher.


Former Kidder Chief Named To Two Posts at Travelers
Michael A. Carpenter, who left in June as chief executive of Kidder, Peabody &amp; Company and before that was a deal-maker for GE Capital, was named to senior positions at the Travelers Group yesterday.
In one of his new jobs, Mr.
Carpenter, 48, will be responsible for the life and annuity businesses of Travelers Insurance, reporting to Robert I. Lipp, chief executive of all the Travelers Insurance businesses.


Johannesburg Journal; The Elite Are New, but Evita (Hmm) Has Entree
The white matron batted long lashes at President Nelson Mandela and squealed ecstatically: "You have freed all of us! You have freed me of all the guilt!"
Mr.
Mandela smiled an aw-shucks smile.
For South Africa's first black President, the only remarkable thing about this tribute was that this matron was actually a man wearing a floral-print dress, high-heeled shoes, three strands of pearls and a swoop of bouffant wig.


COLLEGE BASKETBALL REPORT
Gonzaga
Gonzaga (7-0), the school that produced John Stockton of the Utah Jazz, is off to its best start in 36 years of playing at the Division I level.
The Bulldogs, who play at Eastern Washington (1-6) tomorrow night, have won 33 straight home games, the third-longest home-court winning streak in the nation behind Indiana (47) and Massachusetts (37).


Helen Phillips, 92, Sociology Teacher
Helen U. Phillips, a sociologist who researched group theory as a means to helping people solve their problems, died on Dec. 3 in the Broomall Presbyterian Nursing Home in Broomall, Pa, a Philadelphia suburb.
She was 92.
The cause was heart failure, said the University of Pennsylvania, where Dr.
Phillips became a professor emeritus in 1967.


California Governor Sues To Void Motor-Voter Law
Gov.
Pete Wilson asked a Federal court today to declare the National Voter Registration Act unconstitutional.
Mr.
Wilson argued that the act was another example of Congress's laying down a law that states must then enforce at their own expense.
The act, which is scheduled to become effective next year, requires states to streamline voter registration, including allowing anyone applying for a driver's license to register simultaneously to vote.
The law, popularly known as the motor voter act, also permits registration for Federal elections by mail.


Boys Town Costs No More Than Other Residential Youth Care
To the Editor:
Re "What You Can't Learn From 'Boys Town' " (Op-Ed, Dec. 13):


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS  Third Slalom for Tomba  Alberto Tomba of Italy won his third World Cup slalom of the season yesterday, and did it despite pain from bruised ribs.
Tomba now has a winning streak of five slaloms, the final two of last season and the first three of this season.
The three-time Olympic champion beat Thomas Sykora of Austria by 1.49 seconds with a two-run time of 1 minute 44.73 seconds at Lech Am Arlberg, Austria.
Tomba, who celebrated his 28th birthday Monday night, returned to competition after dropping out of a giant slalom Sunday at Val d'Isere, France because of the rib injury suffered when he ran into a pole before the race in Sestriere, Italy last week. (AP) NORDIC SKIING


County Sets New Budget And Tax Rise
Battered by successful challenges to property assessments and by mandatory state programs, Westchester County has adopted a budget for next year that, on average, will raise county property taxes by 8.4 percent, the largest increase in four years.
Andrew P. O'Rourke, the County Executive, said in an interview that as soon as he receives an official version, he would sign the $980.8 million budget passed Monday evening by the county's Board of Legislators.
In that politically charged eight-hour session, legislators scuttled expenses like round-the-clock use of cars for 28 commissioners and assistants, then added projects dear to pivotal colleagues like night basketball at community centers.


Survey Details Gay Slayings Around U.S.
Bias-related slayings of homosexuals are often gratuitously violent and many go unsolved, according to a report released yesterday by 23 victims services and anti-violence groups nationwide.
The report, described by its compilers as the first national study of its kind, listed 151 such homicides in 29 states and the District of Columbia from January 1992 until early this month.
All but eight victims were men.


Bills Gain On Inaction By the Fed
Prices of Treasury bills and notes rose yesterday as the Federal Reserve's policy-making committee adjourned its meeting without altering interest-rate policy.
But the price of the 30-year bond slipped 2/32 of a percentage point, to 96 2/32 , for a yield of 7.84 percent, unchanged from Monday.


Hinting He Will Stay, Cortines Defends Work as Schools Chief
Giving the clear impression that he had decided to stay on as the head of the New York City school system, Chancellor Ramon C. Cortines yesterday offered an impassioned defense of his 16-month tenure and said he would try to improve his working relationship with Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani.
Breaking a long silence after weeks of unrelenting criticism by the Mayor, Mr.
Cortines declared in an interview that he was satisfied with his achievements so far.


The Melting Pot Myth Unmasked
In the decades before multiculturalism became a hot political issue, America liked to think of itself as the happy melting pot for grateful immigrants who couldn't wait to shed their cultural baggage and gorge on hot dogs, baseball and apple pie.
But as shown in "America Dreaming," an impressionistic music-theater piece exploring the collision of Eastern and Western cultures, that notion of happily-ever-after assimilation was always a myth.
Jointly produced by the Vineyard Theater and the Music-Theater Group, "America Dreaming" is an interlocking series of surreal reveries spun off from the metaphor of a beach side wedding ceremony joining Yuki (Liana Pai), a Japanese woman, and Robert (Billy Crudup), a white American.
Six other actors play an assortment of characters of varying symbolic and fantastical stripe, who figure in their lives.


In About-Face, Intel Will Swap Its Flawed Chip
Heeding the growing uproar about a tiny arithmetic flaw in its Pentium personal computer chip, the Intel Corporation abruptly reversed course today and said it would offer all customers a free replacement part upon request.
It may still be two months or more before replacement chips are widely available.
That will delay relief for people who already own Pentium-based PC's made by Compaq, I.B.M. and other companies.
And the lag will leave potential customers with the decision of whether to buy now and replace later, or delay the purchase until new Pentium-chip PC's reach the market without the flaw.


Some People (and Others) Are Truly Hard to Please; Oh, to See Doggy Kissing Santa Claus!
HE was all done up for the photo op with Santa -- hair brushed, nails clipped, fuzzy little sweater.
But when his turn came to sit on the red velvet lap, he balked as 2-year-olds are wont to do.
"Where's the mommy?" said the photographer in an elf outfit.
A mortified-looking woman came forward.
"Harold," she implored, "'Harold . . . " The daddy cut in: "Sit! Sit!"


Of Wise Men and Wise Guys; Meteorology Doesn't Count
SAN FRANCISCO has a winter nip year round.
But at Christmas, it never looks like the holiday cards.
My mother was from the tropics, my father from Mississippi.
But even they and their three California-bred children knew what Christmas was supposed to look like: the ground blanketed white, a chill in the air, carolers bundled up while their voices pierced the night.


Core Industries Inc.(CRI,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Nets Find Cool Way To Score A Victory
In accordance with the new National Basketball Association rules, forearms and elbows are not flying frequently.
No longer able to go to the body, the Knicks occasionally try the minds of their opponents.
Last night at Madison Square Garden, they lost that game, too.


Nebraska's Frazier Makes Plans for Jan. 1
Taking quarterback TOMMIE FRAZIER off blood thinners so he may play for top-ranked Nebraska against Miami in the Orange Bowl on Jan. 1 is unusual but not unreasonable, doctors said yesterday.
"I'm feeling fine," said Frazier, who hasn't played since late September when he was sidelined by recurring blood clots in his right calf.


CHRONICLE
Harboring a yen to step all over your ex-spouse's divorce lawyer?
Well, now you can -- if that lawyer is RAOUL LIONEL FELDER and you happen to be on his Christmas list.
Mr.
Felder, never one for the understated, sent his gifts to 200 clients, fellow lawyers, friends and, of course, people in the news media: huge, furry bedroom slippers bearing his likeness.


Corrections
The Guide to New York Dining in the City section on Sunday misstated the telephone number for Maison Caribe on East 85th Street.
It is (212) 744-1227.


Irvin Warned Not to Push Giants Too Far
If you see a few Giants defensive backs huddling with officials before their game against Dallas Saturday, they won't be talking about getting together for dinner.
The subject will be Dallas wide receiver Michael Irvin and, according to the Giants, the worst-kept secret in the league: That as good as Irvin is, he's a master at pushing off a defender to get open past the legal 5-yard limit.
They say he did it in the first meeting between the two teams, and they want no part of it this time.


Discount Auto Parts Inc.(DAP,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 29


Italian Leader In Showdown With Ex-Ally
Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi is approaching a showdown with his political adversaries -- possibly by Wednesday and certainly within days -- that will determine whether his Government will fall.
Mr.
Berlusconi's battle against a revolt by the Northern League, a party in his coalition, will formally begin when the Prime Minister addresses Parliament on Wednesday.
What happens next is as uncertain as the Government's future.


Corrections
A listing in the Calendar column of The Home Section last Thursday about holiday trees misstated the final day that the origami tree at the American Museum of Natural History may be seen.
Because of a schedule change, the tree will be on view through Jan. 9, not Jan. 15.


Of Wise Men and Wise Guys; Breaking The Code
NINETEEN ninety-four may be the year when I refuse to give my wife a gift.
This sounds harsh, but there's a reason for it: she cheats.
The Code of Christmas, as handed down to me and my five siblings, requires that no one touch a package under the tree until Christmas morning.
That's sacred.
For many married years, however, I have watched my wife brazenly approach our little tree and carefully pick up the packages tagged "Nancy." She weighs each one, shakes it back and forth, sniffs it expertly, stares hard.
She then announces what's inside.


Stuart Levin, 64, an Operator Of Elegant Restaurants, Is Dead
Stuart Levin, who ran elegant Manhattan restaurants, died on Monday at Mount Sinai Hospital.
He was 64 and lived in Manhattan.
The cause was pneumonia complicated by advanced multiple sclerosis, his family said.


Florida's Plea for Immigration Relief Fails
In a troubling signal for states seeking relief from the costs associated with illegal immigration, a Federal District Court judge today threw out a lawsuit in which Florida officials sought to recover nearly $1 billion a year from the Federal Government to pay for services to illegal immigrants.
In his decision, Judge Edward B. Davis said he recognized the tremendous financial burden to Florida "due to the methods in which the Federal Government has chosen to enforce the immigration laws." But he said that did not create a legal theory under which the state could recover money.


Insurance Rules Help To Prevent Oil Spills
To the Editor:
"Shift in Insurance to Cover Oil Ships May Disrupt Flow" (front page, Dec. 12) overstates the costs of new insurance requirements for oil tankers and ignores the benefits.


Of Wise Men and Wise Guys; A Doll Awaits A New Owner
THE year was 1962.
J.F.K. was in the White House.
Ed Sullivan was one of the top-rated television shows and "He's a Rebel" by the Crystals was climbing the Billboard song charts.
I was 12. An adolescent longing to be a teeny-bopper.


Mariner Health Group
Shares of Mariner Health Group, a health care service provider based in Mystic, Conn., dropped more than 11 percent yesterday in Nasdaq trading after its president and chief executive resigned with no public explanation.


Rebels in Mexico's South Vanish Before a Show of Force
Hundreds of state police officers reinforced by heavily armed federal soldiers pushed aggressively today into isolated territory that had been taken on Monday by rebel forces in the southern Mexican state of Chiapas.
But the rebels seemed to have disappeared just as suddenly as they had arrived.
The total force of more than 700 Government troops met no resistance as it removed stones and fallen trees from the major road leading to Simojovel de Allende, where the town hall had been taken over by armed, masked men on Monday.
The guerrilla raids were viewed nonetheless as the most serious provocation in the rebel uprising since both sides agreed to a cease-fire last January.
Rebels and sympathizers of the Zapatista National Liberation Army managed to seize, at least temporarily, a vast area beyond the mountain stronghold where they have taken refuge since early this year.


Don't Let Them Tax Whatever Is Bad for Us; No Special Grace
To the Editor:
Linda Stewart (letter, Dec. 15) would have us believe that smokers will "essentially be put under house arrest" by a bill in the New York City Council to ban smoking in restaurants.


Executive Changes
AMERICAN CLASSIC VOYAGES CO., Chicago, appointed Phillip Calian executive vice president and chief operating officer.
AMERICAN SUPERCONDUCTOR CORP., Westborough, Mass., named Ramesh Ratan to the new position of executive vice president for corporate development and chief financial officer, effective Jan. 4.


Data on Secondhand Smoke Were Faked, Workers Say
Figures cited by the tobacco industry to show that secondhand smoke is not a significant hazard in workplaces were faked, say three workers who helped make the measurements.
The workers' statements were cited today in a report by the staff of Representative Henry A. Waxman, the California Democrat who heads the House health and environment subcommittee.
Mr.
Waxman said the staff had found that "significant alterations occurred in over 25 percent" of the measurements of environmental tobacco smoke in a survey of 585 buildings by Healthy Buildings International, a private concern in Fairfax County, Va.


Owners Offer Players a Deal That Will Exclude a Payroll Tax
Slowly and surely, the National Hockey League dispute is nearing a possible conclusion.
People with knowledge of last week's collective bargaining negotiations confirmed tonight that the team owners have offered the players a deal that doesn't include a payroll tax.
It is the tax, which the players call a salary cap in disguise, that has been the deal breaker thus far in keeping the players locked out and postponing the start of the season for 81 days, as of today.
The league also has offered the Players Association a deal that includes a salary tax, but the player representatives from the 26 teams emphatically rejected that approach tonight when they met at a lakefront hotel.


U.S. Officials Voice Doubts On Truce Pact
While insisting that they welcomed any progress that former President Jimmy Carter might have made toward peace in the Balkans, Administration aides expressed some skepticism today about what he had accomplished.
"I don't think Carter has pulled anything out of his hat," one senior White House official said.
"What has he accomplished that hasn't been accomplished in Bosnia 10 times before and then disintegrated in a few hours or days? We've been down this path before."


DANCE
A Moody Blend Of Classical and Contemporary Fourth Dimension Dance Gould Hall


9 Guilty in Landfill Case
Nine of 11 defendants charged with bribery and fraud in connection with the operation of the Fresh Kills Landfill in Staten Island have pleaded guilty in United States District Court in Manhattan, Federal officials said yesterday.
Mary Jo White, the United States Attorney for the Southern District, said seven of the defendants were current or former employees of New York City's Department of Sanitation who, during their pleas in recent days, admitted accepting bribes from a trash hauler in exchange for allowing the hauler to dump unapproved garbage at the landfill.


Corrections
An article yesterday about military readiness at Fort Riley, Kan., misstated the amount of money the base diverted to training from its base repairs budget.
It was $2 million, not $2 billion.


Not Ads for Hunting
To the Editor:
Bob Herbert erroneously claims (column, Dec. 14) the Fish and Wildlife Service paid for videotapes to promote gun sales to schoolchildren.


COURT PROTECTS SPEECH IN MALLS
Declaring that shopping malls have replaced the parks and squares that were "traditionally the home of free speech," the New Jersey Supreme Court ruled today that the malls must allow access to protesters who want to distribute leaflets on social issues.
The decision, by a 4-3 vote, reaffirms a right of free speech under the New Jersey Constitution that is broader than that in the United States Constitution.
The case was brought by opponents of the nation's involvement in the Persian Gulf war who wanted to distribute leaflets at 10 malls throughout the state.


Wine Talk
NO one ventures too far into wine lore before hearing someone say: "Of course it's good. It's a first growth." Or, "It's only a fifth growth, but it should be at least a second."
The references are to the Bordeaux Classification of 1855, a list rating what were then considered to be the best wine properties of that renowned viticultural region.
"Growth" is an inadequate English translation of the French word "cru," which refers to a vineyard.


Of Wise Men and Wise Guys; Best Revenge? Losing the Gift
I CAN'T find it anywhere.
I've gone through desk drawers, closets, errant piles.
It's the gift certificate to the Elizabeth Arden Salon an old boyfriend gave me, and every year around this time I think about using it.
Was it dated 1987? '88?
I can't remember.


Medical Clinic's Clients Are Between Classes
THE waiting room at the clinic at Theodore Roosevelt High School on Fordham Road in the Bronx was almost full by 9 o'clock in the morning, with 15 students sitting quietly, kidding each other, reading textbooks or doodling into their loose-leaf binders.
"Flu, I think," said one girl in oversize coveralls to another, explaining what brought her to the medical offices.
Then, when she asked a boy she knew why he was there, he replied, "personal." Whatever the boy meant, the girl seemed to understand.
Everyone went on waiting.
No one snickered.
No one teased anyone.


ORACLE SYSTEMS CORP. (ORCL,N)
The Oracle Systems Corporation said yesterday that its fiscal second-quarter net income rose 51.1 percent, exceeding most analysts' expectations.
Oracle, based in Redwood City, Calif., said net income for the quarter that ended Nov. 30 rose to $93.9 million, or 32 cents a share.
Wall Street had been expecting 30 cents a share, according to Zacks Investment Research.
Second-quarter revenue rose 48.2 percent, to $670.3 million.


Trade Gap Widened In October
The American economy pulled in a record amount of imported goods in October as the nation's trade deficit with Japan soared to a new peak of $6.7 billion, the Commerce Department reported today.
Over all, the gap between what this country buys abroad and what it sells abroad widened to $10.14 billion for the month, an increase from the September total that was revised sharply downward.
Initially the department had estimated a September deficit of $10.13 billion.


What Might Have Been of a Movie That Wasn't
You can just imagine the preview: Tyrone Power is the faithless husband, trapped in a South American prison!
Ava Gardner is the loyal wife, who will do anything to help him escape!
John Wayne is the spear-wielding "tigrero," the jaguar hunter she hires to set them all free!
This romantic adventure was in the works in 1955, until it turned out that the stars would have to be insured for $18 million in case they were chomped on by piranhas while shooting in the Amazon.
The movie was scrapped before it was begun.
What remained was some film of the Karaja Indians the director Samuel Fuller had taken while scouting locations in Brazil the year before.
Mr.
Fuller, the director of gritty movies like "Pickup on South Street," is now 82 and an idol to many young film makers.
In "Tigrero: A Film That Was Never Made," he and the director Jim Jarmusch travel to the Brazilian village Mr.
Fuller filmed 40 years ago.
The new movie is part documentary about the Karaja as they face modernization.
But it is mostly a road show in which the two directors, both cult heroes, do their version of a song-and-dance routine.
Mixing Mr.
Fuller's flair for authenticity with Mr.
Jarmusch's droll observations, "Tigrero" is an amusing treat for movie buffs.
It opens today at Film Forum 1, and at 75 minutes is exactly the right length.


Street News, Sold by Poor, Falls on Hard Times Itself
It put a new line in the newspaper vendor's larynx-straining lexicon and a new kind of vendor on street corners and in subways: "It only costs a dollar to help feed a homeless person" became its "Extra, extra, read all about it."
But now Street News, the debt-plagued newspaper sold by homeless people, may be crying "Stop the presses," not because it has a scoop but because it says it lacks the money to continue publishing.
Its editor and associate publisher, Janet Wickenhaver, said Street News will fold early next year unless advertisers or underwriters come to the rescue.


Unhindered by AIDS
To the Editor:
There is a small but important point I would like to make about your Dec. 16 news article on my playing Santa for children with acquired immune deficiency syndrome.


Toe Surgery on Oakley Now Appears Imminent
Charles Oakley said he would undergo surgery on his dislocated right toe if the pain does not subside within a week.
Surgery would keep Oakley out four to eight weeks, but he could be sidelined longer, depending on his rehabilitation and what is found during surgery.
He was re-examined Monday, and he'll be fitted with a new sole insert for his basketball shoe.
If that does not alleviate the pain, surgery would be Oakley's last option.


On Trial in a Fatal Crash, Bus Driver Offers Rebuttal
His wife was killed in the crash of the bus he was driving two summers ago and he lost his left leg.
Today, Robert Campbell took the witness stand in a tiny courtroom here to deny that he was responsible for her death and those of five other passengers on his charter bus.
After his lawyers lifted him by each arm from the wheelchair and put him into the witness chair, Mr.
Campbell spent three hours contradicting prosecution witnesses.
As four of his nine grown children and his Brooklyn minister watched from the first row of the spectator gallery, Mr.
Campbell, in gray suit and solid black tie, said he had no idea anything was seriously wrong with the bus before it crashed on a steep hill in Vernon on July 26, 1992.
The only repair it needed, he said, was a new engine gasket to stop an oil leak.


Accused Molester Said to Plot Girl's Death
A man who faces 25 years to life in prison if convicted on molesting charges tried to hire someone to kill his 5-year-old accuser so she could not testify against him, the police here have said.
But the man he tried to hire was an undercover detective, and now 65-year-old Vincent William Biviano faces another charge: solicitation to commit first-degree murder.


Of Wise Men and Wise Guys; Unlovely Year, Perfect Present
SINCE nothing good had happened to me all year, I was not counting on Christmas.
I was the only 14-year-old girl on the Eastern Seaboard who could not talk to boys and could not grow breasts.
No Santa was going to save my bacon.
But I was blessed with two Santas that year: Uncle Buddy and Uncle Louis, pronounced the French way.
They weren't real uncles.
Just two old sweeties adopted years ago by Mom, an artist who cultivated bohemians.
There must have been a shortage of them in our corner of the Bronx in the late 1940's, because the uncles came up from Greenwich Village for festive occasions.


Prudential Unit Getting More Cash From Parent
The Prudential Insurance Company of America said yesterday that it would give its troubled securities subsidiary $365 million of new capital to help it defray the costs of settlements with tens of thousands of investors who were defrauded by the firm in the 1980's.
The injection of new cash is the latest in a series of bailouts that has seen Prudential spend more than $1.6 billion on Prudential Securities since it acquired the operation in 1981.
The move also comes at a time when many industry analysts and executives at competing Wall Street firms are wondering whether Arthur F. Ryan, the new chairman and chief executive of Prudential Insurance, plans to unload the securities firm.


For Yeltsin, Bad News vs. Bad News
The Russian military, poised outside the secessionist capital of Grozny, could take the city at any time and is awaiting an order from President Boris N. Yeltsin.
But it is uncertain when or if he will give it.
The political risks for Mr.
Yeltsin are considerable either way.
As usual in such moments, his own advisers are divided.


COMPANY BRIEFS
BAXTER INTERNATIONAL INC., Deerfield, Ill., completed the sale of its diagnostics products manufacturing businesses to Bain Capital for about $415 million.
CHARTER MEDICAL CORP., Macon, Ga., said it would acquire Magellan Health Services Inc., Boston, for $54 million.


Giuliani Plans To Trim OTB To Cut Losses
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani announced yesterday that he would pare the size of the Offtrack Betting Corporation, part of a long-term effort to make the agency profitable and eventually sell it to a private company.
The Mayor's plan calls for closing nine OTB branches and eliminating more than 130 positions, most of them through a new severance offer.


French Team Pulls Out
One of two French America's Cup sailing teams has withdrawn its challenger's bid.
ERNIE TAYLOR, executive director of the challengers' committee, said yesterday that the Yacht Club d'Antibes announced its withdrawal at a syndicates meeting Friday in San Diego.
The group, Defi France, apparently had difficulty raising funds to support its multimillion-dollar effort, Taylor said.


BBC Planning to Start A News Channel in U.S.
The British Broadcasting Corporation will start an all-news cable channel in the United States early next year, the BBC and its American partner announced yesterday.
Though executives of the channel say it will not be a direct competitor to Cable News Network, the BBC effort will be the first new 24-hour news channel available to American cable systems since the demise of Satellite News Channel in 1983.


Clearing Up Confusion on Fatigue Syndrome
IF there has been one characteristic consistently associated with chronic fatigue syndrome, it is controversy -- over its definition, its magnitude, its cause, its treatment, even its existence.
To facilitate the diagnosis and study of this syndrome, an international committee of medical experts has released a refined and much-simplified definition of the condition, which has been variously attributed to everything from emotional disorders and stress to chronic viral infection and a malfunctioning immune system.
The new definition is expected to help both researchers and clinicians separate chronic fatigue syndrome from a host of other conditions that can cause prolonged fatigue and that would require more specific therapy.
These other conditions include multiple sclerosis, cancer, sleep disorders, obesity, substance abuse and suicidal tendencies.


Frustration Growing As Knicks Fall Again
The Knicks lost again, this time to the short-handed Nets, who were without Derrick Coleman.
John Starks lost his composure afterward.
And New York will be losing Charles Oakley for an extended period because of toe surgery unless his condition improves within a week.
Hitting the low point of their season, the Knicks were beaten, 85-83, by the Nets last night at Madison Square Garden in a game that featured bizarre events even after the final buzzer.


Kaufel Group reports earnings for Year to Aug 31


Germany Shuns Biotechnology
Hoechst A.G., the pharmaceutical company, has poured $90 million into its biotechnology operations.
Its rival BASF has opened an $80 million biotech research operation.
And Bayer has just entered a $25 million biotech joint venture.
These investments by the three German pharmaceutical giants were made not in Germany but in the United States and elsewhere.


BOSNIA FOES AGREE TO 4-MONTH TRUCE, CARTER REPORTS
Jimmy Carter announced today that the warring parties in Bosnia had agreed to begin a nationwide cease-fire on Friday at noon that would last at least four months.
The former American President also brought the Muslim-led Bosnian Government and the Bosnian Serbs closer to the negotiating table than they have been for six months.
Although slight differences remain over the basis for formal peace talks, it appears that they might begin early next year under the auspices of the five nations known as the contact group.


OUTSIDE A JITTERY WHITE HOUSE


The Joys of a Post-Holiday Risotto
THIS is the season for leftover turkey or ham, either of which is perfect in risotto, accompanied by an orange-and-fennel salad dressed with tahini, orange juice and balsamic vinegar.
Turkey or Ham Risotto
3 ounces whole onion or 2 ounces chopped ready-cut onion ( 1/2 cup)  3teaspoons olive oil  4 to 5 cups chicken stock or broth  8 ounces whole red pepper or 7 ounces chopped ready-cut pepper (1 1/2 cups)  1 cup arborio rice
1 cup dry white wine  4 ounces ripe fresh tomato or 4 ounces crushed canned no-salt-added tomatoes  1 large clove garlic  Cooked white turkey meat or ham, to yield 2 cups julienned  1/3 cup Marsala wine  1 ounce Parmigiano Reggiano ( 1/3 cup coarsely grated).
1. Chop whole onion.
2.
Heat a nonstick pot until very hot.
Reduce heat to medium-high; add 2 teaspoons of the oil; saute onion until it begins to brown.
3. Heat the chicken stock in a separate pot until hot but not boiling.
4. Wash, trim, seed and julienne whole pepper.
5.
Heat a small nonstick pan until it is very hot.
Reduce heat to medium-high and add remaining oil.
Saute pepper until it begins to soften.
6.
When onion begins to brown, stir in the rice to coat, and add the white wine; allow wine to cook away.
7. Wash, trim and chop tomato fine; mince the garlic. Add both to the pepper.
8.
Add about 1 cup of simmering stock to rice, and cook over medium-high heat, stirring often until liquid is absorbed.
Repeat the procedure, 1 cup of broth at a time.
9.
In between adding the broth to the rice, julienne the turkey or ham and add to the pepper-tomato mixture with the Marsala.
Cook to reduce the Marsala by half.
10. Grate the cheese.
11.
When the rice is almost tender, add another cup of stock along with the turkey or ham mixture, and cook until most of the broth is absorbed.
Stir in the cheese.
Yield: 2 servings.
Approximate nutritional analysis per serving (with turkey): 820 calories, 20 grams fat, 125 milligrams cholesterol, 395 milligrams sodium, 65 grams protein, 90 grams carbohydrate.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-19  CARTER CONFIRMS CEASE-FIRE  Former President Jimmy Carter said a Bosnian cease-fire would begin Friday, and both sides were closer to the negotiating table than they had been for months, but the outcome was doubtful.
A1  HIGH STAKES FOR YELTSIN  News analysis: The way the Russian President handles the separatists will determine his future, but he has dropped out of the public eye during the crisis.
A1


Some People (and Others) Are Truly Hard to Please; Cheeses, Neckties And Other Perks Of Being Mayor
UNDERSTAND this: Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani does not want a gift from you.
Unless, of course, it is fresh mozzarella.
But even then, he will just take a snip.
The rest goes to his staff, along with the cannoli, spaghetti sauce, matzohs and Fruit-of-the-Month subscriptions that he has received from his constituents this holiday season.


Smaller May Be Better in Talks
More than two months ago, the Dodgers' Brett Butler proved to be a sound student of the history of baseball labor negotiations when he made the following observation: When negotiating teams are reduced to the smallest common denominators, deals are made.
It was an important lesson to review on this, the second-to-last day before baseball owners are scheduled to declare an impasse in the four-month-old strike and impose a salary cap.
Because, in keeping with labor history, there does seem to be some downsizing of negotiating teams and a recalibration of the bargaining process.


New York Is Picked to Get Federal Development Zone
President Clinton will designate part of upper Manhattan and the South Bronx -- including the area around Yankee Stadium -- as one of the first Federal Empowerment Zones, Congressional officials said today.
The officials said the Federal aid and tax breaks that would be provided through the zone would help the city in its efforts to keep the Yankees baseball team and provide a huge windfall for the team's owner, George Steinbrenner.


Airgas Bid For CBI Unit Is Rejected
CBI Industries, a diversified industrial concern, said yesterday that its board had unanimously rejected an unsolicited bid from Airgas Inc., a fast-growing but much smaller distributor of industrial and medical gases, to acquire CBI's industrial gas business.
Airgas, of Radnor, Pa., made its offer in early November, but it had not been disclosed before yesterday.
The bid, which would have acquired the business for either Airgas stock or for $1.45 billion in cash and debt assumption, came as a complete surprise to analysts and investors.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League
TORONTO BLUE JAYS -- Signed Mike Huff, outfielder, to a one-year contract.
Sent Scott Brow, pitcher, outright to Syracuse of the International League.


Alfred DiTolla, 68, Theater Union Head
Alfred W. DiTolla, the president of the International Alliance of Theatrical Stage Employees and Moving Picture Machine Operators, died on Tuesday at his home in Glen Rock, N.J.
He was 68.
The cause was cancer, said his son Biff.


Lawsuit Shatters Code of Silence Over Hazing at Black Fraternities
Somewhere between being beaten with a cane so hard that it broke, and between being pummeled, poked with needles and branded on his arms and chest with a red-hot iron, Wardell Pride had a numbing thought.
"This is what slave masters did to slaves," he said of the initiation process at the all-black Kappa Alpha Psi fraternity at Tennessee State University here.
"And my only true reward was that I have an opportunity to be a slave master as many times as I want when it's all over."


Stringing Along for Christmas


Esiason Eases Back To Feeling Grounded
Much of this season has been like a bad dream for the Jets.
And for Boomer Esiason, it was never more so than last Sunday afternoon.
"It's a strange phenomenon," said Esiason, who was knocked out of the game against the San Diego Chargers with a concussion late in the first half.
"The only thing I really remember is sitting in the locker room afterward, watching the game on TV, dressed, and thinking I was dreaming that I missed the bus. God, I missed the bus. My wife told me I was saying a lot of strange things in the locker room afterward."


Insurers Were Hit Hard in 1994, Report Says
Claims from the Los Angeles earthquake in January, followed by declines in stock and bond prices, made 1994 a poor year for property and liability insurance companies.
According to a report released yesterday by the Insurance Information Institute and the Standard &amp; Poor's Corporation, after-tax profits for property and liability insurers will fall to an estimated $7.2 billion this year from $19.3 billion in 1993.
The profitability of insurers, which has been lower than the average for the companies in the Standard &amp; Poor's 500 index every year since 1986, remained low in 1994, with insurers earning a meager 3.9 percent return on capital, down from 10.6 percent in 1993.


Marino's Achilles' Saga
Miami Dolphins quarterback DAN MARINO says he will have his right Achilles' tendon examined after the season because it hasn't completely healed since he underwent surgery in October 1993.


Interpublic Plans Charge
The Interpublic Group of Companies said yesterday that it would take a one-time pretax charge of $45 million in the fourth quarter, as part of a restructuring reserve.
The charge is to absorb what the advertising agency company called "extraordinary expenses," mainly from the merger of the Ammirati &amp; Puris and Lintas New York agencies and some European offices.


In America; Terror In Toyland
On the afternoon of May 10, 1993, a fire broke out in a four-story factory complex in Nakhon Pathom Province in Thailand, near Bangkok.
The complex belonged to the Kader Industrial Toy Company, a giant sweatshop operation that over the years has manufactured toys that were distributed and sold by some of the most prominent names in corporate America, including Toys "R" Us, J. C. Penney, Fisher-Price, Gund and Hasbro.
The Kader fire was a catastrophe.
Described by witnesses as a "living hell," it killed 188 panicked and screaming workers, of whom 174 were women and teen-age girls.
It was the worst industrial fire in history, its death toll surpassing the 146 workers who were killed in the Triangle Shirtwaist Company fire in New York in 1911.


U.S. Issues New Warning to North Korea Over American Fliers
The United States warned North Korea today that any further delay in releasing a captured helicopter pilot and the body of another could worsen relations at a time when the North has been eager to improve ties with the West.
In the Administration's most emphatic statement since the helicopter went down on Friday, Secretary of State Warren Christopher said, "We have indicated that a further delay here in returning the pilot and the remains of the co-pilot would be of great concern to us and would affect the atmosphere in which we've been hoping to improve our relations with North Korea."


For Safer Driving, Ideas for Safer Roads
FORTY years ago the New Jersey Turnpike installed rumble strips on the shoulders to wake up drivers who doze off and start to drift off the road.
But 10 years later when the road was repaved, the strips were not reinstalled.
Dr.
Per Garder, a civil engineer at the University of Maine, calls this a tragic error.
He says every study of the effectiveness of shoulder rumble strips has shown that the benefit to cost ratio is very high: at least 50 to 1 and as great as 200 to 1.


Volt Information Sciences Inc.(VOLT,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 28


Energy Dept. Seeks Revised Law on Nuclear Cleanup to Focus on Riskiest Sites
The Energy Department will ask Congress next year to rewrite the rules on the cleanup of polluted nuclear arms factories, scrapping dozens of existing agreements with the states and focusing the program on the riskiest sites to try to save billions of dollars, top officials said today.
"We've got to get some new legislation," Energy Secretary Hazel R. O'Leary said, discussing the changes in law that would be needed to carry out savings of $4.4 billion over the next five years in the program.
"We are not even focused on the biggest risks."


Don't Let Them Tax Whatever Is Bad for Us
To the Editor:
In "Get Slim With Higher Taxes" (Op-Ed, Dec. 15), Kelly D. Brownell recommends imposing a sin tax on unhealthy foods as we do on cigarettes and alcohol.
I am an overweight American. (I like to admit my biases up front.) However, I think Americans should be concerned about having government define sin.
It's a very slippery slope.


Personal Health
IT may lack the drama of drunken driving, but drowsy driving is even more common and can be just as deadly.
Mix it with even one alcoholic drink and you have an asleep-at-the-wheel cocktail in the making.
With holiday preparations and celebrations prompting millions to cheat on sleep and then drive, often after a drink, the risk of dozing off behind the wheel is greater than ever.
Even at quieter and more sober times, about 40 percent of adults are shortchanged on sleep and in danger of being lulled into slumber by humming tires on a dark road.


Univar Corp.(UVX,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


The Old-Time Tax Movie
If you are in the middle class, you are clearly going to get a tax cut.
But there are real questions as to whether this is an exercise in fiscal fantasy and what impact it will have on the nation.
The politics of this bidding war for the middle class is clear enough.
President Clinton once held the upper hand in proposing a re-invention of government, welfare reform and a middle-class tax cut.
But then he gave the ground away while concentrating on deficit reduction and a fruitless quest for health-care reform.
So the Republicans swooped in and captured unprotected ground that he is now groping awkwardly to reclaim.


Apogee Enterprises Inc.(APOG,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 26


Sports of The Times; Picture Still Clear For Beard
THE black-and-white snapshot is in one of Butch Beard's old photo albums, in the back of some closet.
He is a 17-year-old high school senior, a college basketball recruit, posing stiffly with the big man on campus at the University of Kentucky.
Pat Riley's hair wasn't long enough to grease, but he was, as Beard recalled before his stormy Nets stunned Riley's slumping Knicks, 85-83, last night at Madison Square Garden, a pretty smooth talker.
"I thought it was because he was from New York, and the rest of them were from Kentucky and Illinois," Beard said.
"Pat could really jump, like a lot of black kids. You could tell he was different, even then."


Conagra Inc.(CAG,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 27


A Minimalist Stutter From Wayne Horvitz
The Wayne Horvitz Quartet played jazz with a Minimalist stutter at the Knitting Factory on Monday night.
Or maybe it was Minimalism with jazz trimmings.
With Mr.
Horvitz on piano, Marty Ehrlich on saxophones and clarinet, Mark Helias on bass and Newman Baker on drums, the quartet looked like a jazz group and often sounded like one as piano and saxophone shared zigzag lines above a swinging rhythm section.
But Mr.
Horvitz's compositions sidestepped typical jazz structures, and sooner or later each one reached a point of stasis -- a repeated note, a circling line, a riff -- where the music could linger and assemble patterns, finding out where meshed repetitions might lead.


C. M. Hubbard, 82, Ex-State Dept. Aide
Charlotte Moton Hubbard, who was deputy assistant secretary of state for public affairs from 1964 to 1970, making her the top-ranking black woman in the Johnson Administration at the time, died on Sunday at her home in Chevy Chase, Md.
She was 82.
Ms.
Hubbard, who retired in 1970 at the onset of Cushing's disease, an adrenal disorder, died of congestive heart failure, said Marc L. Alper of Rockview, Md., a family friend.


William Fleming, 84, Ex-Head Of the Walston Brokerage Firm
William D. Fleming, former president of what was once one of the largest brokerage firms in the United States, died last Wednesday at the Mesa Verde Convalescent Center in Costa Mesa, Calif.
He was 84.
The cause was congestive heart failure, said his son Richard, of Wilton, Conn.


Corrections
An article on Thursday about a survey's finding that doctors at many teaching hospitals learn techniques by practicing on people who have just died misstated an affiliation of Dr.
George Kanoti.
He is with the Cleveland Clinic Foundation, not Case Western Reserve University.


Nassau's Budget for 1995 Freezes Property Taxes
The Nassau County Board of Supervisors today unanimously adopted a $1.9 billion budget for 1995 that freezes county property taxes for the third consecutive year.
County Executive Thomas S. Gulotta praised the board for its quick action, which was in sharp contrast to a year ago, when the board, swamped in red ink, remained deadlocked several weeks past the year-end budget deadline.


Reckless Hiring in Albany
Governor-elect George Pataki made a reasonable request when he asked Gov.
Mario Cuomo last month not to burden the New York State budget with last-minute hiring.
So it is dismaying to find that the Cuomo administration has gone ahead and hired hundreds of people anyway.
The Governor-elect is about to inherit a $4 billion budget gap.
In his first weeks as governor, he must find ways to save at least that much, just to balance revenues with the cost of current programs in the fiscal year beginning April 1.
To deliver his promised tax cuts, he must find even more savings.


Market Place; AK makes steel, and money, the old-fashioned way.
THE AK Steel Corporation is the newest name in basic steel, although its roots run deep.
The company today is what is left of the carbon-steel division of Armco Inc., which now produces stainless and other specialty steels.
Although it is smaller than it once was, AK Steel remains the industry's sixth-largest integrated company, which means that it makes steel from iron ore, rather than remelting scrap steel as the newer mini-mills do.
Industry experts say an efficient blast-furnace operation can be as economical a source of liquid metal as scrap, which tends to vary in price.


Of Wise Men and Wise Guys; No Boxes, No Bows
MY apartment was painted, papered and slipcovered this spring, and although I paid the bills it would never have been done if a friend who had once been a decorator hadn't given me a wonderful Christmas present: 15 hours of her time.
We spent her gift hours searching through Lower East Side fabric stores -- if I'd been alone, I would have given up in five minutes -- going through paint samples, finding inexpensive pillows to be covered and good-looking ready-made lamp shades and replacements for well-worn pieces of furniture.
Every time I open my front door, her gift is with me.


CLASSICAL MUSIC
A Medieval Sideshow To a Christmas Celebration  Newberry Consort Frick Collection


Rough Going On Comeback Of the QE2
The Queen Elizabeth 2, the most famous passenger ship afloat, left England last Saturday and was due in New York early tomorrow -- in ample time to showcase its new $45 million face lift at a luncheon for more than 450 dignitaries, travel agents and reporters.
Instead, the superliner will not dock before late afternoon, if then, and when it does finally arrive there are likely to be a lot of glum faces on board and at dockside.


A 40-Mile Chain Against Russian Troops
As Russian planes and mortar shells battered the Chechen capital today, more than 100,000 people formed a remarkable, 40-mile human chain to protest the assault on Grozny.
The demonstrators, called to their task by a radio broadcast, began the line on the western edge of the capital and stretched along the only open highway to the border of Dagestan, where regiments of Russian troops have been waiting for a week.


Metropolitan Diary
DEAR DIARY:
One recent afternoon, I headed out to the post office full of dread but arrived to find not a single person in line.
Not only that, but the clerk called me over without the usual pointlessly humiliating five-minute stall behind the "Wait Until Called" sign.


Comrades Up in Arms; Ranks of American Communists Split Over Future of Their Party
The Communist Party, U.S.A. had a coming-out party recently.
It laid out doughnuts and invited more than 100 reporters.
When a handful showed up, they were ushered into the inner sanctum of party headquarters in Manhattan.
An elderly man with watery blue eyes entered slowly, using a cane.
He was introduced as Gus Hall, the longtime party chairman.
He began speaking about his party's accomplishments and its bright future.


Of Wise Men and Wise Guys; Repaying A Hero
MY parents gave me a football as a holiday gift.
This was in Chicago in 1949, when I was 9.
The football carried a signature of a player named Harry Gilmer.
I didn't know who Harry Gilmer was, but I wasn't alone.
He was, in fact, a backup quarterback for the Redskins.
Nonetheless, I was happy to have the football and went into the snowy streets, kicking it around and bouncing it off parked cars in front of startled passers-by and having a merry time.
Eventually, the hide of the ball wore away and the bladder peeped through.
Goodbye, dear football.


CLASSICAL MUSIC
How a Debussy Sonata Started a New Form  Aureole Kosciuszko Foundation House


BUSINESS DIGEST
Business Technology In an about-face, Intel pledged free replacement chips to owners of personal computers powered by its Pentium chip.
The new policy is expected to help resolve an intensifying public relations crisis over the company's initially dismissive response to reports of a tiny arithmetic flaw in the Pentium.  [ Page A1. ]


Religion, Politics and the Pluralistic Puzzle
Why is the Christian right different from other religious groups that have tried to advance their beliefs and interests through the political system?
That question is addressed, if not deeply probed, on tonight's edition of "The Cronkite Report," which begins with a reminder of the vital part America's churches have played in momentous causes from the abolition of slavery to the civil rights movement.
"Christianity Reborn: Prayer and Politics" notes that only a minority of America's millions of evangelicals can be classified as conservative activists.
For most Americans the powerful appeals of religion do not translate into political partisanship.
The program looks in, for example, at the big Willow Creek Community Church near Chicago, where elaborately produced services draw thousands every Sunday and steer clear of politics.


No Headline
"There is a philosophy among the top-ranked managers that you can't touch top management. For some reason, they seem to think it would bring down the whole damn agency if you messed with a certain level of person." JAMES DORCY, ex-chief investigator for the Immigration and Naturalization Service.  [ A1:5. ]


Book Notes
Fast-Moving Club
Three of the hottest books on the horizon have been snapped up by the Literary Guild.


Want Another Pentium? It's Easier to Get One Now
The owners of personal computers equipped with Pentium microprocessors who are concerned about the flawed chip can have it replaced by either calling a toll-free number or contacting the makers of their computers.
The Intel Corporation, which makes the Pentium chip, is no longer requiring that users justify their need for replacement chips.


Don't Let Them Tax Whatever Is Bad for Us; Smoke and Harm
To the Editor:
Linda Stewart maintains in "Ever Think About the 2.5 Million New Yorkers Who Smoke?" (letter, Dec. 15) that smokers in New York City would be banned from restaurants and "essentially be put under house arrest" by the proposed legislation to limit smoking.


Magic and O'Neal Hold Off Trail Blazers
Magic 108, Trail Blazers 104
Despite a slow start and a shaky finish, Shaquille O'Neal scored 30 points last night as the visiting Orlando Magic held off the Portland Trail Blazers, 108-104.


Standard Microsystems (SMSC,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.50
8.50
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
4.75
4.75
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
5.44
5.27
2.97
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.44
5.59
3.06
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
6.14
6.30
3.23
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.79
7.80
5.81
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.84
7.84
6.31
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.73
8.72
7.31
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.94
6.97
5.55
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Wausau Paper Mills Co.  (WSAU,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Key Post Off-Limits To Gramm
In a quest for the Republican Presidential nomination in 1996, there would be no better perch for Senator Phil Gramm of Texas than the Senate Finance Committee, which will be at the center of efforts to cut taxes and change the welfare system.
That may be why Senator Bob Dole of Kansas, who has also set his sights on the Republican nomination for the White House, saw to it that Mr.
Gramm was not likely to get the seat, an assignment the Texan had expected and talked about for months.


How Not to Fix Public Broadcasting
Newt Gingrich, the next Speaker of the House, intends to change public broadcasting.
This is good.
There are things about it that need changing.
Representative Gingrich has announced that he will do the job by eliminating Federal funding for the Corporation for Public Broadcasting, which is getting $285.6 million in tax money in the current fiscal year and distributes 90 percent of it to about 1,000 public television and stations and groups.
I think he will eventually conclude that this is not the way to get the change he wants.


Iraq Hinders Arms Monitors, U.N. Panel Reports
Setting the stage for a Security Council debate next month on easing sanctions against Iraq, the head of a commission monitoring the elimination of Iraq's weapons of mass destruction said today that Baghdad was falling "far short" in some areas.
Of particular concern are questions about existing biological weapons.
These are difficult to answer because Iraq has been reluctant to provide information on past production.


Extension at T.C.U.
PAT SULLIVAN, who coached Texas Christian to a 7-4 record and its first bowl game in a decade, then pursued the Louisiana State job, signed a five-year contract extension yesterday.
The school said he will get a substantial raise in a contract that contains a buyout clause and is designed to keep Sullivan at T.C.U. through 1999.


Real Estate; The QVC Network finds a new home in a corporate park west of Philadelphia.
QVC NETWORK INC., which sells merchandise on its cable television channel, did a little old-fashioned bargain hunting of its own this year and wound up buying a 600,000-square-foot building for office and warehouse space.
The building, in a corporate park about an hour's drive west of Philadelphia, formerly contained offices and a manufacturing plant for Commodore International Ltd., the bankrupt computer maker.
QVC plans to use the space for offices and a warehouse.


Little Women, Growing Up Then and Now
LITTLE WOMEN  By Louisa May Alcott  502 pages.
Little, Brown. $18.95.
LITTLE WOMEN  By Louisa May Alcott  Illustrated. 527 pages.
Everyman's Library Children's Classics/Alfred A. Knopf. $15.95.
DAUGHTERS On Family and Fatherhood  By Gerald Early  Illustrated. 234 pages.
Addison-Wesley. $17


Intel's Crash Course on Consumers
It was during the weekend after Thanksgiving that Paul Otellini, the Intel Corporation's senior vice president for worldwide sales, first realized that his company had a crisis on its hands.
Customers were angry about reports of a flaw that caused mathematical division errors with the company's Pentium chip.
Even as he was on the phone discussing the problem with his boss, Andrew S. Grove, the president and chief executive of Intel, a message was coming out of Mr.
Otellini's home facsimile machine, his computer was receiving electronic mail and his cellular phone was ringing.
It was at that moment, he said, that his wife threw up her hands and walked out of the room.


The Fed Forgoes a Seventh Rate Increase
The Federal Reserve's top officials met for nearly four hours today but adjourned without announcing any change in interest rates.
Most economists and traders still expect the Fed to raise rates again, possibly at its next meeting on Jan. 31 and Feb. 1, or perhaps before then.


Cowboys Will Miss Smith, but the Giants Won't
The hamstring pull heard round the football world Monday night won't make the Giants feel cocky.
"There aren't but a couple of guys in the league that have the ability that Emmitt Smith has," Giants Coach Dan Reeves said of the Dallas Cowboys' Pro Bowl running back, "so there's no question they'll miss him. But I don't think you can say, 'All right, they aren't going to run the ball.' "


Czech Cache of Nuclear Material Being Tested for Bomb Potential
The nuclear material recently seized by Czech authorities may be the largest supply of bomb-grade uranium smuggled out of the former Soviet Union, American officials said today.
But the officials said that Washington was still awaiting scientific confirmation that the material seized was weapons-grade.
According to a preliminary assessment by Prague's Interior Ministry, the shipment confiscated involves 6.6 pounds of highly-enriched uranium 235, which is suitable for making bombs.
The nuclear material is believed to have originated in the former Soviet Union.


Chronic Back Problems Bring an End to Lendl's Career
Ivan Lendl, who made such a religion of physical fitness that he overcame a shortage of God-given tennis talent and transformed himself into the No. 1 player in the world for a record 270 weeks, announced his retirement today.
Alternately misty-eyed and jocular as he held court off the court at the Grand Slam tennis facility he owns in this Westchester County community, the 34-year-old Lendl said he had finally succumbed to the back problem that was diagnosed as facet joint syndrome last March.
The condition manifested itself in crippling back spasms during many of his matches this year.


Mexico Devalues the Peso, Dealing a Blow to Stocks
The Mexican Government devalued the peso yesterday, presenting Americans who have been pouring millions of dollars into Mexico through stocks, bonds and mutual funds with a nasty surprise that essentially cut the value of their investments by about 15 percent.
Under the new exchange-rate policy announced early yesterday, the peso will be allowed to fall to 4.0 to the dollar before Mexico's central bank will intervene -- not far from its close yesterday of 3.9750.
The previous intervention limit was slightly more than 3.46 pesos to the dollar.


Excerpts From the Ruling On Free Speech at Malls
Following are excerpts from the majority opinion in today's ruling by the New Jersey Supreme Court on the distribution of leaflets in shopping centers.
The economic lifeblood once found downtown has moved to suburban shopping centers, which have substantially displaced the downtown business districts as the centers of commercial and social activity.


It's Smokestack Chic As Steelers Are Back
There were plenty of cigars in the Pittsburgh Steeler locker room here on Sunday afternoon.
Long, expensive, fat ones that some players puffed and others simply held.
Victory cigars.
And when the smoke cleared, the results were the same.
A 17-7 victory over the Cleveland Browns before the largest Steeler crowd -- 60,808 -- that Three Rivers Stadium has ever held.
A 12-3 record.
An American Football Conference Central Division championship.
Home-field advantage throughout the A.F.C. playoffs.


Blind Eye: How the Immigration System Handles Discipline -- A special report.; Behind One Agency's Walls: Misbehaving and Moving Up
The harassment of Ginger Kramer began shortly after she took a job as an automation clerk in the Livermore, Calif., office of the Border Patrol.
In a sworn statement to investigators, she said her boss, J. William Carter, crudely invited her to have sex on his office couch.
She pushed him away as he tried to embrace her, she said.
A few weeks later, Mr.
Carter ordered Ms.
Kramer to deliver his newly laminated identification card to his office, she told investigators.
He grabbed her again, and this time forced his tongue into her mouth, peered down her blouse and declared that he would not let go until she "did it right."


McDowell Not Rushing Into Yanks Deal
Jack McDowell, one of the superb pitchers in the major leagues, turns 29 years old in less than one month.
The next contract he signs could be the last lucrative multiyear deal of his career.
So why should he rush and sign with the Yankees when the status of baseball is so unsettled?
That seems to be the logic the former Cy Young Award winner is using in dealing with the team that traded for him last week.


Iran Offers an Islamic Way to Improve the Lot of Women
In a Teheran stadium last month, thousands of Iranian women marched to show their support for women's rights.
But this was no protest rally.
President Hashemi Rafsanjani was there, and he told the crowd of 80,000 that any effort to deny women their rights was "doomed to failure."
The rally, celebrating Women's Week in Iran, was a sign that some restrictions on women during the past 15 years of fundamentalist rule are starting to ease.


Macaulay Culkin's Poor Little Richie Rich Boy
Macaulay Culkin has reached that awkward age -- 14 -- when he is too old to play a moppet whose adorability redeems a mania for mischief and too young to jump on a motorcycle with Drew Barrymore.
Perched on the brink of puberty in "Richie Rich," a movie based on the popular comic strip, the young actor seems wary and introverted, as though compelled to hoard his energy until the full rush of adolescence strikes.
As Master Richie, the sole heir to a $70 billion fortune, the young star wears three-piece suits and has his reddish hair slicked back.
Though he recalls Ron Howard in his youthful "Happy Days" incarnation, there is a sultriness in Mr.
Culkin's hooded eyes and puckered lips that suggests he could never become a symbol of innocent, golden-age nostalgia.


AT WORK WITH: Kristina Gunnill; Madison Avenue Meets the Volga
IN this provincial city, once closed to foreigners because of its military plants, a Peace Corps volunteer named Kristina Gunnill has found both a cause and a second family.
Ms.
Gunnill is a Peace Corps volunteer in a country taught to believe that the Peace Corps is a nest of spies.
She is a Harvard M.B.A. and former advertising executive in a land where the customer is still regarded as the enemy, where, as the old proverb goes, "You can never sell anything without deceiving someone."


Mayor Supports Correction Head Despite Trouble on Rikers Island
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani yesterday said he had confidence in his Correction Commissioner, Anthony J. Schembri, a day after several inmates at Rikers Island were stabbed in a gang fight and less than four weeks after ordering an investigation into some of his actions.
"Mr. Schembri's doing a very good job," the Mayor said.


As Its Editor Goes to The New Yorker, Granta Heads Into an Uncertain Time
It was more than 15 years ago that Bill Buford grabbed the ailing literary journal Granta by the scruff of its neck and shook it back to health, transforming it from a magazine for Cambridge undergraduates to a fat quarterly of fiction and nonfiction that has become a must-read in literary circles here and in the United States.
If Mr.
Buford, now 40, has sometimes seemed to run Granta as a vanity press -- his vanity, his press -- he has also muscled it onto the literary scene, through a combination of first-rate contacts, relentless energy and an exuberant belief that if he likes something, he can print it.
The magazine's circulation, a sorry 800 or worse when Mr.
Buford took over, now hovers at just below 100,000, with about two-thirds of that in the United States.
The company also publishes 20 or so books a year in a joint venture with Penguin Books, and this year it expects to register a small profit.


Rivalries May Shape Senate's Committees
Senator Phil Gramm of Texas is seeking the Republican Presidential nomination in 1996 and for months had been talking about gaining a spot on the Finance Committee, which will be at the center of efforts to cut taxes and change the welfare system.


Discovering the New World Anew
Thematic threads often run through the programs that Joel Cohen assembles for the Boston Camerata, but even when the topics are straightforward and obvious, as holiday programs tend to be, there is usually a touch of gamesmanship in Mr.
Cohen's work that can make his concerts intriguing, maddening or both.
In "A New World Christmas," the program he presented on Monday evening at Gould Hall, his goal seemed to be not simply a pleasing compilation of Christmas songs but also a program that drew on the full spread of his repertory purview.
Because Mr.
Cohen's field of study now runs from medieval Europe to late 19th-century rural America, accomplishing this goal within the "New World" scope required some sleight of hand.
One could, for example, include the Spanish composer Tomas Luis de Victoria's setting of "Ave Regina caelorum" on the grounds that it was also sung in colonial Mexico, but that would open the door to a large part of the Old World repertory and, one would think, invalidate the theme.


U.S. Indictment Charges 26 In a Narcotics Ring in Bronx
A 25-year-old man, partly paralyzed in a shootout with rivals, directed a sophisticated ring that committed seven murders and dominated the crack and heroin trade in the University Heights section of the Bronx, Federal authorities charged yesterday.
Mary Jo White, the United States Attorney in Manhattan, announced the indictments of Jose Reyes, the wheelchair-bound man accused of heading the gang, and 25 others on charges that they took part in an organization that she said made tens of millions of dollars a year.


Of Wise Men and Wise Guys; The Simpler, The Better
NEVER did I imagine that my lifelong and seemingly insatiable quest for my elegant and, of course, ageless mother's approval would crystallize in a banal blue suitcase on wheels.
In previous years, the Judith Lieber bag had been "too nice to use," and the extravagant floral silk scarf from Paris was "hard to handle." This year, I delivered and packed Mom's carry-on jewelry, extra eyeglasses and book on Jackie in the unassuming suitcase and watched her practice pulling it down the hall by its telescopic handle.
She had a lilt to her step I hadn't seen in quite some time.
Later, I called, waiting for the inevitable glitch on the trip south.
But Mom sounded young and self-sufficient: "The suitcase made my trip. It's a wonderful thing. It's perfect. Thank you."


Cubans Welcome Envoys of Capitalism
To the Editor:
I was happy to read "The U.S. and Cuba: Double Fantasy" (editorial, Dec. 14), but disappointed at how soft it was on United States policy.
Yes, there is rhetorical posturing on both sides.
But all the rhetoric in the world will not stop a needy people enticed by the possibility of economic growth from embracing capitalism if it is available to them.


No Charges in Death of Boy With Toy Gun
Saying the real culprits are authentic-looking toy guns, the Brooklyn District Attorney announced yesterday that he would not attempt to prosecute the housing police officer who shot and killed a 13-year-old boy last September after suddenly coming upon the boy playing cops and robbers.
Standing behind a table displaying 16 black and silver toy guns, the District Attorney, Charles J. Hynes, said an investigation by his office made it "abundantly clear that the circumstances leading to the tragic death of this 13-year-old were not the fault of Police Officer Brian George, but rather the result of a proliferation of imitation toy guns."


Executive to Leave DDB Needham Shop
Larry Iannuzzelli, a longtime executive at DDB Needham New York, said yesterday that he would leave at the end of the year to start his own consulting business.
"I just finished celebrating my 25th anniversary," Mr.
Iannuzzelli said.
"I think it's time to start a second phase."


Of Wise Men and Wise Guys; So Who Needs Gifts?
TO whom it may concern: If you're even the least bit tempted to slip me a present -- Christmas, Hanukkah, whatever -- I have one suggestion: don't.
I am difficult, nay, impossible, to gift.
What I truly desire, not even the Gap can fulfill.
What I want is to be in the movies.
I mean really be in the movies.
The way people paraded into the screen in Woody Allen's "Purple Rose of Cairo" and became part of the plot.
Sure, it's cool to have a flat across the avenue from the Village Vanguard or the Pleasure Chest.
I long, however, to live in grander digs boasting names like Manderley.
Dragonwyck.
Xanadu.


CLASSICAL MUSIC
Detonations of Sound, Here, There and Everywhere  Kathleen Supove, Pianist Roulette


Have Olive Branch, Will Travel: An Ex-President Abroad


N.Y.P.D. to Go on the Air
"N.Y.P.D. Blue" is about to face some new competition -- from the N.Y.P.D. itself.
The Police Department has begun planning a half-hour show to broadcast the mug shots and criminal records of accused murderers, thieves and violators of parole and probation.


Ambulance Service Admits 'Miscommunication' in Death
When Emergency Medical Service ambulances answered a call for help in Rego Park, Queens, on Sunday night, they encountered a five-block scene of blood and frenzy that was chaotic even by New York standards.
But as bullets flew past the ambulances, there was so much activity and so many injuries that emergency crews missed the original call to assist a wounded Chinese restaurant cashier who was rapidly bleeding to death.
As E.M.S. officials began an investigation of the incident yesterday, the agency's spokesman, David Bookstaver, admitted that there was a "tragic miscommunication" on Sunday that sent ambulances to the final gun battle instead of the shooting that began the violence.


Of Wise Men and Wise Guys
Gift-giving, social scientists tell us, is governed by something called the exchange theory.
This has nothing to do with the scene on Dec. 26, when people converge on stores, gifts in hand, saying, "too large," "too small," and, "does it come in mauve?"
Instead, the exchange theory holds that reciprocity in gift-giving adds glue to social bonds.


Foreign Aid And G.O.P.: Deep Cuts, Selectively
Republican leaders in Congress are planning a tough new approach that treats foreign aid much like welfare: as a multibillion-dollar handout that needs to be overhauled and cut.
In mapping strategy for the foreign aid budget, which is $13.7 billion this year, the Congressional Republicans want to focus on advancing the United States' national security and economic interests rather than what they say is an entitlement program for poor nations.
Many of them talk about using their new majority to cut foreign aid by 15 to 20 percent.


Corrections
An article in Business Day yesterday about credit market activity on Monday misstated the dates of two Treasury auctions of new notes.
The auction of two-year notes will be held today.
The auction of five-year notes will be held tomorrow.


Blount Inc.(BLTA,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


In Dishes From Soup to Hash, the Sweet Potato Shows Off
SOME people are divided into two factions during the holidays: the sweet potato pie camp and the pumpkin pie camp.
"I like sweet potatoes better than pumpkins any day," said Norma Jean Darden, an owner of Spoonbread Catering in Manhattan.
"Nobody likes pumpkin pie in my family," said Sadie Bell Herbin of Reidsville, N.C.
But then again, pumpkin pies don't stand much of a chance in her state, which is the leading producer of sweet potatoes in this country.


Walter Clark, 92; Taught Psychology of Religion
Dr.
Walter Houston Clark, a retired professor of the psychology of religion at Andover Newton Theological School in Massachusetts and a former dean at Hartford Seminary, died on Thursday at his home in Cape Elizabeth, Me.
He was 92.
Dr.
Clark taught at Andover Newton in Newton Centre near Boston from 1962 until his retirement in 1969.
Before that, starting in 1951, he was dean of the School of Religious Education at the seminary.


A Little Help From Jimmy Carter
If Jimmy Carter's controversial mediation effort brings Bosnia closer to peace, more power to him.
But the odds on an early end to the two-and-a-half-year war remain long, despite yesterday's agreement on a cease-fire that could start as soon as Friday.
The Bosnian Serb leader, Radovan Karadzic, began reinterpreting his agreement with Mr.
Carter almost from the moment he signed it Monday night.
It remains unclear what he has committed his side to beyond a very temporary truce and a willingness to talk about revising the latest international peace plan.
Under that plan, Britain, France, Germany, the United States and Russia offered the Serbs title to 49 percent of Bosnia's original territory.
But Mr.
Karadzic's forces currently hold 70 percent of that territory, and given the unwillingness of the five powers to use force, no one has figured out how to get the Serbs to pare down their holdings.


Bed Bath &amp; Beyond (BBBY,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 27


The Gold Standard For Girlhood Across America
"Some books are so familiar reading them is like being home again," Jo March observes in the new film version of Louisa May Alcott's classic novel.
She's talking about Shakespeare, but we all know "Little Women" is a book like that, one of the most seductively nostalgic novels any child ever discovers.
As the gold standard for American girlhood, it lingers in our collective consciousness as a wistful, inspiring memory.
Ladies, get out your hand-hemmed handkerchiefs for the loveliest "Little Women" ever on screen.
Gillian Armstrong's enchantingly pretty film is so potent that it prompts a rush of recognition from the opening frame.
There in Concord, Mass., are the March girls and their noble Marmee, gathered around the hearth for a heart-rendingly quaint Christmas Eve.
Stirring up a flurry of familial warmth, Ms.
Armstrong instantly demonstrates that she has caught the essence of this book's sweetness and cast her film uncannily well, finding sparkling young actresses who are exactly right for their famous roles.
The effect is magical.
And for all its unimaginable innocence, the story has a touching naturalness this time.


Cigna Plans To Revamp Subsidiary
The Cigna Corporation was pushed yesterday to announce plans to reorganize its loss-ridden property and liability insurance business after the A. M. Best Company reduced Cigna's ratings to a level that would seriously limit the appeal of Cigna policies to corporations.
News of the lower rating and reorganization plan caused Cigna stock to drop sharply in heavy trading on the New York Stock Exchange.
Cigna shares fell $4, or 6 percent, to close at $62.75.
As recently as July 28, its stock traded at $72.25.


Salant
Shares of the Salant Corporation, an apparel maker, rose sharply yesterday.
Dan Dorfman, a CNBC commentator, said that analysts had told him the company's stock could double to $10 from a recent price of $5, partly because of rising sales to Sears.


Judge Approves Plan for Logging In Forests Where Rare Owls Live
A Federal judge today approved the Clinton Administration's much-disputed plan for logging in the Pacific Northwest forest that is home to the spotted owl and other imperiled species.
The policy, approved by Judge William L. Dwyer of the District Court in Seattle, would let the timber industry cut up to one billion feet of lumber each year in the ancient forests of Washington, Oregon and northern California -- less than one-fifth of the harvest during the 1980's.


Cintas Corp.(CTAS,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Help for Distressed Areas


A Dublin Dreamer Confronts Reality
No writer was ever more urbane and sophisticated than Oscar Wilde, so it comes as a shock that Albert Finney has discovered Wilde's warm and fuzzy side.
In "A Man of No Importance," Mr.
Finney plays Alfie Byrne, a bus conductor in Dublin in the early 1960's.
He wears Wilde's trademark green carnation while riding an emerald-green double-decker bus.
He reads Wilde's plays and poetry aloud to his rapt passengers every morning, and he directs local productions of Wilde's plays at the parish hall.
Mr.
Carney, the rough-hewn butcher (Michael Gambon), usually plays the lead.
Alfie is almost as enamored of Wilde as he is of Robbie (Rufus Sewell), the handsome young driver of his bus, though he will admit this passion only to his own bedroom mirror.
A repressed homosexual masquerading as one more Dublin bachelor, Alfie doesn't see why his little drama group shouldn't put on Wilde's "Salome," complete with the dance of the seven veils.
He is one of the last true innocents.


Pennies by the Barrel, 24 Tons Worth


Hasty Is Wearing the Frustration of the Jets' Failure on His Sleeve
Seven seasons as a Jet suddenly seemed too much today for James Hasty, the volatile, outspoken cornerback who had a sideline confrontation with a teammate last Sunday.
"Who can deal with seven years of losing?" Hasty asked today, explaining his actions in what sounded like a farewell speech.


Corrections
A headline yesterday about a call for Congress to rewrite the rules on the cleanup of polluted nuclear arms factories referred incorrectly in some editions to the source of the request.
It was the Energy Department, not the Environmental Protection Agency.


New Element, 111, Is Detected By German Nuclear Scientists
A team of German physicists reported on Tuesday that they had succeeded in creating, detecting and identifying three atoms of a new element.
Although the atoms survived for less than two-thousandths of a second, scientists hailed the achievement as a landmark in nuclear physics.
The creation of Element 111 in the periodic table, with a nucleus containing 111 protons and 161 neutrons, was the latest achievement of the Gesellschaft fur Schwerionenforschung (Society for Heavy Ion Research) Laboratory at Darmstadt.
In 1981 the laboratory created and detected Element 107, and by 1984 it had added Elements 108 and 109 to the periodic table.
Last month, the laboratory reported the discovery of Element 110.


Clinton Seeks Ties With Pope on Aid Groups
At a time of sharpening differences in Congress over the usefulness of United States foreign aid, President Clinton has written to Pope John Paul II proposing closer, formal cooperation between United States Government and Roman Catholic aid agencies to insure that aid reaches the people it is meant for, American and Vatican officials said today.
The idea is to tap into the wide network of Catholic relief and development services around the world -- both private organizations and those directly sponsored by the Vatican -- that often have the most up-to-date and detailed information on the needs of people in disaster areas, United States officials said.


Coffee Prices Stage a Rally On Plan by Some Producers
Financial turmoil in Mexico and a round of speculative dollar buying against European currencies lifted the dollar higher yesterday.
The dollar's gains were seen by analysts as temporary, coming in thin, pre-holiday trading.


A Farewell to Tinsel Town
They beat the Dodgers to the West Coast, the 49ers to the Super Bowl and the Lakers to Showtime.
Their players belonged to the actor's guild, their Fearsome Foursome did the Ed Sullivan Show and Jonathan Winters was their Jack Nicholson.
The Los Angeles Rams were first to Hollywood and are about to be first to leave.
Their star has fallen in increments, from a nonsensical move down the freeway, to the drowning of their former owner, to the pitiable trade that emptied their pockets.


A Place for Megan


U.S. Easing Rules on Biotech Patents
The Government will no longer require drug companies to conduct clinical trials on humans before granting patents for biotechnology products, Clinton Administration officials and drug industry executives said today.
The policy, which drug companies said would actually make it easier for them to conduct such clinical trials, is expected to speed development of treatments for cancer, AIDS and other diseases.
It is to be announced on Thursday by Bruce A. Lehman, the Commissioner of Patents and Trademarks.


McCann-Erickson Forms Global Board
McCann-Erickson Worldwide said yesterday that it had formed a worldwide management board representing all areas of the agency.


For Commuters, Disruption and Dismay
Verda McCune's ride home on the subway yesterday evening had a psychological drawback to go with the physical one: the Fulton Street station near her Manhattan office was closed down by the firebomb explosion that offered her something newly ominous to adjust to on the long ride to Queens.
"Just got to take it day by day," she said fatalistically, walking across town to an alternate station and trying to adjust to the new notion in city life that explosives can go off on the subway.


Corrections
An article in Science Times on Dec. 13 about the symbiotic relationship between leaf-cutting ants and fungi referred incorrectly to Mitchell L. Sogin and Ulrich G. Mueller, authors of scientific papers on the subject.
Each was named last on a list of authors, a distinction often reserved for the senior researcher, but in this case they were not the senior authors.


Shaken, but Reassured
New Yorkers suffered a harrowing flashback yesterday when a crude firebomb ignited on a subway car in lower Manhattan, injuring more than 40 people and spreading fear that the World Trade Center bombing was being played out again in the subways.
Some injuries were severe, but the outcome was less horrific than it might have been.
It is not clear whether the fiery burst was deliberate or accidental.
A passenger was apparently carrying the bomb, consisting of a glass jar filled with a combustible liquid, when it ignited, sending flames and smoke rushing through the car.
In a similar incident a week ago, a teen-age subway rider was burned by an incendiary device that ignited, setting his coat afire.


Mexico Will Float Its Battered Currency
Mexico's economy was thrown into crisis tonight as the Government abandoned its efforts to defend the peso and announced that it would allow the currency to float against the dollar.
At the least, the move was expected to bring a sharp, immediate further devaluation of the peso, plus a burst of new inflation and major losses for Mexican banks.


A Bicycle With an Edge -- And Electric, at That
YOU say you like the idea of bicycling but find the ride a little too long, the hills a little too steep or the trip a little too sweaty?
Specialized Bicycle Components, the bicycle company of Morgan Hill, Calif., is working on a model with an electric motor to help with the pedaling.
The design, which is not final, has a 10-watt motor, providing about half the effort needed for a fast ride on level ground.
The motor turns a roller that rests on the back tire; the pedals are connected to the rear wheel by a seven-speed gear system.


Cheating Death, and Testing a Reproductive Law
The birth of Judith Christine Hart on June 4, 1991, had been a lonely miracle.
Later, as Nancy Hart filled out the hospital form to legally register her daughter's birth, one fill-in-the-blank made her pause.
"What was your relationship to the child's father at the time of conception?" the form read.


Mariners Re-sign Buhner for $15.5 Million
JAY BUHNER, a free agent who had been pursued by the Baltimore Orioles, has re-signed with the Seattle Mariners for $15.5 million over three years.
The 30-year-old outfielder hit .279 last season with 21 homers and 68 runs batted in and has averaged 25 homers and 80 r.b.i. over the last four seasons.
The average annual value of his contract, $5,166,667, is the second-highest on the Mariners, trailing only the $6 million per season earned by KEN GRIFFEY Jr. in a four-year deal that runs through 1997.


Administration Gives Up On Raising Grazing Fees
The Clinton Administration reversed itself today and decided not to increase the fees paid by ranchers whose sheep and cattle graze on public lands.
In effect, the Administration conceded that the new Congress, controlled by Republicans, will have the final word in a long, bitter dispute about how the Government manages hundreds of millions of acres of the Western range.


U.S. Wisely Avoids Waging Air War in Bosnia
To the Editor:
Critics of the Clinton Administration's Bosnian policy are making recommendations that would lead to an Americanization of the conflict, an expansion of the war beyond Bosnia and a foreign policy disaster that dwarfs anything our country has experienced since Vietnam.


One Man's Impromptu Act of Bravery
Denfield S. Otto, an off-duty transit officer sitting in the sixth car of the Brooklyn-bound train, was 45 minutes late for a transit police choir practice when he heard a popping sound like gunfire and looked toward the end of the car.
Officer Otto, a 54-year-old grandfather from Harlem, heard a series of pops as people left the crowded train.
Then the car went black except for flashes of orange and crimson flames.


Christmas on a Corporate Island; Chubb Creates Holiday Spirit, but a Trip to the Mall Is Nice
Moving to the countryside of New Jersey in the early 1980's, the Chubb Corporation, like any pioneer, tried to take everything that the members of its large corporate family would need.
The new offices of the insurance company, rising above Interstate 78 in Somerset County and miles from any town center, provided its 2,600 workers a restaurant and health club, dry cleaner and bank, barber shop and hair salon, lending library and art gallery.


A Pack of Architects For a House of Cards
SHUFFLE the modernist deck with "Play Architecture," cards from the Finnish Building Centre that cut the master builders down to size -- though whether they would appreciate the joke is debatable.
Mies van der Rohe is a grumpy-looking Queen of Spades, Michael Graves is the imperious King of Hearts and Bernard Tschumi is the dashing Jack of Clubs.
Iconic 20th-century structures -- including the Schroder House by Rietveld and the Einstein Tower by Mendelsohn -- illustrate the numbered cards.
The cards are $15.95 a deck from the Princeton Architectural Press, 37 East 7th Street, New York 10003; (800) 458-1131.


Oakley Tests Shoe And Knicks Test Mettle
While Charles Oakley issued a ray of hope about avoiding surgery, Pat Riley issued a strong warning to anyone who has written off the Knicks.
Oakley was cautiously optimistic today after testing a custom-made shoe insert designed to relieve pressure on his dislocated right toe.
Unlike last week, Oakley was able to run without excruciating pain, and he may try to play in Thursday night's home game against the Cleveland Cavaliers.
However, if the pain becomes intense again within the next few days, surgery will be unavoidable.


Bentsen's Last Day


Loved Ones Live On in Black and White
WHEN I look through my family photographs, I am struck by the power of the portraits from the past.
The strongest images are printed in sepia -- my grandmother, posed at 13, in her nipped-in "waist" and long skirt, her head held high under a wide, plumed hat.
Her portrait has faded on its board-like paper, but her image still bears out her boasts of an hourglass figure and a face that men fell in love with at first sight.
I can hear her voice as I stare at her picture, telling how her future husband saw this photograph on the wall and raced across the room to declare, "If I can't marry this girl, I will marry no one at all."
Even more potent is the picture of my father, for it is labeled in pencil on the back: "The only picture of my dead father. If lost, Big Reward." I was 8 when I scribbled those words.
Even as a child, I knew this snapshot was irreplaceable.


Frederic Zeller; Sculptor and Writer, 70
Frederic Zeller, a sculptor and author of a book about his escape from Nazi Germany, died on Saturday at his home in Sag Harbor, L.I.
He was 70 and also had a home in Manhattan.
The cause was cancer, said his wife, Susan Kennedy Zeller.


One, by One, by One, Manhattan Marches On
Coach Fran Fraschilla of Manhattan has a motto his players are sold on.
"We want to start a one-game winning streak with every game," he said.
"That's all we ever care about."
That motto has significance these days, a method of keeping the Jaspers focused during a seven-game winning streak that is building optimism and confidence.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  *
Mobile Telecommunications Technologies Corp., Jackson, Miss., is selling $265 million of senior notes due in 2002 through Bear, Stearns &amp; Co.
The notes are priced at par to yield 13.5 percent.
Callable in four years, the issue is rated B2 by Moody's Investors Service Inc. and BB- by the Standard &amp; Poor's Corp.


AT HOME WITH: Mary Bingham; Cultural Gifts Shared With a City
MARY BINGHAM lives alone in an Italianate villa at Melcombe, the newspaper family's estate 15 minutes outside Louisville, Ky.
Surviving traumas as well as tragedies, she remains vigorous and self-composed.
On Christmas Eve, she celebrates her 90th birthday.
Eight years ago, her family was split by a bitter and very public conflict that resulted in the sale of the Bingham media empire, the cornerstone of which was The Louisville Courier-Journal, the Pulitzer Prize-winning newspaper known for its liberal positions.
The battle became front-page news across the country and later provoked a chorus of investigative books.
Mrs.
Bingham said that when her husband died, in 1988, "I hardly knew what would become of me, because our lives were so intertwined." Married for 57 years, Mary and Barry Bingham Sr. were always "the Binghams," the most famous couple in Louisville.


Jean Stralem, 86, Philanthropist Known for Work With the Blind
Jean Ickelheimer Stralem, a New York philanthropist and art collector, died on Tuesday at her Manhattan home.
She was 86 and lived on the Upper East Side.
She suffered a long illness, said Lillian Groueff, her former sister-in-law.


An Act of Bravery
As people left the crowded Brooklyn-bound subway train at the Fulton Street Station in lower Manhattan, Denfield S. Otto, an off-duty transit officer, heard popping sounds like gunfire.
Then the car went black except for flashes of orange and crimson flames.
What Mr.
Otto did next earned him a call from President Clinton and made him a hero to a city unsettled by a firebombing that injured more than 40 passengers.


Bridge
During the 1993 Fall Nationals in Seattle, the diagramed deal appeared in this column, with East playing in a three-diamond contract.
Mike Passell of Dallas, sitting South, underled the ace of spades, deceived the declarer and defeated the contract.
A tricky defense involving the spade suit occurred in a different context at another table.
South became the declarer in three spades, after opening in third seat and a take-out double by West.
It would seem that three spades is sure to succeed, since the bidding has suggested that West has the heart queen.
South, it seems, will lose a trump trick, a diamond and two clubs.


U.S. Wisely Avoids Waging Air War in Bosnia; War Crimes Tribunal
To the Editor:
"Will the U.N. Smother Its Conscience?" (Op-Ed, Dec. 17) argues for adequate financing for the tribunal to prosecute war crimes in the former Yugoslavia.


Firebomb Ignites in Subway Car, Hurting at Least 40
A crude, homemade firebomb engulfed a subway car in flames just after it pulled into a heavily traveled station in lower Manhattan yesterday, injuring more than 40 passengers in a few horrifying seconds and disrupting subway service to Brooklyn for hours.
Law-enforcement officials said the firebomb, a mayonnaise jar filled with a flammable liquid, ignited shortly after 1:30 P.M. in a crowded car on a No. 4 train on the Lexington Avenue IRT.
They said the device appeared very similar to one that injured two teen-agers on another subway line last Friday.


Corrections
An article on Dec. 19 about the growth of political power in the suburbs misstated the clientele of VNS, an organization that does exit polling, and misidentified Murray Edelman, a VNS executive.
VNS carries out polls for ABC, CBS, NBC, CNN, and The Associated Press, not for the Fox television network.
Mr.
Edelman is the editorial director of VNS, not its head.
The article also misstated the voting record of Chelsea, Mass.
Historically, the city has voted Democratic, not Republican.


Mr. Foyle Chooses Faulkner
College basketball coaches often sound like meat merchants at a cattle auction.
The guy is a real horse.
That's a professional body if ever I've seen one.
Last spring, the coaches were salivating in the stands as Adonal Foyle -- an athletic 6 feet 10 inches, 260 pounds -- made the rounds of the post-season all-star games as one of the most sought-after high school players in the country.
There was a coast-to-coast gasp of disbelief when Mr.
Foyle said no to the big basketball factories and instead chose Colgate, a smallish unbasketball school in upstate Hamilton, N.Y.
The reason: He wanted a school where academics did not run a distant second to sports, and where winning wasn't everything.
Mr.
Foyle got his wish, or a version of it.
The Colgate Red Raiders, though playing hard, are 1 for 6, their first victory having come against the equally unbasketballish Harvard.


Homeless Man Shot Near the White House Dies
The armed homeless man who was shot on Tuesday by a Park Police officer outside the White House died tonight from his wounds.
The man, Marcelino Corniel, had brandished a knife before being hit by two bullets fired by the officer, whom the Park Police have declined to identify.


Accounts
*
Follis Inc., New York, was awarded two accounts with combined billings estimated at $1.5 million: Crew Cuts, New York, a post-production house, and Kripalu Yoga, Baltimore, a yoga center. *
Dialogic Corp., Parsippany, N.J., to Richardson, Myers &amp; Donofrio, Baltimore, to handle its account, previously at Earle Palmer Brown, Philadelphia.
Billings were estimated at $1 million.


Political Gifts Cost Prudential
In the largest civil settlement in its 19-year history, the Federal Election Commission announced today that Prudential Securities Inc. had agreed to pay $550,000 for making illegal political donations over several years.
The commission said the company violated the law by making contributions of about $250,000 from 1986 to 1993 that would have been legal if they had been given through a political action committee.
In addition, the commssion said, top officers of the company improperly put pressure on other executives there to make contributions.


I.R.S. Angers Family of Pan Am Crash Victim
The Internal Revenue Service has notified the family of a man killed in the Pan Am jetliner crash in Scotland in 1988 that his estate faces a tax bill of more than $6 million on the settlement of a lawsuit against the now-defunct airline and its insurers, even though no payment has been made to the estate and the size of the settlement has not even been determined.
"This is idiotic," said Lee S. Kreindler, a New York lawyer representing John and Barbara Zwynenburg of Nyack, N.Y., whose 29-year-old son, Mark, was one of 270 people killed when the Boeing 747 was blown from the sky by a terrorist bomb six years ago today.


College Hockey Report
Interference
Improvements in the way college hockey is played are increasingly evident, according to Sid Watson and Charles Holden.


Pacers Extend Home Streak As Bulls Struggle Again
Pacers 107, Bulls 99
Rik Smits scored 25 points last night as the Indiana Pacers topped the Chicago Bulls, 107-99, in Indianapolis, stretching their home winning streak to seven games.
The Bulls failed to score 100 points for the fifth straight game.
In their previous game, they hit a franchise low in losing to Cleveland, 77-63.


French Abbe Aids Homeless and Politicians Genuflect
Every year since 1954, as soon as the winter chill sets in here, a Roman Catholic abbot known to all of France as Abbe Pierre has emerged from his monastery in Normandy to demand publicly -- and often noisily -- that the authorities give shelter to the homeless.
It is not an isolated gesture.
Abbe Pierre has long acted as spokesman for the less fortunate and, in a sense, as conscience of the nation at large.
Polls routinely show him to be the most admired Frenchman.
And whenever he decides to speak out, he is assured full newspaper and television coverage.


Corrections
An article on Tuesday about military readiness at Fort Riley, Kan., misstated part of the combat history of the First Infantry Division.
It did not fight in the Korean War.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.50
8.50
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
4.75
4.75
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
6.00
5.43
3.08
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.39
5.44
3.04
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
6.12
6.14
3.18
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.79
7.79
5.70
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.84
7.84
6.21
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.71
8.73
7.24
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.94
6.94
5.54
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Canada Plans Tax on a U.S. Magazine
Canada's efforts to protect its recording and magazine industries at the expense of powerful American companies are generating fresh tensions with the United States.
On Thursday, the Canadian Government is expected to announce measures to bolster the industries, including a punitive tax on Canadian issues of Sports Illustrated.
The tax could provoke direct American retaliation, although such a tax is not specifically prohibited by the North American Free Trade Agreement.


Kohlberg, Kravis Says It Has Control of Borden
It has been a wild, bumpy ride for Elsie the Cow.
But yesterday, Kohlberg, Kravis, Roberts &amp; Company announced that it had won control of Borden Inc. when stockholders tendered 63.5 percent of Borden's shares by the deadline of midnight Tuesday.
Kohlberg, Kravis will buy an additional 28.1 million Borden shares that were issued under terms of the deal, meaning that it will own 69.5 percent of outstanding Borden common stock.


Theatrical Readings Meant for the Holidays
Two of television's most meaningful productions this Christmas week take the now almost quaint form of theatrical readings.
Talking heads still can have clout.
Everything depends, of course, on the quality of what's being said.
Even nonbelievers will find it impossible to resist the language of "St. Mark's Gospel," delivered in the unrevised St.
James version by the British actor Alec McCowen.
Mr.
McCowen has been doing the one-man reading since the mid-1970's; this particular performance, being broadcast on Channel 13 at 1:30 this afternoon, was taped in 1990 at the Lambs Theater in New York City.
The producer, Arthur Cantor, has sent Mr.
McCowen on tour with it throughout North America.


Broderbund Software (BROD,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Sir Evelyn Shuckburgh, 85, Influential British Diplomat
Sir Evelyn Shuckburgh, a retired British diplomat, died on Dec. 12.
He was 85 and lived in Watlington, Oxfordshire.
He retired in 1969 as Ambassador to Italy.
But his influence was at its peak in the 1950's.
He was the principal Middle East expert in the Foreign Office and, from 1951 to 1954, the private secretary of Foreign Secretary Anthony Eden.


Ashkenazy Drops Out of Orchestra
The pianist and conductor Vladimir Ashkenazy has resigned as music director of the Royal Philharmonic in a dispute with the orchestra's management over its offer to a potential successor.
Mr.
Ashkenazy, who is 57, has been conducting the orchestra for a decade and has been its music director since 1986.
He has an open-ended contract, and although in recent seasons he and the orchestra have discussed his eventual retirement, he had agreed to lead the ensemble on seven tours between 1995 and 1997.


Market Place; For Banks, Time of Reckoning
High-rolling hedge fund managers like George Soros were the first to disclose that they lost money in the plunging bond market this year.
Then came Piper Jaffray and some others that run mutual funds.
More recently, several municipalities, most notably Orange County, Calif., confessed to substantial losses from risky interest rate bets gone bad.
Now it's the banks' turn to come clean.


Economic Scene; Lower income taxes stimulate the economy. The sequel.
REMEMBER the Laffer curve?
That was the back-of-the napkin illustration by the economist Arthur Laffer of his idea that in some cases lower tax rates actually increase government revenues.
It inspired the immense rate reductions of the early Ronald Reagan era -- and later, the I-told-you-so chuckles from mainstream economists who never believed the rosy revenue forecasts.
Well, nobody's laughing these days.
The Laffer curve is alive and well, back at the heart of academic and political debates over the "dynamic scoring" proposed by some Republicans in computing how tax changes affect the budget.


Dow Up 34.65 As Trading Stays Brisk
Stock traders surprised even themselves yesterday by bidding share prices up in unusually heavy trading.
Computer stocks led by Oracle Systems, I.B.M., and Intel helped prompt a rally that also included retailers, pharmaceutical companies and health care providers.


Big Board's Uncovered Short Sales Set Record
The volume of uncovered short sales in the latest month rose to a record level on the New York Stock Exchange, the Big Board reported yesterday.
Meanwhile, short sales on the American Stock Exchange fell for the second straight month.
On the New York exchange, short interest positions rose by 4.5 percent, to 1.85 billion shares, from 1.77 billion shares the previous month.
In November, the Big Board experienced its first decline in short interest in a year.
The previous record short interest position was set in October, at 1.79 billion shares.


N.C.A.A. Places Alcorn State on Probation
The National Collegiate Athletic Association has placed Alcorn State University's athletic program on probation for three years for violations committed in the football and men's and women's basketball programs.
The university, which drew attention in the last several years because of the football heroics of quarterback STEVE McNAIR, who finished third in this year's Heisman Trophy voting, will lose scholarships in both football and basketball, and the basketball program was banned from post-season play for two years.


From Burns and Tatters, a Bombing Suspect
The man in the Clark Street subway station in Brooklyn was hurting.
His sneakers and the legs of his blue jeans were singed and shredded, his legs bloody below the knees, Police Officer Michael Ruiz remembered later.
There were burns on his arm, some of the skin on his face was peeling away, and through the tatters of his gloves there were burn marks on his knuckles.


New Look at Hypothetical Future of Ibsen's Nora
When Nora Helmer walks off the stage at the end of "A Doll's House," she slams the door on her husband, her children and her adolescent passion for macaroons.
These are the peanuts with which, throughout her marriage to Torvald, she has indulged herself as the keeper of her own caged animal.
The scene is usually played by a decisive Nora who holds her head high and her back straight and carries a small overnight bag that seems to contain nothing heavier than a handkerchief.
No need for anything else.
As Henrik Ibsen wrote "A Doll's House" in 1879, Nora isn't walking to the nearest boarding house.
She is slipping into the allusive darkness that brackets any piece of fiction complete unto itself.
The play is over.
Her world vanishes, though not the mind's image of her.
Everything we need to know about Nora has been said.


House Proud
MOST houses have secret places: a tiny alcove, a staircase tucked behind a false wall, a musty attic with an occasional recalcitrant ghost.
In the Los Angeles home of Deborah Sussman, a graphic designer, and her husband, Paul Prejza, a designer, the secret place is a closet so beautifully made that it invites you to put something precious there.


Police Arrest Son In Bathtub Murder
A 67-year-old Manhattan woman was found dead in a bathtub filled with scalding water yesterday after a dispute with her son, who was arrested and charged with second-degree murder, the police said.
The woman, Juanita Quinones, was found naked in the bathtub.
The police said that it was unclear what prompted the argument but that Ms.
Quiones's son, Roberto, has some "type of mental problems."


A Novice Plunges Into CD-ROM Land
THE young entrepreneurs who created the personal computer industry have always shown a flair for the evocative hyperbole of salesmanship.
In the late 1970's, when their smaller computers started to appear, they deftly called them personal computers.
It made the infuriating machines sound friendly.
The latest clever label in computing is "multimedia," and it is a big reason personal computers are going into American homes this year as never before.
This may be the first year that as many PC's will have been sold to homes as to businesses.


G.M. Raising Many Prices As Costs of Materials Rise
With steel and plastic costs rising and demand for vehicles still strong, the General Motors Corporation said today that it would raise the prices of almost half its cars and nearly all its light trucks on Jan. 3.
Although the increases varied by vehicle, they averaged seven-tenths of a percent, or $151, on base models, G.M. said.
When it announced 1995 prices in June, G.M. said they would be 2.5 percent, or $494, higher than prices of 1994 models.


15% Stake Is Sought In Teledyne
The holding company for the Wheeling-Pittsburgh Steel Company said yesterday that it would seek Government permission to acquire 15 percent of the common stock of Teledyne Inc. after Teledyne rejected an unannounced offer of about $1.2 billion made last month to buy the entire company.
Under an antitrust law called the Hart-Scott-Rodino Act, companies that plan to acquire assets of $15 million or more or at least a 15 percent stake in another company's securities must get approval from the Federal Trade Commission.


NBC and HBO Outbid Fox, Renewing Wimbledon Pact
After several weeks of delays, NBC and HBO yesterday renewed their rights to the Wimbledon tennis tournament, beating out Fox.
The combined five-year deal is worth an estimated $26 million to $28 million annually, at least 44 percent above the previous deal.
Fox pulled out of the bidding yesterday after the All England Club abruptly changed the length of the deal to five years from six.
Fox, which says it offered $168 million for six years, an average of $28 million annually, needed an extra year to rebuild sagging Wimbledon ratings and to balance expected early-year losses with the potential for an extra year of profits.


Investigation Finds 'Complex Network' Of Ticket Scalping
A New York State investigation into ticket scalping has found "a massive, complex network" that illegally resells tickets to major entertainment and sporting events for huge profits.
But Attorney General G. Oliver Koppell acknowledges he will have been unable to do much about it before he leaves office on Dec. 31.
In a draft report wrapping up an eight-month investigation, Mr.
Koppell describes a conspiracy involving the systematic siphoning of large blocs of tickets to illegal brokers through Ticketmaster outlets and by corrupt box-office employees and concert promoters, managers and agents, among others.
Although there have been several arrests and small fines levied during the investigation, there have been no major indictments, and the report is sketchy on what major reforms should be made.


So Dangerous, And So Simple To Produce
The explosive used in yesterday's subway firebombing appeared to be a modified Molotov cocktail.
The police said the device was a container about the size of a mayonnaise jar, filled with a flammable liquid and attached to an external electrical timing device.


Council Votes To Eliminate Most Smoking In Public Sites
After months of passionate debate and vigorous lobbying by the tobacco industry and local restaurants, the City Council yesterday passed a bill that will severely restrict smoking in nearly all public places in New York City, including a ban on smoking in most restaurants, offices and, for the first time, many outdoor locations.
Senior aides to Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani said they expected the Mayor to sign the bill, which becomes law 90 days after Council approval.
Mr.
Giuliani has said he wants to study the latest version of the bill, which has been repeatedly amended since it was introduced in March.


Gently Rippling Bowls and Vases
THE glass bowls and vases that the Italian designer Marco Zanini has created for Steuben, the blue-chip American crystal company, are part of Steuben's continuing interest in attracting young, hip consumers.
Mr.
Zanini's Calypso series rises to the challenge with classic but nontraditional designs.
Fluid and facet-free, Calypso's curvaceous silhouettes recall the surface of a pool of water, momentarily disturbed by a trailing finger or a skipping stone.
From $795 to $995 at Steuben; (800) 424-4240.


The Pop Life
Old, New and Odd
Though New York is not known as a haven for record buyers, it is getting close.
This year, more specialty record stores have opened than in any other year in recent memory, a particularly helpful fact for last-minute Christmas shoppers.
Here is a listing of the notable independent record shops that have opened in downtown Manhattan this year.


Executive Director Is Leaving Post at Port Authority After 4 Years
In a move widely expected since the election of George E. Pataki gave both New York and New Jersey Republican Governors for the first time in decades, the Port Authority's executive director said yesterday that he would resign effective Feb. 3.
The director, Stanley Brezenoff, a Democrat who served in a series of senior positions under Mayor Edward I. Koch, including first deputy mayor, said he would become president of the Maimonides Medical Center in Borough Park, Brooklyn.


Shelters Aren't Cause of Child Malnutrition
To the Editor:
Re your Dec. 14 news article on malnutrition among children in New York City shelters:


Brooks Hits Hard, With No Apologies
The former Jets wide receiver Al Toon had so many concussions during his eight-year career that another one could have put his health in serious jeopardy.
So he left the game.
And it turns out that the last big hit he took before walking away came from, of all people, a current Giants player.
The date was Nov. 8, 1992, and Toon had just caught an 8-yard sideline pass at Mile High Stadium.
By his count, the hit resulted in Toon's ninth concussion; the Jets say it was his fifth.
It was a clean shot on the 6-foot-4-inch, 205-pounder but a hard one, one that caused him to feel disoriented.
It would be the last hit he ever took; 19 days later, Toon retired.


Developer Charges Bribes Fed Boom in Brookhaven
In the mid-1980's, when John M. McNamara was using some of the hundreds of millions of dollars he was stealing from General Motors to develop real estate projects, Ira Costell would show up at Brookhaven Town Board meetings in futile attempts to persuade the town leaders to vote against Mr.
McNamara's projects.
At the time, Mr.
Costell, who was on a campaign to curb growth in the 326-square-mile municipality, chalked up Mr.
McNamara's easy victories to pro-development sentiment on the seven-member Town Board.
But now, with Mr.
McNamara's assertions in Federal Court that he bribed some board members to vote his way, Mr.
Costell wonders if he himself was an unwitting participant in an elaborate charade.


Rockies Re-sign Freeman for 2 Years
The Colorado Rockies have re-signed right-hander MARVIN FREEMAN to a $4.4 million, two-year contract.
Freeman, 31, was 10-2 with a 2.80 e.r.a. last season after joining the Rockies as a free agent. (AP)


Graduates of Smith Stand on Their Own
To the Editor:
Contrary to your Dec. 16 news article, Dr.
Ruth Simmons, Smith College's president-to-be, was one of three finalists considered for Oberlin College's presidency last winter.
The other two finalists were Ronald C. Rosbottom, dean of faculty at Amherst College, and Nancy S. Dye, dean of the faculty at Vassar College.
Ms.
Dye was appointed president of Oberlin College on Jan. 29.
JANE MACDONALD-MCINERNEY  Oberlin, Ohio, Dec. 17, 1994 The writer was coordinator of the 1993-94 presidential search committee at Oberlin College.


Mexico to Float Peso; Fiscal Crisis Grows
Mexico's economy was thrown into crisis as the Government abandoned its efforts to defend the peso and said it would allow the currency to float freely in value against the dollar.
The move was expected to bring a sharp devaluation, new inflation and losses for Mexican banks.


Good Deeds In Minutes
TOO busy to volunteer, too cash-strapped to write a check?
Reconsider the options.
"How to Make New York a Better Place to Live: A Handbook for Resident Angels" (City &amp; Company, $9.95) by Mark Grashow offers 540 suggestions for low-effort, high-impact activism.
The opportunities range from the usual to the quirky, in all boroughs: donating used eyeglasses, mending clothes at a nursing home, even participating in a fish census at a Staten Island salt marsh.


We Couldn't Live With a Balanced Budget
To the Editor:
Americans just don't get it: balancing the Federal budget is not the same as balancing a checkbook.
While the latest New York Times/ CBS News Poll suggests that more than 80 percent of the public supports a constitutional balanced-budget amendment (front page, Dec. 15), I fear that only a handful realize what this entails.


No Headline
"The train just lit up. The flames were shooting out from the doors." -- OZELL LUCAS, describing the explosion on the New York subway.  [ B6:1. ]


N.H.L. Players Rally Against Payroll Tax Plan
Two hundred and forty players met for about three hours here on Day 82 of the lockout to discuss their collective bargaining struggle with the National Hockey League.
They left voicing support for their negotiating committee.
They said they would not accept a payroll tax to go back to work.
They hinted that they are willing to make further concessions on salary arbitration.
And they said they wanted to play again, but not at any cost.


Treasuries Mixed, but Auction Helps
Treasury securities were mixed yesterday, with prices helped by a well-received auction of two-year notes and by a stronger dollar.
The price of the 30-year bond rose 2/32 , to 964/32 , for a yield 7.84 percent, unchanged from Tuesday.
Shorter-maturity bills were mixed, with a three-month bill rate down four basis points, to 5.40 percent, and a one-year note up two basis points, to 6.59 percent.
A basis point is one-hundredth of a percentage point.


Dean Rusk, Secretary of State In Vietnam War, Is Dead at 85
Dean Rusk, who as Secretary of State for President Kennedy and President Johnson became a stubborn if much-criticized defender of the American involvement in the Vietnam War, died Tuesday at his home in Athens, Ga., with his family at his side.
He was 85.
The cause of death was congestive heart failure, according to a spokesman for the University of Georgia.


Behind sliding doors lies a couple's private shrine, a closet


A New President Is Picked for GE Capital
The General Electric Company said yesterday that it had named Denis J. Nayden president and chief operating officer of its GE Capital subsidiary.
Mr.
Nayden will report to Gary C. Wendt, who remains chairman and chief executive of GE Capital as well as chairman, president and chief executive of the company's parent, GE Capital Services.
Mr.
Wendt said Mr.
Nayden would take over some administrative duties while he focused more on strategic opportunities.


Coffee Shops Now Fill Tirana's Boulevard of Heroes
The grand boulevard that is this bedraggled capital's main street has sprung to a life it never knew before.
The avenue once bore Stalin's name but now has a name good for all political seasons -- Boulevard of the Heroes of the Nation.
It stretches from the university built in the 1930's in the Fascist style favored by Mussolini to the vast square with the dilapidated museum, concert hall and hotel in the mode of the Communist heyday of the 1960's.
Over the last year it has sprouted any number of small shacks with a few plastic tables and chairs, inside and out, featuring as their main equipment espresso machines.
They are cafes.


Guest Artists: 'Nutcracker' Tradition
George Balanchine used to invite guest artists into his "Nutcracker" at the New York City Ballet, and Peter Martins, the company's current artistic director, has continued the tradition.
Paloma Herrera, American Ballet Theater's rising young star, packed the New York State Theater on Tuesday night with a sparkling debut with the company as Dewdrop.
She will repeat the role at the 2 P.M. matinee tomorrow and on Monday night.
Margaret Illmann, a guest from the National Ballet of Canada who performed here last season, will appear as the Sugarplum Fairy next week on Tuesday and Friday nights.


The Difficulty of Holiday Car Rentals
HEADING home for the holidays? Or taking a holiday vacation?
Don't forget to check your list of things to do: get gifts for Mom and Dad, pick up dry cleaning, take cat to kennel, rent car.


Frenzied Passengers, Their Hair and Clothes in Flames, Flee Burning Train
Through smoke, screams and heat, Mary McMurry tried to dash out of the packed subway train as soon as she heard the explosion and saw the flash of flames in the car behind her.
But she was nearly knocked to the ground by the crush of people.
When she reached the platform of the Fulton Street station, she went to the aid of three fellow passengers rolling on the ground, flames consuming their clothing.
"They were burning, laying there burning," said Ms.
McMurry, who had been on her way home to Brooklyn.
"Whatever we could do, we rolled them on the ground and threw jackets on them."


Robert Osborn Is Dead at 90; Caricaturist and Satirist
Robert Osborn, the caricaturist, cartoonist and satiric commentator, died on Tuesday at his home in Salisbury, Conn.
He was 90.
The cause was complications of bone cancer, said his son Nic.


Casino Gambling Issue Affects Deal for Garden
The National Basketball Association and the National Hockey League will probably require the ITT Corporation, which earlier this week agreed to buy Caesars World for $1.7 billion, to ban betting on their games once the company gains control of the Knicks and the Rangers.
ITT, which already owns the Desert Inn in Las Vegas, Nev., and four other casinos, will need to take some sort of step because both leagues have provisions excluding ownership involvement in establishments that bet on their games.


Fresno State Extends Sweeney's Contract
Fresno State has extended Coach JIM SWEENEY's contract into the next century despite finishing this year with a 5-7-1 record, the worst season in his 17 years with the Bulldogs.
The new contract runs through Jan. 31, 2000, Athletic Director GARY CUNNINGHAM said Tuesday.
Sweeney's contract, which was extended for four years in April 1993, will pay him $87,840 annually.
Sweeney, 65, is the nation's seventh winningest active coach with a 30-year record of 194-137-4. (AP)


Top Farm Job Likely to Go To Lawmaker From Kansas
Representative Dan Glickman of Kansas, who lost his bid for re-election last month, is likely to be named the next Agriculture Secretary, possibly as early as Thursday, senior Administration officials said today.
Mr.
Glickman was chairman of the House Intelligence Committee and has been a principal architect of the last three farm bills.
The officials said he would bring strong experience and management skills to the department.


WTA Tour Headquarters to Connecticut
The WTA Tour, the governing body of women's professional tennis, will move its world headquarters to Stamford, Conn., in February, Gov.
LOWELL P. WEICKER Jr. said yesterday.
The WTA Tour has been based in St.
Petersburg, Fla., since 1990 and will continue to maintain an operations office there.
WTA officials said Connecticut offers a better business environment than Florida for its headquarters.
The move is also part of an effort to restructure the WTA Tour by merging with the staff of the New York City-based Women's Tennis Council.
The new headquarters will employ about 10 people, including the WTA Tour's chief executive officer, ANNE PERSON WORCESTER. (AP)


A Cease-Fire Called Winter Settles Over Bosnia
Nenad Tadic, a Bosnian Serb soldier, looked up today at the snow falling heavily on the mountains surrounding Sarajevo and said, "The weather would achieve a four-month cease-fire, with or without the politicians."
He was right.
With snow falling and the weather bitterly cold, the fighting season is largely over in Bosnia.
The cease-fire announced by Jimmy Carter is therefore relatively insignificant unless it can be developed into a real disengagement of forces.


Don't Credit F.D.R. With 'Happy Warrior'
To the Editor:
William Safire implies in " 'And Enjoy This' " (column, Dec. 15) that Franklin D. Roosevelt chose "the happy warrior" sobriquet for Al Smith when nominating Smith for President at the 1924 Democratic National Convention.


Embattled Yeltsin Finds He Is Also Besieged at Home
Russian troops are still laying siege to Grozny, the capital of secessionist Chechnya, while in Moscow, opponents of the offensive are laying siege to the presidency of Boris N. Yeltsin.
And with his popularity in free fall, Mr.
Yeltsin took a cautious step in the direction of those who felt most betrayed by his military offensive.


Governors' Mansions: The Lights Are On, Is Anyone Home?
WHEN New York State voters elected a new governor last month, many probably assumed that George E. Pataki would move his family into the gabled Queen Anne Executive Mansion perched high on a hill above the Hudson in Albany -- the one that 29 governors have lived in, that Nelson A. Rockefeller restored after a fire on the first floor in 1961, where Alfred E. Smith once kept monkeys, donkeys, a bear and a goat named Heliotrope.
They were wrong.


COMPANY BRIEFS
ALCAN ALUMINIUM LTD., Montreal, completed the sale of its building products divisions in the U.S. and Canada to Genstar Capital Corp., for about $120 million.
AMERITECH CORP., Chicago, approved an increase of 4.2 percent in its quarterly dividend, to 50 cents a share, and the repurchase of up to 20 million shares during three years.


Architect of Health Plan Could Face Charges
A Federal district judge said today that Ira C. Magaziner, the chief architect of President Clinton's health plan, had given misleading testimony to the court, and he asked Federal prosecutors to determine whether the statements amounted to perjury or criminal contempt of court.
The judge, Royce C. Lamberth, issued the directive as he dismissed a lawsuit filed 22 months ago by doctors and consumers seeking access to records of the task force that developed the Clinton plan.
The panel was led by Mr.
Magaziner and Hillary Rodham Clinton.
In recent months, the Administration has disclosed virtually all records of the task force, thus avoiding the need for a trial.


Morris Helps Upstart Nets Keep Rolling
Only a rookie, Grant Hill is already being called the next Michael Jordan by some.
The Detroit Pistons' forward came into tonight's game against the Nets as the leading vote-getter in the balloting for the N.B.A.
All-Star Game.
But tonight -- at least for one night -- it was the Nets' Chris Morris, not Hill, who looked like Mike.
Morris, perhaps the most controversial player on a team that always seems to be looking for its next controversy, scored a season-high 22 points, including five 3-pointers, in 19 minutes off the bench.
Morris, Armon Gilliam (a season-high 27 points in place of the injured Derrick Coleman) and Kenny Anderson (a season-high 17 assists, with 11 points) led a second-quarter charge as the Nets followed a 2-point victory over the Knicks with a 117-99 drubbing of the Pistons at the Byrne Meadowlands Arena.


Secrecy Rule Narrowed in Fox Inquiry
The Federal Communications Commission will scale back the level of secrecy it has imposed on its investigation of the financial structure of the Fox Broadcasting Company, the commission said in an order issued yesterday.
The order was meant to clarify a much-debated confidentiality clause the commission included in its first order in the investigation, on Dec. 7.
At that time, the F.C.C. said it would seek further information before it ruled on the challenge that the N.A.A.C.P. has brought against Fox over renewal of the license for WNYW, Channel 5, Fox's station in New York.


Don't Veto the Police Commission
Nearly everyone agrees that New York City needs an independent agency to monitor police corruption.
But the Mayor and the City Council have been unable to agree on what powers such a commission should have.
In a report last summer, the Mollen commission made the case for a powerful independent agency to help root out corrupt cops.
The need is clear: repeated cycles of corruption over the decades have shown that the Police Department itself is not up to the job.


North Korea Returns the Body Of Downed U.S. Copter Pilot
North Korea today turned over the body of an American pilot who died when his helicopter went down four days ago north of the demilitarized zone, and indicated it would soon free the surviving pilot, Pentagon officials said.
After expressing impatience with North Korea's delay in returning the body, officials welcomed the move.


A Top Trader Quits Salomon
Yet another of the top traders at Salomon Brothers has left the firm to go work with John Meriwether, Salomon's former master trader, at his Greenwich, Conn., hedge fund known as Long Term Capital Management.
Hans Hufschmid, the head of foreign exchange, quit yesterday, Robert Baker, Salomon's spokesman said.
Long Term Capital said Mr.
Hufschmid would be the co-head of its London office.


Corrections
The Buy of the Week feature with the Food Notes column in The Living Section yesterday misstated the price for one and three-quarters ounces of Osetra caviar at Petrossian.
It is $47, not $85.


Behind the Bearhug: Chechnya's Case
So why shouldn't Chechnya be independent?
Opinions vary, of course, but the arguments center on reasons of history, reasons of state and reasons of luck -- bad luck, if you're a Chechen.
Or an Ossetian, or an Abkhazian.


Essay; Middle-Class War
In the White House, the catch-phrase must have seemed like a good idea: Marry F.D.R.'s "Economic Bill of Rights" with Bill Clinton's campaign promise of a "middle-class tax cut" to dress up a necessary placation of the overtaxed as a "Middle-Class Bill of Rights."
But the first thing we don't need is a new assertion of economic "rights," long the basis for budget-busting "entitlements." Mr.
Clinton proposes that all taxpayers subsidize a large portion of what some taxpayers will spend on college for their youngsters.


Baseball Talks Are Collapsing as Impasse Nears
Demonstrating once again that it is not the salesman but the product he's selling, major league club owners and their striking players reached another bleak stage in their negotiations today.
Talks between the two sides were in a state of virtual collapse, and the owners were poised to declare an impasse and implement a salary cap.
Negotiators, who did not meet at all today, agreed to stay overnight to see if there was a reason to meet on Thursday, but there seemed to be little prospect of positive developments.


Areas That Have the 50-Plus Enthusiasts in Mind
There is an accent on youth in the ski industry, as there is in everything else.
But increasingly, resorts are finding that sports-minded seniors are staying north to ski rather than following the exodus south to play golf.
"Being 70 and skiing isn't an oddity anymore," said Gwen Allard, the founder in 1987 of a senior skier development program at Windham, N.Y.
"People are running up and down our slopes at 80 and 90. There's no reason for them to give up their participation in the sport as they age. But what we're trying to do is develop quality programs that won't break seniors or ski-area budgets."


People
*
Marshall Karp, executive vice president and executive creative director at McCann-Erickson Worldwide, New York, and executive creative director at McCann Interactive, was named to head Compelling Content, a creative satellite spinoff shop that will develop advertising and programming concepts for McCann Worldwide.


Continental Homes Holding Corp.(CON,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Gingrich Gets Big Contract From Publisher
Representative Newt Gingrich, the Georgia Republican who will be the next Speaker of the House, is expanding his literary career in a multimillion-dollar deal with the book publisher Harper Collins.
Mr.
Gingrich, who has written novels, is now developing two works of nonfiction.
One is tentatively titled "To a New America" and will lay out his political vision.


American Theater Wing Awards Its '94 Grants
Twenty-nine theater companies, schools and organizations in the New York metropolitan area are the recipients of grants totaling $99,500 given this year by the American Theater Wing.
Among the recipients are Circle Repertory Theater, Audelco, Playwrights Horizon, Circle in the Square Theater School, the Eugene O'Neill Theater Center, the New York Shakespeare Festival, the Directors Company, Theaterworks/USA and the Willard Swire Learning Center at Actors' Equity.


Subway Service
Transit officials said last night that they did not anticipate any changes or delays in subway service today as a result of the firebombing at the Fulton Street station.


Imitating Armstrong As a Form Of Praise
The two programs of Louis Armstrong's music on Saturday and Monday nights, presented by Jazz at Lincoln Center as part of its series The Armstrong Continuum, clearly represented an enormous amount of work.
Nearly 40 pieces were played, with Monday night's program at Avery Fisher Hall digging deep into Armstrong's rarely performed orchestral works and Saturday's at Alice Tully Hall working through the revolutionary early works of Armstrong and King Oliver, among others.
It is difficult music, and not just for Armstrong's trumpet parts; the pre-swing rhythms are hard to make come alive, and the orchestral works, even the barest ones, were often complicated by show-biz virtuosity.
But something happened in Lincoln Center's pursuit of Armstrong: he appeared, but only in the form of a shadow, and his vague presence pointed out a great flaw in the whole repertorial endeavor.
While it is clear that the music of certain historical figures -- Duke Ellington, for example -- is ideal for the modern concert hall, depending mainly on the accurate reproduction of music found on records or in scores, the process falls short for others.


BUSINESS DIGEST
International Mexico was thrown into financial turmoil as the Government abandoned its efforts to defend the peso and announced that it would instead allow it to float freely against the dollar.  [ D1. ] Canada's efforts to protect its cultural industries are generating fresh tensions with the United States.  [ D1. ]


METRO DIGEST
FIREBOMB EXPLODES IN SUBWAY CAR, INJURING AT LEAST 40 PASSENGERS A crude firebomb engulfed a subway car that had just pulled into a station in lower Manhattan, burning more than 40 passengers in a horrifying second and disrupting subway service to and from Brooklyn for hours.
A1.
A SUSPECT: A JOBLESS COMPUTER WORKER Within an hour of the explosion, a badly burned man identified by the police as Edward Leary, 49, was being investigated in the blast and a similar incident last week in Harlem.
A1.


Korea Yields on Dead Pilot
North Korea handed over the body of an American who died when his helicopter went down, and indicated it would soon free the other pilot, who survived.
Page A8.


Hillhaven Corp.(HIL,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Books of The Times; Flesh Turns Into Spirit, Fiction Into Grisly Fact
NEVERMORE  By William Hjortsberg  289 pages. Atlantic Monthly Press. $21.
Not very far into William Hjortsberg's latest novel, "Nevermore," a sleepless Sir Arthur Conan Doyle sits in the front room of his suite at the Plaza Hotel shortly before dawn and beholds "a faint shimmering outline" taking shape before him.
It is "undeniably the same ethereal form he had seen before, a seated man in garments stylish three-quarters of a century ago."


Italian Premier to Resign, Possibly Today, Aides Say
After seven months in office as the billionaire outsider who promised Italy an era of stability and renewal, Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi indicated tonight that he would resign in the face of a revolt within his coalition.
The Prime Minister's spokesman said it was "99 percent certain" that Mr.
Berlusconi would tender his resignation to President Oscar Luigi Scalfaro on Thursday, which would lead to political turmoil and uncertainty far greater than anything Italy has seen in decades.


Graduates of Smith Stand on Their Own
To the Editor:
As a Smith College alumna, I am distressed by your Dec. 16 news article reporting the appointment of a new president for the college.
After asserting that Smith is "known" as "one of the more conservative of the top women's colleges," you identify it as the alma mater of Nancy Reagan and Barbara Bush.


In Japan, Girls Lead the Digital Pack
Apple Computer Inc.'s personal digital assistant, the Newton, didn't exactly catch on with American businessmen.
Maybe the company should have focused on Japanese girls instead.
Hand-held electronic organizers designed for children are beginning to catch on in the United States.
But here in Japan, they are all the rage among pre-teen-age girls, and they are being snapped up as Christmas presents this year.
Prices range from $30 to more than $200 for the devices, which are made by Casio, Sharp, Sega Enterprises and toy makers such as Takara and Bandai.


Transactions
Baseball  American League
CLEVELAND INDIANS -- Signed David Lynch, pitcher, to a minor-league contract.
SEATTLE MARINERS -- Agreed to terms with Jay Buhner, outfielder, on a three-year contract.
Placed Eric Anthony, outfielder, on waivers for the purpose of giving him his unconditional release.
National League
PHILADELPHIA PHILLIES -- Signed Dave Hollins, third baseman, to a one-year contract.
PITTSBURGH PIRATES -- Signed Rob Leary, first baseman, to a minor-league contract.
SAN DIEGO PADRES -- Announced the sale of the team from Tom Werner to John Moores.
Football  National Football League
ATLANTA FALCONS -- Placed Chuck Smith, defensive end, on injured reserve.
Signed Dunstan Anderson, defensive end.
CINCINNATI BENGALS -- Placed Steve Broussard, running back, and Eric Moore, offensive tackle, on injured reserve.
Acquired Derek Ware, tight end, off waivers from the Arizona Cardinals and Lamont Hollinquest, linebacker, off waivers from the Washington Redskins.
SEATTLE SEAHAWKS -- Signed Dion Lambert and Del Speer, safeties.
Placed Rick Mirer, quarterback, and Duane Bickett, linebacker, on injured reserve.
Arena Football
CHARLOTTE RAGE -- Named David DeSpain vice president.
Hockey  International Hockey League
CHICAGO WOLVES -- Released Joe Crowley, left wing.
Returned Grant Sjerven, goaltender, to Richmond of the East Coast Hockey League.
DETROIT VIPERS -- Signed Kevin Malgunas, right wing, and Clark Polglase, defenseman, to tryout contracts.
Released Maxim Michailovsky, goaltender.
Placed Joe Day, center, on injured reserve.
College
FRESNO STATE -- Extended the contract of Jim Sweeney, football coach, through 2000.
LSU -- Suspended David Bosley, guard, and Misha Mutavdzic, center, for one game for violating an NCAA rule by participating in a pickup basketball game last summer in West Virginia.
MARYLAND -- Announced that Kevin Foley, sophomore quarterback, is leaving the school.
MICHIGAN STATE -- Announced that Morris Watts, assistant head football coach, will be retained as an administrative assistant for the football team.
MINNESOTA -- Named Jim Zorn quarterbacks coach.
SOUTH FLORIDA -- Named Leslie Kanter softball coach.


Anti-Abortion Violence Rises Slightly, Study Finds
Violence at abortion clinics this year has risen only slightly from last year, according to a survey by an abortion rights group, although the group also found that clinics were experiencing a sharp increase in death threats.
The Feminist Majority Foundation, a nonprofit advocacy group that runs a clinic protection program and conducted the study, found that in the first seven months of this year violence of various kinds had occurred at 52 percent of the clinics surveyed, including death threats, bombings and blockades by protesters.
This was up from the 50 percent in a similar survey covering the first seven months of 1993.


Hospital Endowment From Ashe Unit
The Arthur Ashe Foundation for the Defeat of AIDS will establish a $1 million endowment at New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center in New York, the foundation president and late tennis star's widow, JEANNE MOUTOUSSAMY-ASHE, said yesterday. (AP)


Threat of Disruption in Oil Supply Is Eased
Enough oil tankers are obtaining the added insurance to be required by Federal law beginning next week that a threat of disruption to the country's oil supplies has been averted.
Shipowners are saying, however, that the cost of the added coverage is being passed along in the form of higher charter rates, which in the last week have risen 10 to 15 percent on many ships.
These costs are expected to add only a fraction of a cent to the cost of gasoline and heating oil.


Frances Schuman, 81; Helped Public Radio
Frances Prince Schuman, the founding chairwoman of the National Friends of Public Broadcasting and the wife of the composer William Schuman, died on Monday at her home in Manhattan.
She was 81.
She died after a brief illness, said her son, Anthony.


Events: Crafts And Cactus
Kwanzaa Crafts  American Museum of Natural History, Central Park West (79th Street); (212) 769-5315.
Traditional African textiles, jewelry, sculpture and foods will be sold on Wednesday from noon to 5 P.M.
The event includes music and dance performances.
No charge with museum admission, $6 (those 62 and older, $4; children under 13, $3).


Els Is Named European Player of Year
ERNIE ELS of South Africa, the United States Open champion, was selected PGA European Tour player of the year yesterday.


Report Finds the Limbo of Foster Care Is Growing Longer
Because one girl was beaten and sexually abused by her parents, she has been taken away from them three times, and placed with four different foster families.
But nine years after she entered New York City's foster care system as an infant, she remains ineligible for adoption because her parents' legal claim to her still has not been cut off.
Another little girl has been taken from her mother three times, the last time when she was 4, emaciated and suffering from ringworm, but it was not until she was 7 that the city decided that she should not go back to her mother.
She has spent 8 of her 9 years in foster care, but like the first child, she has no immediate prospect of finding a permanent home.


A Surprise From Lichtenstein Prints Show
The unexpected news delivered by the handsome retrospective of Roy Lichtenstein's prints at the National Gallery of Art here is that his graphic works are as good as his paintings, sometimes better.
One might have expected exactly the opposite from this Pop artist, famous for recyling images from both high and low culture into pristine, expertly composed icons of style.
Since Mr.
Lichtenstein's painted images are so seamless and devoid of touch as to seem almost like prints themselves, it might be supposed that his prints seen in bulk might easily impress one as not only redundant but also icy cold, too far removed from the artist's already invisible hand.
But in fact, this survey of 90 works dating from 1950 to 1994, which coincides with the publication of a catalogue raisonne of his prints, gives a fuller and more textured picture of Mr.
Lichtenstein's artistic achievement and his way of thinking than last season's painting survey at the Guggenheim Museum did.
The reason turns out to be simple: in printmaking more than in painting, Mr.
Lichtenstein found a perfect mating of medium and message and is in many ways at his most thoroughly Pop.


The Lamp With Subtlety
FROM its sleek, cast-aluminum body to its discreet maple base, the 23-inch-tall Marco table lamp brings an understated flair to a genre that can often be overwrought.
"It's difficult to find a lamp that's easy to live with," said Michael Killeen, the design director of the J &amp; R Collection, a Chicago company whose fashion-forward store furnishings are now manufactured for the home.
"So many are overdesigned, premeditated. Even I'm guilty of that. But this time, it just felt right."
The Marco lamp is $275 and is available in polished or brushed aluminum finishes.
It can also be made in a taller size upon request.


Tassels As Stars
OVERSIZE accessories make even the skimpiest curtains look glamorous.
At least that's the philosophy of Xavier Dohr, a Parisian designer.
His window accessories combine the suavity of Jean-Michel Frank with the utilitarianism of the Gap.
Priced from $190 to $375, they are available to the trade at Quadrille, 979 Third Avenue (near 58th Street); (212) 753-2995.


Kenneth J. Ludwig; Insurance Executive, 72
Kenneth J. Ludwig, an insurance executive, died on Friday at Brunswick Hospital in Amityville, L.I.
He was 72.
The cause was pulmonary fibrosis, a progressive degeneration of the lungs, said his son Christopher, of Massapequa, L.I.


French Yacht Racer Arrives in Sydney
The French solo sailor Christophe Auguin arrived in Sydney, Australia, yesterday after having been stalled out for two days in light winds.
The rest of his 7,000-mile passage in Leg 2 of the BOC round-the-world yacht race had been much quicker.
Auguin shaved more than a day off the record for the voyage from Cape Town, by finishing in 24 days 23 hours.
Auguin, who is the race's defending champion, is skipper of the 60-foot sailboat Sceta Calberson.
He was first in Sydney ahead of 14 other solo skippers.


The Neediest Cases; Opening Home and Hearts to Disabled Children
In Zafar Ahmed's native country, Pakistan, neglected children are usually sent to live with relatives.
So when Mr.
Ahmed heard about New York City's foster care system, he was intrigued.
"In my country, everyone has an extended family to depend on," said Mr.
Ahmed, who immigrated to New York in 1981.
"I was surprised to learn that most Americans have nobody to lean on when trouble comes."


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-14  ITALY'S PREMIER ON THE BRINK  After seven months in office, Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi indicated that he would resign in the face of a revolt within his governing coalition over his leadership.
A1


TV Sells All Things
To the Editor:
Re "Television Gets Closer Look as a Factor in Real Violence" (front page, Dec. 14): I'd like to pose a question.
If children (and adults) are not influenced by what they see and hear on television, why are commercials, many of which appeal neither to reason or logic, so effective?
Be assured that if these commercials were not effective, the sponsors would take them off the air.
If the commercials affect people, why wouldn't program content affect people?
HERMAN FLEISCHER  Plainview, L.I., Dec. 15, 1994


INSIDE
Contender to Replace Espy
Dan Glickman, a defeated Kansas Congressman, is expected to be named to succeed Mike Espy as Secretary of Agriculture, senior Administration officials said.
Page B12.
Police Fire Killed Bystander
The police said a bystander who died in a gunfight between officers and a gunman in Queens was killed by a bullet fired by the police.
Page B1.
Fast Track for Drug Patents
Pharmaceutical companies will no longer have to conduct clinical trials on humans before they can be granted patents on the biotechnology products they invent.
Page B11.


How Kaposi's Sarcoma Behaves in AIDS Cases
To the Editor:
"Apparent Virus May Be a Cause of Fatal Cancer in AIDS Patients" (front page, Dec. 16) calls Kaposi's sarcoma "one of the principal causes of death" among gay and bisexual men with AIDS.


Horizon Healthcare Corp.(HHC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Designs for Cathedrals Provide a Cautionary Tale
ASPIRING master builders take note: not even a Renaissance architect could protect his work from temperamental clients, budget disputes or rivals.
Antonio da Sangallo's version of St.
Peter's Basilica, for example, was totally trashed by Michelangelo, who decreed that its dark corners would attract "criminals, forgers, rapists and other such scoundrels."


Schools Chancellor Agrees to Stay On for 2 Years
The Board of Education reached an agreement yesterday with Schools Chancellor Ramon C. Cortines on a new two-year contract, offering Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani only the smallest concession on his demands that the Chancellor be held to specific performance goals.
After originally trying to force Mr.
Cortines to resign, Mr.
Giuliani backed down over the weekend and called for a one-year contract with strict conditions on the Chancellor's performance in four areas.
But the board refused to change the wording of the contract, although it issued a statement calling on the Chancellor to make several of the administrative reforms urged by the Mayor.


HealthTrust Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


10 Writers Win Grants
The Lila Wallace-Reader's Digest Fund announced 10 winners of its annual Writer's Awards on Tuesday.
The recepients, who will receive $105,000 each, to be paid in three annual installments, are Sherman Alexie, Christopher Durang, Ian Frazier, Jessica Hagedorn, Bell Hooks, June Jordan, W. S. Merwin, David Mura, Lee Smith and Wakaka Yamauchi.
Under the terms of the award, the winners will work with nonprofit cultural and community organizations to create programs intended to foster a greater appreciation of contemporary literature.


Corrections
An article on Tuesday about a museum in Chongqing, China, dedicated to Gen.
Joseph W. Stilwell, an American who served there during World War II, misstated his role in some copies.
He commanded American forces in the China-Burma-India theater, not all Allied forces there.


Competing Cuts In Budget Dismissed
A state judge tossed out both Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani's proposed budget cuts and a competing set of reductions enacted by the City Council, while sidestepping any ruling on the Council's attempt to test its budgetary powers under the New York City Charter.


A Movement Disastrous Or Just Annoying?
At moments, all eight participants in tomorrow night's "Firing Line" debate seem to be ganging up on Gloria Steinem, who, unfortunately for the spirit of the occasion, is not there to speak for herself.
The resolution, framed by William F. Buckley Jr., is "The Women's Movement Has Been Disastrous," and the two sides pretty much agree that pronouncements equating sex with rape and the campaign for the depatriarchizing of English ("spokesperson") are extreme, silly and uneuphonious.
But there is strenuous disagreement over whether such annoyances constitute a disaster.
Mr.
Buckley, the program's token patriarch, maintains that what began as a commendable campaign for equality, like the civil rights movement, has gone astray, in a politically correct direction.
Elizabeth Fox-Genovese, who founded the Institute for Women's Studies at Emory University, faults the movement as it has developed or declined for favoring the interests of upper-class women and scanting the needs of their poorer sisters.


Police Bullet Killed Victim Of Gun Battle
Police officials and the New York City Medical Examiner's office have determined that a bystander who died on Sunday in a furious gunfight between police officers and a gunman in Queens was killed by a bullet fired by the police, not by the gunman.
A Police Department spokesman said last night that investigators believe the officers hit the bystander accidentally with a shot aimed at the gunman they were pursuing, though he said that finding was still preliminary.
The bystander, Laakhraj Dalipram, 31, of Mount Vernon, had already been shot once in the head by the gunman, the police said yesterday, but it was the police bullet that killed him.


Commercial Metals Co.  (CMC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Paris Journal; Starved for Customers, the Bistros Die in Droves
Henri Miquel, the owner, knows what most of his regulars want.
The early-morning customers at Le Dufrenoy, his bistro, wolf down croissants and espressos, sometimes laced with a burning shot of calvados.
At midday, copious plates of beef stew or lentils with ham zip along the Formica-topped tables.
Afternoons are for flirting students and lovers of pinball machines.
The after-work crowd comes in to decompress.
It seems a suitable spot to ask why the bistro, that monument of French street culture, has been declared a vanishing breed.
According to Le Limonadier, the trade journal, 4,000 bistros -- France's homey cafes -- are going out of business every year.


Sports of The Times; Garden Must Get Gambling Weed-Killer
IN the year 2000, if not before, a gambling casino at Madison Square Garden might be a sideshow to a Knick or Ranger game.
As incompatible as it is with sports integrity, that futuristic scenario is the thinking behind ITT's agreed purchase of Caesars World for $1.7 billion not long after its agreed purchase, with Cablevision as a partner, of the Garden (including the Knicks, the Rangers and the MSG cable network) for $1.075 billion.


RESULTS PLUS
MEN'S BASKETBALL  No. 8 Florida Is Upset  Kip Stone scored 24 points, 9 in the final 4 minutes, in visiting Jacksonville's 68-67 upset of eighth-ranked Florida last night.
Jacksonville led most of the game despite shooting only 39 percent from the free throw line and turning the ball over 21 times.
Jacksonville (5-2) opened an 8-point lead four times in the second half, but Florida (5-2) came back behind guard Dan Cross (28 points, 15 rebounds) and forward Andrew DeClercq (26 points).
Cross and DeClercq scored 20 consecutive points, including all of a 10-0 run with less than 10 minutes to play, as Florida took a 60-57 lead. (AP) California 89, Cincinnati 76: Monty Buckley (22 points) and K. J. Roberts (16 points) sparked a second-half comeback by No. 24 California (6-0) in its victory at No. 13 Cincinnati (7-3).
California overcame an 8-point deficit for its second consecutive victory over a ranked team.
The Golden Bears beat then-No. 11 Minnesota, 82-75, last Saturday. (AP)


CHRONICLE
ELIZABETH H. DOLE, president of the American Red Cross and the wife of Senator Bob Dole, who will be the new majority leader, underwent surgery Tuesday at Massachusetts General Hospital in Boston to clear blockage in a major artery in her neck.
The hospital listed her condition yesterday as good.
The blockage in the vessel, the right carotid artery, was discovered in a recent physical examination.
"The problem is isolated in the one spot on the one artery," Dr.
ROBERT G. OJEMANN, Mrs.
Dole's surgeon, said in a statement issued by the hospital before the operation.
"Mrs. Dole is in superb physical condition. She has no other symptoms. We found no other blockage in her system and no other risk factors."


M.T.A. Vote Puts New Fares In Question
The Metropolitan Transportation Authority board voted yesterday to delay adopting a $5 billion operating budget for next year until after Governor-elect George E. Pataki takes office next month, leaving uncertain the fate of the authority's ambitious plan to establish monthly passes and free transfers between buses and subways.
The decision to delay adoption of the budget came after several Republican members of the board expressed opposition to the fare plan, which they said would cost too much at a time of government cutbacks.


A Johnson &amp; Johnson executive takes over the helm of a foundation devoted to educational links.
FOR only the second time since its founding, the Advertising Educational Foundation is changing top leadership.
Peter N. Larson, worldwide chairman of the consumer and personal care group at Johnson &amp; Johnson, is succeeding Eugene H. Kummel, chairman emeritus at McCann-Erickson Worldwide, as chairman and chief executive of the foundation, which is based in New York.
The change, approved unanimously by the board at a meeting last week, is effective immediately.


CHRONICLE
Travels With Julia:
JULIA CHILD and ROBERTA KLUGMAN, executive director of the American Institute of Food and Wine, were in a taxi recently en route to the March restaurant in Manhattan, when some discussion arose about its exact location.
"Julia was saying, 'I think it's between First and Third,' and the driver was saying maybe York, and there we were moving along down Park," Ms.
Klugman said.
"Suddenly the driver said: 'I recognize that voice. How do I know that voice. Why is it familiar to me?' "


Poor Steered To Yonkers, Mayor Charges
Charging that wealthy suburbs have illegally steered poor people to housing in Yonkers, Mayor Terence M. Zaleski threatened today to sue 11 Westchester communities, the county and the Federal Government unless they moved to stop the practice.
Mayor Zaleski said that people with Federal housing subsidies, known as Section 8 certificates, had moved into southwest Yonkers from the communities in Westchester, as well as New York City, without going through the Yonkers Municipal Housing Authority, which administers the program here.


Journal; A Star Is Born
"Dueling Tax Cuts," Washington's newest drama, made its debut last Thursday with the President's prime-time address from the Oval Office.
But as so often happens in show business, a supporting player stole the show from the star.
Sitting casually on a desk and speaking a scant five minutes, the nation's newest Senator, Fred Thompson of Tennessee, delivered a G.O.P. rebuttal that had all the focus, intimacy and conviction that Mr.
Clinton's impersonation of a Republican lacked.
Bob Dole, who chose Mr.
Thompson for a role that might conceivably have gone to Newt Gingrich or Mr.
Dole himself, did not cite the new Senator's experience as an occasional movie actor as a factor in his decision.
But surely Mr.
Thompson's Hollywood past didn't hurt.
He wrote his own script and served as his own director.
For an acting method he chose Ronald Reagan's, not Lee Strasberg's.


Ending the Korean Showdown
A navigational error by a U.S.
Army helicopter crew and an overreaction by North Korean defenders have threatened to undo months of arduous negotiations to defuse tensions on the Korean Peninsula.
Now North Korea has taken a step to defuse the crisis by repatriating the remains of the dead American crewman.
But it should have released the surviving American crewman as well.
North Korea needs to return him by Christmas and provide a full accounting of what happened to the helicopter and its crew.
Once the pilot is returned, Washington and Pyongyang need to discuss ways to avoid similar incidents in the future.


A New Concern for Moscow Drivers


Solomon Friedman Absorbing Agency
Solomon Friedman Advertising in Bloomfield Hills, Mich., said yesterday that it would hire Chato Hill, a longtime creative executive in the Detroit area, and absorb his agency, effective Jan. 1.


Judge Voids Disputed Cuts Of Mayor and Council
A state judge yesterday tossed out both Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani's proposed budget cuts and a competing set of reductions enacted by the City Council, while sidestepping any ruling on the Council's attempt to test its budgetary powers under the City Charter.
Mr.
Giuliani promptly said he would now use his power of impoundment to achieve nearly the full $800 million in spending cuts that he originally proposed.
And the Council, while claiming a victory, was left with little leverage to block him.


It's Down to the Wire; McMorris Is at Plate
Some call him a deal maker, others call him a decision maker.
Only time will tell if Jerry McMorris is much more than that when it comes to helping his fellow baseball owners and major leaguers as they desperately try to wend their way out of a paralyzing four-month-old players strike.
McMorris, a 54-year-old trucking magnate from Colorado, the owner of the wildly successful two-year-old Colorado Rockies is, right now, the point man for management's negotiating team.


The Sparring Is Over, for Now. Time for a Handshake.
AT FIRST there was an air of unreality about the afternoon as the sirens screamed outside, heading for the subway firebomb site in lower Manhattan, and reporters waiting for a news conference at Board of Education headquarters in Brooklyn huddled around portable radios and telephones.
Another New York City crisis had struck, making everything else seem insignificant.
But they weren't insignificant at all, those proceedings yesterday in an improbably Baroque conference room of board headquarters.
As the afternoon played itself out, it became clear that there was nothing quite so real or significant in the city as the public school system trying to educate one million children.
Right or wrong in its defiance of Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani, the board made a grab for equilibrium when it voted, 5 to 2, to give Ramon C. Cortines, the Mayor's nemesis, a two-year extension to his contract as Schools Chancellor.


Holiday on Monday
Christmas, which falls on Sunday, will be legally observed on Monday. NEW YORK
GOVERNMENT OFFICES: Closed.
POST OFFICE: Express Mail and special delivery only; main post office, at 33d Street and Eighth Avenue, open.
BANKS: Closed.
PARKING: Sunday rules in effect.
SANITATION: No pickups, street cleanings or recycling.
SCHOOLS: Closed.
FINANCIAL MARKETS: Closed.
TRANSPORTATION: Subways and buses on holiday schedule.
Long Island Rail Road on normal weekday schedule.
Metro-North Railroad on Saturday schedule.
NEW JERSEY
GOVERNMENT OFFICES: Closed.
POST OFFICES: Closed.
BANKS: Closed.
SCHOOLS: Closed.
TRANSPORTATION: Rail service on holiday schedule; no service on the Boonton, Montclair, Port Jervis and Pascack Valley lines.
Buses on Saturday schedule.
CONNECTICUT
GOVERNMENT OFFICES: Closed.
POST OFFICES: Closed.
BANKS: Closed.
SCHOOLS: Closed.
TRANSPORTATION: Metro-North on Saturday schedule.


While We're Young
Lights in the distance candles on a windowsill, a twinkling decorated tree, the street lights of a small town seen from a snowy hill above -- have long evoked a feeling of hope that is the best universal feature of the Christmas season.
Yet our rational impulse tells us that this notion comes from sentiment, not reasoning -- that a distant light can't reveal anything about the human prospect.
Or can it?
Researchers working with the Hubble Space Telescope this fall fixed their gaze on the light emitted by a class of stars called Cepheids, located in a galaxy that sky charts designate M100, and made a discovery that, if confirmed, could have tremendous implications for the way we think about the future of our species and our planet.


Boom Shows Its Dark Side
In the financial capitals of the developed world, a favorite story of Latin American success in recent years was about a closed economy thrown open by bold technocrats trained in the Ivy League.
It told of investments pouring in, inflation being vanquished, democracy taking root.
By today, however, the tale that investors called "the Mexico story" had suddenly turned darker.


CHRONICLE
PRINCE RAINIER of Monaco has vehemently denied a report in yesterday's issue of Paris-Match, the French weekly magazine, that he intended to abdicate soon in favor of his son, PRINCE ALBERT.
A statement issued by the palace said: "The sovereign Prince expresses the most formal denial of this fantasy that lacks all foundation, which was obviously inspired by the weekly magazine more out of concern for increasing its circulation than out of concern for the truth."


That's a Strange Way to Finance a Tax Cut
To the Editor:
"President Insists His Tax Cuts Keep Deficit in Check" (front page, Dec. 17) contains reassuring reports from Treasury Secretary Lloyd Bentsen, Leon E. Panetta, the White House chief of staff, and Laura D'Andrea Tyson, chairwoman of the President's Council of Economic Advisers, about not "cooking the books" and phasing spending cuts with tax relief over time so as not to increase the deficit.
Leaving aside the wisdom of cutting taxes now, what is disturbing is that part of the offset to tax reductions will come from sales to the public of Government-owned properties.
Countries all over the world have been privatizing, motivated partly by the desire to increase their budgetary revenue.
Such privatization has served useful purposes.


BASEBALL OWNERS IMPLEMENT A CAP ON PLAYERS' PAY
Baseball's labor dispute, which prompted a mediation effort by the Clinton Administration in October and induced an offer of help from Jimmy Carter on Thursday, plunged to a new low early this morning when the owners rejected a new proposal from the players and implemented a salary cap, effective at one minute after midnight.
"There was no sense going further tonight and I recessed the negotiations," Bill Usery Jr. said 10 weeks after he began mediating the strike at the request of the Administration.
"A deadline was set by owners and it was evident that we weren't going to reach an agreement by that time."


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League  BALTIMORE ORIOLES -- Named Claude Osteen pitching coach for Rochester of the International League.


People
*
James C. Sammartino was named publisher at Travel Holiday magazine, New York, succeeding Richard Fontana, who left to become president at Globe Media, New York.
Mr.
Sammartino was previously Eastern regional manager at Reader's Digest magazine, New York. *
William David, associate publisher at Town &amp; Country magazine, New York, was named associate publisher at House Beautiful, New York, succeeding Jeffrey Burch, who left to join Cosmopolitan magazine, New York, in a similar position.


Robert Lowry, 75, Postwar Novelist
Robert Lowry, a writer whose novels and short stories about World War II and life in Greenwich Village in the postwar years were popular in the 1940's and 50's, died on Dec. 5 at the Veterans Administration Medical Center in Cincinnati.
He was 75.
He had been hospitalized in October for treatment of an irregular heartbeat and then developed pneumonia, said his son Beirne, of Manhattan.


PRUDENTIAL CLAIMS-PAYING RATING LOWERED
The Prudential Insurance Company of America's claims-paying rating was reduced yesterday to AA- from AA by the Standard &amp; Poor's Corporation.
The rating agency said the giant insurance company's earnings for 1994 could show break-even results or even a loss of several hundred million dollars, a sharp reversal from the $1 billion or more the company has earned annually in recent years.
In addition to losses at Prudential Securities resulting from improper sales of securities and limited partnerships, S. &amp; P. said that Prudential's life insurance sales had declined this year, and that its mortgage business had fallen sharply.
Earlier this week, the A. M. Best Company said it was putting Prudential's A+ rating under review.
Both agencies said Prudential was in strong overall financial condition.


As Russian Pilots Close In: 'It Was Terrifying'
Aleksandr Shevchenko, 75, said he was taking a walk this morning after spending the night in his cellar when the air raid began.
"I heard and saw it," he said.
"It was terrifying, absolutely terrifying," he added, his body shaking at the memory of the first daylight raid on Grozny since the beginning of the Russian offensive against this secessionist capital.


McDowell to Get Yankee Offer
When the owners' new salary plan and work rules are implemented today, the Yankees will offer their newly acquired pitcher Jack McDowell a one-year, $5.83 million qualifying offer to retain the right to match any other offers.
The Yankees, who must offer McDowell 110 percent of his $5.3 million salary with the White Sox from 1994, will not make qualifying offers to the left-hander Jim Abbott or utilityman Randy Velarde.
Under a salary cap, General Manager Gene Michael said the Yankees could not afford to offer Abbott $3.0525 million for next season, which is 110 percent of his $2.775 million salary in 1994.
Abbott was a disappointing 20-22 in two seasons with the Yankees.


Democrats Ask For an Independent Inquiry Into Gingrich's $4 Million Book Contract
Democrats demanded an independent inquiry today into reports that Representative Newt Gingrich, the Georgia Republican who will become the House Speaker in January, has signed a $4 million book contract with the conglomerate that is waging a regulatory battle to prevent the dismembering of the Fox television network.
In a news conference today, Representative David E. Bonior of Michigan, who will be the Democratic whip in the new Congress, suggested that Mr.
Gingrich's contract was "a $4 million Christmas gift" from the media baron Rupert Murdoch.
Mr.
Murdoch's empire includes Fox and HarperCollins, the publisher that has signed Mr.
Gingrich as an author.


Jurors Deserve to Know at Outset How Long a Trial Might Last; Judicial Failure
To the Editor:
As a trial lawyer, I read with dismay your Dec. 19 front-page article on a case in which a mistrial was declared because of a "revolt" by jurors who felt they could no longer cope with a trial that had already lasted four months and was not about to conclude.
Having participated in trials lasting longer than four months, I fault the lawyers for both sides in that case, not the jurors.
So too should the judge share part of the responsibility if the jurors had not been prepared at the outset for the anticipated length of the trial.
In recent years, many trials have extended well beyond four months, and in virtually all cases, verdicts were arrived at.
I am not aware of any litigation that was compromised because of juror disenchantment; in extended cases I am familiar with, jurors, having been prepared, served with distinction.
It is to be hoped that the jurors in your article who feel their time was wasted will not be dissuaded from serving on a jury again.
While many will be quick to criticize our system of trial by jury, we who work within that system rely on the participation of ordinary citizens who agree to serve as the ultimate judges of the facts.
Those who criticize this system have yet to propose a viable alternative.
BENJAMIN BRAFMAN New York, Dec. 19, 1994


At the Bar; A professor looks at the Simpson trial and sees something missing: an emotional prosecutor.
One can hardly pick up a newspaper or turn on a television these days without running into Denise Brown or Fred Goldman, the sister and father of the two people O. J. Simpson is accused of killing.
As the two grieving relatives have become more visible and outspoken, they have taken their share of criticism, particularly from Mr.
Simpson's lawyers.
To George P. Fletcher of Columbia University Law School, it is a bad rap.
In his forthcoming book, "With Justice for Some: Victims' Rights in Criminal Trials" (Addison-Wesley), he argues that Ms.
Brown and Mr.
Goldman seek out Geraldo Rivera and others like him simply because they have nowhere else to turn.
And that, he believes, reflects badly on the criminal justice system in general and prosecutors in particular.


Foleys: Different Paths
Almost at the same time it was confirmed that his older brother, GLENN FOLEY, would see his first action in a regular-season professional football game, it was announced that the University of Maryland quarterback KEVIN FOLEY is leaving the school because of a lack of action.
Foley said he would transfer to a Division I-AA college.
Early in the season, Foley came off the bench in the second quarter and helped Maryland upset West Virginia, 24-13, completing 24 of 37 passes for 287 yards and was named the Atlantic Coast Conference's quarterback of the week.
He started the next week and lost.
"I thought I played pretty well and then I got benched," said the Cherry Hill, N.J., athlete.


Anti-Gay Minister
To the Editor:
The Rev.
Louis Sheldon, a homophobe under a smiling mask, has for years not been a Presbyterian minister (news article, Dec. 19).
He and the Presbyterian Church U.S.A. parted company when it realized that his attitudes are not what the church stands for.
But he still identifies himself that way in interviews.


Mental Hospital Aide Is Acquitted in the Escape of 2 Killers
A former state police lieutenant accused of helping two convicted killers escape from the Mid-Hudson Psychiatric Center in May has been acquitted by an Orange County jury.
After the verdict on Wednesday, the defendant, Robert Kamrowski, thanked the jurors "for looking at all the facts" and for rejecting the testimony of the prosecution's chief witness, Herbert Arnold, one of the escapees.


A Political Fable in Thriller's Clothing
Roman Polanski knows that a sleek, stylish thriller is often the best route to weightier matters.
Without its glossy commercial surface, "Rosemary's Baby" would never have made Devil worship so viscerally chilling.
His new film, "Death and the Maiden," is a similar triumph for Mr.
Polanski.
His brilliance with the camera turns Ariel Dorfman's well-meaning but pretentious play about human rights into a harrowing experience.
The film, which opens today, is a three-character story set in an unspecified South American country (standing in for Mr. Dorfman's native Chile) after the fall of a dictator.
Sigourney Weaver plays Paulina Escobar, a woman who was kidnapped and tortured during the dictatorship.
Stuart Wilson plays her husband, Gerardo, a lawyer who has just been named to head a human-rights commission, a panel that will investigate murder but not cases of unlikely survival like Paulina's.
Ben Kingsley is Roberto Miranda, a doctor who gives Gerardo a lift home when his car breaks down, and whom Paulina insists is her torturer.
Though she was blindfolded throughout her captivity, she knows his voice, she knows his favorite turns of phrase and she is determined to make him confess.


Art in Review
'On Paper'
The Sculpture Center
167 East 69th Street
Manhattan
Through today


Settlement By Bankers Trust Unit
The Bankers Trust New York Corporation said yesterday that it had agreed to pay a $10 million fine to settle charges that its securities unit hid the extent of a client's losses from trading derivatives.
The settlement, in which the bank neither admitted nor denied guilt, represents another sharp rebuke for Bankers Trust, one of the leading players in the rapidly growing markets for the new financial instruments known as derivatives.
Two weeks ago, the Federal Reserve, in a formal enforcement action, forced the bank to follow strict new compliance and disclosure procedures.


Depardieu and Ardant Match Wits, a la Balzac
The year is 1817 and the events described have been strongly influenced by Napoleon.
But "Colonel Chabert," the new film version of a Balzac novel, which opens today at Sony Theaters Lincoln Square, has an odd and timely resonance.
Much of its enduring interest comes from the familiar unpleasantness of bitter legal wrangling that is at the center of this story.
Such strife yields an intimate, disturbing perspective on the social fabric that binds the tale's characters and defines their lives.
When an earlier French version of "Colonel Chabert" opened here in 1947, Bosley Crowther of The New York Times said it involved "mostly a lot of talking with lawyers about signing things and precious little action of a revealing or absorbing sort." That's still true.
But this time, in a quietly intense film directed by Yves Angelo (the cinematographer whose decorous credits include "The Accompanist" and "Un Coeur en Hiver"), those legal maneuvers become subtly ferocious and revealing.


Senator Returns Campaign Contributions
Senator Bill Bradley, Democrat of New Jersey, announced today that he would return improper contributions from Prudential Securities Inc. to his 1990 re-election campaign.
The company, in a settlement with the Federal Election Commission made public on Wednesday, agreed to pay $550,000 for making illegal donations to several candidates and for pressuring employees to contribute.
It was the largest civil settlement in the commission's 19-year history.


Employers' Ability to Require Bias-Case Arbitration Is Curbed
A Federal appeals court has ruled that workers may not be forced to submit their discrimination and sexual harassment claims against employers to binding arbitration unless they have knowingly waived their right to a jury trial.
The decision, issued on Tuesday by a unanimous three-judge panel of the United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit, in San Francisco, is the first in which a Federal appeals court has limited companies' ability to compel job applicants to submit all subsequent such disputes to arbitration as a condition of employment.


Somalia Aid Groups Seek Help as U.N. Leaves
About to be stripped of military protection as the Somalia peacekeeping operation winds down, aid agencies working in the country appealed today for $70.3 million in emergency funds to keep the Somali people from slipping back into starvation and disease.
"The United Nations agencies are committed to remaining in Somalia during and after the withdrawal" of United Nations forces, Peter Hansen, Under Secretary General for Humanitarian Affairs, told reporters today.


Manhattan Heads Into Showdown Unscathed
Manhattan set the stage for the battle of New York City last night after coasting to the 1,000th basketball victory in school history with a 91-46 clinic at the expense of Wright State at Draddy Gymnasium in Riverdale, N.Y.
Enter St. John's.


Williams in Auto Accident
Monty Williams, a rookie forward for the Knicks, was not injured when the car he was driving Wednesday night spun out of control and struck a guard rail on a Connecticut highway.
Yesterday morning, Williams participated in the Knicks' shoot-around.
He suited up but did not play last night in the Knicks' 93-90 loss to the Cleveland Cavaliers at Madison Square Garden.


Federal Court Overturns Ruling on Judicial Selection
A Federal district court today overturned a two-week-old Justice Department opinion that the process of selecting State Supreme Court justices in Brooklyn, the Bronx and Manhattan violated the Voting Rights Act.
The ruling by the United States District Court for the District of Columbia cleared the way for 12 Supreme Court candidates in Kings, Bronx and New York counties to be seated next month.
Their election last month had been placed in doubt by the Justice Department's Dec. 5 opinion.


A Yorkshire Parsonage and Beyond
CHARLOTTE BRONTE A Passionate Life By Lyndall Gordon 418 pages. W. W. Norton. $27.50
"Though I knew I looked a poor creature," Charlotte Bronte once observed, "and in many respects actually was so, nature had given me a voice that could make itself heard, if lifted in excitement or deepened by emotion."


Mets Send Vina To the Brewers
The Mets yesterday completed the deal they made on Nov. 30 to obtain pitcher Doug Henry by sending infielder Fernando Vina to the Milwaukee Brewers.
They also signed infielder Billy Spiers and first baseman-outfielder Jim Lindeman to one-year contracts.
In the original deal for Henry, the pitcher was obtained for two players to be named.
The first was catcher Javier Gonzalez, who went to Milwaukee Dec. 6.


Subway Suspect: Trail of Distrust
At his homes in Brooklyn, Manhattan and New Jersey, at work on Wall Street, even in his son's carpool, Edward J. Leary created a trail of distrust and confrontation that left many who knew him deeply uneasy.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-12  MEXICO'S FINANCIAL CRISIS  Mexico slid further into financial turmoil after the peso was allowed to trade freely against the United States dollar.
The move shook American investors.
A1  HOW RECOVERY WENT WRONG  News analysis: Mexicans face an economy that most of them thought had been consigned to their difficult past, with soaring inflation, recession and uncertainty.
A1


Troopers Are Accused of Stopping Drivers Based on Race
While the State Police maintain that troopers do not stop cars on the New Jersey Turnpike and search for drugs based on the skin color of motorists, the Public Defender's office here says that evidence to the contrary walks into court in handcuffs all the time.
The volatile assertion that black and Hispanic drivers are singled out by troopers is the subject of a hearing here in the case of 19 men and women, all black or Hispanic, who were stopped on the turnpike and arrested from 1988 through 1991.


Sports of The Times; Hey, Boss: We Won't Forget This
THE big-market fan, forgotten consumer of the sports labor wars, pulled out a $20 bill the other night across the street from Madison Square Garden, but the parking lot attendant shook his head.
"That's $23.75," the attendant growled.


Singing Trees, Dancing Mice and Other Holiday Fare
Here is a sampling of holiday celebrations in New York City.
Admission is free unless otherwise noted. (Churches accept donations.)
Today
"A BLACK NOEL." A radio broadcast of a Christmas play, with gospel music, by Philip Hayes Dean, based on Dickens's "Christmas Carol." The play was recorded at the Museum of Television and Radio in November and features members of the Negro Ensemble Company.
Tonight at 7 on WFUV-FM (90.7); tomorrow at 9 P.M. on WBGO-FM (88.3) and 10:30 P.M. on WNYC-AM (820).
A CAPELLA CAROLS, Winter Garden, World Financial Center, West Street south of Vesey Street.
A performance by the group Tapestry. 12:30 P.M.
Part of free holiday performances.
Information: (212) 945-0505.
"A CHRISTMAS CAROL," the Paramount, Seventh Avenue at 33d Street, Manhattan.
A musical based on the Dickens novel, with music by Alan Menken, lyrics by Lynn Ahrens, and book by Mike Ockrent and Lynn Ahrens.
At 2, 5 and 8 P.M.
Through New Year's Day.
Tickets: $19 to $55.
Show times and other information: (212) 465-6741.
Tickets through Ticketmaster: (212) 307-7171.
CAROLS AND MUSIC, Continental Insurance Atrium, 180 Maiden Lane, at Front Street, financial district.
Traditional carols and secular music by the Juilliard School Vocal Quartet. 12:30 P.M.
Information: (212) 799-5000.
"A LIVING NATIVITY," Christ and St.
Stephen's Church (Episcopal), 120 West 69th Street, Manhattan.
A tableau with live animals, actors and music.
Presented by the St.
Genesius Guild of Christ and St.
Stephen's Church.
Tonight and tomorrow night, weather permitting, 5:30 to 7:30 P.M.
Information: (212) 787-2755.
"A TUNA CHRISTMAS," Booth Theater, 222 West 45th Street, Manhattan.
A comedy set in a small Texas town, with two actors portraying all the townspeople; starring Joe Sears and Jaston Williams. 8 P.M.
Through New Year's Eve.
Tickets: $40 and $45.
Show times and other information: (212) 239-6200.
"A NEW YORK HOLIDAY," Museum of the City of New York, Fifth Avenue at 103d Street.
An exhibition of items depicting the holiday season in the city, including toys, books, kitchen tools and paintings.
Through Jan. 23.
Hours: Wednesdays through Saturdays, 10 A.M to 5 P.M; Sundays, 1 to 5 P.M; closed Mondays; groups only on Tuesday.
Closed Christmas and New Year's Days.
Admission: $5; $3 for the elderly, students and children; $8 for families.
Information: (212) 534-1672.
'CHARLES DICKENS: A CHRISTMAS CAROL," Pierpont Morgan Library, 29 East 36th Street, Murray Hill. A display of the original 1843 manuscript and items relating to its publication. Through Jan. 8. Hours: Tuesdays through Fridays, 10:30 A.M. to 5 P.M.; Saturdays, 10 A.M. to 6 P.M.; Sundays, noon to 6 P.M. except Christmas and New Year' Day. Admission: $5; $3 for students and the elderly. Information: (212) 685-0008.
"A CHRISTMAS CAROL," Richard Rodgers Theater, 226 West 46th Street, Manhattan.
A one-man show starring Patrick Stewart.
At 8 P.M.
Through Jan. 8.
Tickets: $40 to $50.
Show times and other information: (212) 307-4100.
CHORUS TREE, South Street Seaport, Market Square, Fulton Street between Water and South Streets, lower Manhattan.
"The Chorus Tree," performances of holiday songs by the St.
Cecilia Chorus in a Christmas tree formation.
Through New Year's Day.
Performances: Thursdays and Fridays at 6:30 and 7:30 P.M.; Saturdays and Sundays at 3 and 4 P.M.; no performances on Christmas Eve, Christmas Day and New Year's Eve.
Information: (212) 732-7678.
CHRISTMAS SPECTACULAR, Radio City Music Hall.
The annual show with the Rockettes.
At 11 A.M. and 1, 2, 5 and 8 P.M.
Through Jan. 8.
Tickets: $25 to $46.
Information: (212) 247-4777.
Tickets: (212) 307-1000.
"NATIVITY," Theater for the New City, 155 First Avenue, at Ninth Street, East Village.
A performance by the Bread and Puppet Theater. 7 and 9 P.M.
Tickets: $10.
Reservations: (212) 254-1109.
"THE NUTCRACKER," New York State Theater, Lincoln Center.
New York City Ballet. 2 and 8 P.M.
Through New Year's Eve.
No show on Christmas Day.
Tickets: $14 to $67.
Show times and other information: (212) 870-5570.
"STAR OF CHRISTMAS" AND ORIGAMI TREE, American Museum of Natural History, Central Park West at 82d Street.
In the Hayden Planetarium: "Star of Christmas," a holiday story exploring the skies of the first Christmas and what led the Three Wise Men to Bethlehem. 1:30 and 3:30 P.M.
Through Jan. 2.
Tickets: $5; $4 for the elderly; $2.50 for children 12 and younger.
In the museum: origami holiday tree.
Through Jan. 9.
Hours: Today and tomorrow, 10 A.M. to 5:45 P.M.; closed Sunday.
Museum admission: $6; $3 for children 12 and younger; $4 for students and the elderly.
Planetarium show times and other information: (212) 769-5100.
Christmas Eve
MERRY MISTLETONES QUARTET, Citicorp Center, Lexington Avenue at 53d Street.
A performance of holiday music. 5:30 P.M.
Part of holiday music programs offered at the center through Jan. 6.
Information: (212) 559-6758.
"GEORGE BALANCHINE'S 'THE NUTCRACKER,' " Walter Reade Theater, 165 West 65th Street, Lincoln Center.
A screening of the 1993 film of Balanchine's choreography, adapted by Peter Martins from Balanchine's New York City Ballet production, directed by Emile Ardolino and featuring Macaulay Culkin, Darci Kistler, Bart Robinson Cook and Jessica Lynn Cohen; narrated by Kevin Kline. 2 P.M.
Also New Year's Eve and New Year's Day, 2 P.M.
Admission: $7.50; $4 for children under 12.
Information: (212) 875-5600.
LAURA NYRO, Bottom Line, 15 West Fourth Street, Greenwich Village.
Christmas Eve with Laura Nyro and Group. 7:30 and 10:30 P.M.
Tickets: $17.50.
Information: (212) 228-6300.
ALL-BACH PROGRAM, Carnegie Hall.
Suite No. 3 in D and the "Brandenburg" Concertos Nos. 2 and 4.
New York String Orchestra; Jaime Laredo, conductor. 7 P.M.
Tickets: $7 to $30.
Information: (212) 247-7800.
READINGS, CAROLS AND SACRED MUSIC, Cathedral of St.
John the Divine (Episcopal), Amsterdam Avenue at 112th Street, Morningside Heights.
Candlelight service featuring readings and contemporary carols.
Choir; Johnson Flucker, conductor; Dorothy Papadakos, organist. 4 P.M.
Liturgical service, featuring Victoria's Missa Alma Redemptoris and "O Magnum Mysterium"; Sweelinck's "Hodie Christus Natus Est," and carols.
Cathedral Combined Choirs and Brass Ensemble; Bruce Fifer, conductor; Paul Winter, soprano saxophonist; Ms.
Papadakos, organist. 10 P.M.
Information: (212) 662-2133.
Christmas Day
ALL-MOZART PROGRAM, Calvary Episcopal Church, Park Avenue South at 21st Street, Manhattan.
Excerpts from the Mass in C and other works.
Choir; Lynn Norris and Christine Sperry, sopranos; Constance Beavon, mezzo-soprano, and Emily Eyre, contralto; string quartet; Harry Huff, organist and conductor. 10:45 A.M.
Information: (212) 473-2877.
CHRISTMAS DAY WALKING TOUR OF THE JEWISH EAST SIDE, Big Onion Tours.
An annual tour tracing three centuries of Jewish life in New York City.
Meets at 1 P.M. at the southeast corner of Essex and Delancey Streets.
Fee: $10.
Information: (212) 439-1090.
Dec. 26
VICTORIAN HOLIDAY CELEBRATIONS, Historic Richmond Town, 441 Clarke Avenue, Richmondtown, S.I.
Holiday displays in the houses and shops in the restoration. 1 to 6 P.M.
Also Dec. 27 and 28, same times.
Admission: $4; $2.50 for students and the elderly; free under age 6.
Information: (718) 351-1611.
Dec. 27
"THE NUTCRACKER," Gould Hall, 55 East 59th Street, Manhattan.
A one-hour dance presentation by the New York Theater Ballet; Keith Michael, choreographer. 1 and 3:30 P.M.
Tickets: $17.50; $12.50 for children $12 and under.
Through Dec. 31.
Information: (212) 355-6160.
Dec. 28
KWANZAA CELEBRATION, American Museum of Natural History, Central Park West at 82d Street.
Music, dance, crafts and food; with the Forces of Nature Dance Company, the Spirit Ensemble, Sister Griots, the Sesame Flyers Steel Pan Orchestra and others.
Noon to 5 P.M.
Suggested contribution: $6; $3 for children.
Information: (212) 769-5315.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article in Business Day on Wednesday about the proposed acquisition of the Welbilt Corporation by Berisford International P.L.C. misidentified the buyout firm that owns 46.7 percent of Welbilt.
It is Kohlberg &amp; Company, not Kohlberg, Kravis, Roberts &amp; Company.


Mars Is Reviewing Its Global Account
Mars Inc. said yesterday that it had begun to review, as expected, the performance of the agencies on its worldwide account, which has billings estimated at $1 billion.
The decision came after the forced resignation last Friday of Maurice Saatchi, the chairman of the Saatchi &amp; Saatchi Company, which handles about $400 million in Mars billings; Mr.
Saatchi is a longtime associate of John Mars and Forrest Mars Jr., who control the privately held Mars confectionery, pet products and food company and are strong supporters of Mr.
Saatchi.


Austin Journal; Rodeo Star Dies, and Throng Mourns
In the world of rodeo bull riding there is always the chance of being crushed or gored to death, and though it doesn't happen often it can happen to the best.
That was the sad truth in the air here today at a funeral service at the Travis County Exposition Center for Brent Thurman, one of the world's top riders, who died of injuries on Saturday after six days in a coma.


CHRONICLE
LUCY KROLL, an agent for writers, playwrights and performers for more than 50 years, gave the Library of Congress a big gift the other day: 110 boxes full of letters, manuscripts, albums, contracts and other memorabilia.
"This is my gift to my country, so that future artists can learn from the relationships and discipline that I practice with my various clients and what we learned together," she said.


A Fuzzy Christmas to All


The Israeli Connection Is Thriving at UConn
As the fifth Israeli to play basketball at the University of Connecticut in the last five seasons, Uri Cohen-Mintz has this distinction: at 6 feet 10 inches, he is the tallest of that group.
But before he is done, the 21-year-old Cohen-Mintz hopes to be remembered for more than his height.
And the UConn men's coach, Jim Calhoun, says he thinks he will be.


Art in Review
Ellen Carey
Jayne H. Baum Gallery
588 Broadway (near Prince Street)
SoHo
Through Jan. 7


Fed Panel Was Split on Last Rate Increase
The Federal Reserve's top policy-making committee was divided last month over how much to raise interest rates, according to the minutes of a meeting released today, as some members argued that too big an increase could damage the economy.
The final vote was unanimous in favor of the rate increase of three-quarters of a percentage point.
But a minority of the members of the 12-member Federal Open Market Committee initially favored a half-point increase, the minutes show.


Canada Might Not Survive a Secession
To the Editor:
As an expatriate Canadian, I warmed to your Dec. 15 article on Robertson Davies, whose writings I have read and loved.
Like many great men of letters, he is a bundle of prejudices and contradictions.


Investors Weigh a Market's Safety
In large measure, Mexico's financial future rests with American investment firms.
But the events of the last two days, the latest in a string of shocking surprises this year, have led some to wonder if Mexico is truly on its way to becoming a relatively safe place to invest.
"The assumption was that in 1995 Mexico would become investment grade," said Joyce Chang, a director of emerging markets research at Salomon Brothers in New York.
"In the short term, that is not now likely to happen."


Less-Than-Regal Crossing for a Refurbished QE2
The Queen Elizabeth 2 steamed into New York yesterday, its newly refurbished cabins in disarray, its toilets malfunctioning, its cold water spigots streaming hot water, its passengers irate and its management struggling with a public-relations fiasco.
Keeping a stiff upper lip in the face of British newspaper headlines about a "floating construction site" and passenger protests in the storm-whipped Atlantic, the chief executive of the Cunard line acknowledged that all had not been shipshape on the world's most famous luxury ship.


Also of Note
Critics' choices of some other Manhattan art shows:
HANNO OTTEN, Janet Borden Gallery, 560 Broadway, at Prince Street, SoHo. (Through Jan. 21.) Large color photographs by a German Conceptualist that depict curtains of the sort found in movie theaters, suggesting the by-now-familiar idea that art is made, and hidden, by its surroundings; also pieces based on statistical graphs taken from a textbook, which try to point out the separation between them and reality.


Keep in Mind
HOLIDAY HAPPENINGS, featuring "Sounds Fun," an exhibition of larger-than-life interactive instruments and sculptures (presented by the Children's Museum of Manhattan and others); 24 costumed and animated dolls representing different countries; blown-glass sculptures by Dale Chihuly, and an international children's art exhibition sponsored by the United States Committee for Unicef.
Carolers tonight at 5:30 and live music next Monday through Friday.
All in the Citicorp Center Atrium, 53d Street and Lexington Avenue.
Hours: daily 7 A.M. to 11 P.M. (closed Christmas and New Year's Day), through Jan. 7.
The "Sounds Fun" exhibition is open 11 A.M. to 9 P.M.
Information: (212) 559-6758.
THE NEW YORK BOTANICAL GARDEN, with an indoor exhibition of miniature trees thematically decorated after children's books like "The Polar Express"; a musical tram ride through the gardens ($1 a person), and an outdoor railway exhibition: a scenic 6,000-foot-square tableau of large-scale, moving trains, with miniature historic New York City houses.
At 200th Street and Southern Boulevard, the Bronx.
Hours of all three events: daily through Jan. 2 (closed Christmas and New Year's Day).
Admission: $3 for adults and $1 for children 6 to 16; free on Wednesdays and Saturdays, 10 A.M. to noon.
Parking: $4.
Information: (718) 817-8700.
MULTICULTURAL HOLIDAY TALES, with the storyteller Abike Jotayo.
Folk tales about Kwanzaa, Three Kings' Day, Christmas and New Year's Day.
Tomorrow, 1 to 3 P.M., at the Charles A. Dana Discovery Center, 110th Street and Fifth Avenue, Central Park.
Free.
Information: (212) 860-1370.
GINGERBREAD TABLEAU, with replicas of historic Brooklyn, including the Brooklyn Bridge and the monument at Grand Army Plaza, all made from 50 pounds of powdered sugar, 75 egg whites, 80 pounds of gingersnap dough and 2 pounds of chocolate.
At the Steinhardt Conservatory, Brooklyn Botanic Garden, 1000 Washington Avenue, Crown Heights.
Through Dec. 31.
Hours: Tuesdays through Sundays, 10 A.M. to 4 P.M. (closed Christmas Day).
Free.
Information: (718) 622-4433.
CHRISTMAS PAGEANT, with lambs, shepherds, angels, singing and a service; lasting about an hour.
Tomorrow, 4 P.M., at St.
George's Church, Rutherford Place and 16th Street, Manhattan; free.
Information: (212) 475-0830.
CHILDREN'S MUSEUM OF MANHATTAN, a workshop in which children can compose collage poems, make hats and dance, all to celebrate Christmas with Max the Dog, from the Maira Kalman books, in conjunction with an exhibition on the character.
For children 4 and up.
Tomorrow, 1 to 4 P.M., at 212 West 83d Street.
Admission, $5 a person.
Information: (212) 721-1234.
"NUTCRACKER," the 31st annual production of the classic Christmas story, presented by the Eglevsky Ballet and the Eglevsky Ballet Nutcracker Orchestra.
At the Tilles Center, C. W. Post campus of Long Island University, Brookville, L.I., tonight at 8 and Monday and Tuesday at 2 and 7 P.M.
Tickets, $18 to $36.
Information: (516) 888-9000 or (212) 307-4100.
"THE WORKS," a hike through Central Park from 59th to 110th Streets; led by the Urban Park Rangers.
Bring lunch.
Sunday, 10 A.M. to 2 P.M., meeting at Columbus Circle, Central Park West and 59th Street, in front of the Main Monument.
Free.
Information: (800) 201-PARK.
BIG APPLE CIRCUS, the annual engagement at Damrosch Park, Lincoln Center, with the theme "Grandma Meets Mummenschanz." Horses, pigs, acrobats, Grandma the clown, jugglers and the Swiss movement-theater group Mummenschanz.
Daily performances through Jan. 8, including tomorrow through Dec. 30 at 12:30 and 4:30 P.M. and Dec. 31 at 12:30 and 9:30 P.M.
Tickets, $10 to $48.50.
Reservations: (212) 307-4100, (212) 721-6500; information: (212) 268-0055.


Times Is Criticized for Using Simpson Account From Tabloid
The New York Times's use of information reported by The National Enquirer in news articles about the O. J. Simpson case has provoked journalistic criticism of The Times.
In news articles on Dec. 15 and Dec. 20, The Times described legal proceedings in the Simpson case dealing with whether a sheriff's deputy would be allowed to testify about remarks he might have overheard Mr.
Simpson make in a jailhouse meeting with Roosevelt Grier, the former football player who is now a minister.


Late-Breaking Strategy puts Syracuse on Top
Syracuse 94, Arizona 84
Lawrence Moten scored 25 points as the 14th-ranked Orangemen built a 13-point halftime lead on the way to a 94-84 victory over No. 6 Arizona last night in Syracuse.


COMPANY BRIEFS
UNISYS CORP., Blue Bell, Pa., has been awarded a five-year contract worth up to $100 million to provide agencywide information systems maintenance and support services to the Department of Justice.


RUSSIANS STEP UP ATTACK ON REBELS
Russian bombing raids and artillery attacks increased today against Grozny, the capital of the breakaway Chechen republic, as signs of strong dissent continued to emerge from within the Russian military command.
Reporters at the scene said at least 24 people died today in Grozny as bombs and shells hit apartment blocks and strategic targets like the Lenin oil refinery.
Chechen officials put the toll at 100 or more.


From Pounds and Pence To Comfort and Joy
"Gadoing!" says Patrick Stewart in his very grown-up, totally compelling interpretation of Charles Dickens's "Christmas Carol," at the Richard Rodgers Theater.
He pauses importantly before saying it again.
And again: "Gadoing!"
The word, which can be found in no dictionary, is Mr.
Stewart's onomatopoeic rendering of the striking of a clock.
It makes a silly sound that causes children to giggle appreciatively.
But it has a far more significant purpose.


Tribute to Lipman Recalls Dedication To High Standards
Samuel Lipman, the pianist and critic who was the publisher of The New Criterion, a conservative review of the arts, was remembered yesterday at Temple Emanu-El in Manhattan for his brilliance, integrity and devotion to the arts.
About 500 people attended the service for Mr.
Lipman, who died of leukemia on Saturday at the age of 60.


Honors
*
Ira C. Herbert, former chairman at the Coca-Cola Beverages unit of the Coca-Cola Co., Atlanta; Michael Roarty, former executive vice president and marketing director at the Anheuser-Busch Cos., St.
Louis, and John O'Toole, former president and chief executive at the American Association of Advertising Agencies, New York, were named to the 1994 Advertising Hall of Fame.
They will be inducted at a luncheon on March 28 at the Plaza Hotel in New York.


Webber's Golden State Reunion Ends in Pain
Warriors 107, Bullets 87
When Chris Webber hit the floor in obvious agony last night, the game's result became an afterthought.
Webber, playing his first game against Golden State since his Nov. 17 trade to Washington for Tom Gugliotta and three first-round picks, dislocated his left shoulder in a third-quarter scramble for a loose ball.


Jurors Deserve to Know at Outset How Long a Trial Might Last
To the Editor:
Your Dec. 19 front-page article on the mistrial because of hardship to jurors in a libel case in Westchester County, New York, discusses the role played by the lawyers as a factor in the trial's length.
I served as the lawyer for one of the physicians sued by Barbara Kraus, a former New Rochelle Hospital employee.
After three weeks of trial, the defense lawyers unanimously voiced their concern to the court that Ms.
Kraus's lengthy presentation could result in a mistrial.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  *
Ashland Oil Inc., Ashland, Ky., filed a shelf registration with the Securities and Exchange Commission for up to $600 million in debt and equity securities.


U.S. Also Hounds Anti-Hunt Protesters
To the Editor:
With the extensive publicity surrounding the British saboteurs of fox hunting and Britain's new Criminal Justice Act (front page, Dec. 19), it is easy to ignore similar legislative injustices in our own country.
President Clinton's recently enacted crime bill contains a little-known "hunter rights" provision that makes it illegal to protest hunting on Federal public land, subjecting peaceful protesters to civil penalties up to $5,000 each.
The provision even allows for prior restraint, giving a pro-hunting organization the chance to obtain a court injunction stopping a protest before it occurs.


WITH PESO FREED, MEXICAN CURRENCY DROPS 20% MORE
Mexico's economic crisis deepened, sending the peso plummeting nearly 20 percent further today, after the Government adopted an emergency plan late Wednesday night to allow the currency to trade freely against the American dollar.
The decision to float the peso was made under extreme pressure by the Government of President Ernesto Zedillo Ponce de Leon, who took office only three weeks ago, to calm financial markets after several days of intense speculation and plunging indexes.


Indian Premier Defuses Crisis as 3 Accused Ministers Resign
A crisis that threatened the political survival of Prime Minister P. V. Narasimha Rao was defused today when three Cabinet ministers accused of corruption resigned.
But Mr.
Rao's hold on power remained shaky, and many in the governing Congress Party predicted that he might not last as India's leader until spring.
The resignations allowed Mr.
Rao to escape, at least temporarily, what had become a secondary scandal, his reluctance to dismiss the ministers after they were linked by official inquiries to stock market and commodities scams.


CHRONICLE
JOHN L. LOEB JR., the president of the Winston Churchill Foundation of the United States and a former ambassador to Denmark, has been named by Queen Elizabeth II to be an honorary commander of the Most Excellent Order of the British Empire.
He received the honor earlier this month for his efforts to strengthen Anglo-American relations in the fields of science and technology.


Solomon Gaon, 82, A Rabbi Who Led Sephardim in Britain
Dr.
Solomon Gaon, a world leader of Sephardic Jews and University Professor of Sephardic Studies at Yeshiva University, died on Wednesday at Mount Sinai Medical Center.
He was 82 and lived in Manhattan.
The cause was pneumonia, said Dr.
Herbert Dobrinsky, a Yeshiva vice president and longtime associate.


Corrections
An article in Business Day yesterday about Wednesday's trading in the futures markets was omitted from some editions, and a duplicated article about the currency markets appeared in its place.
Readers wishing copies of the omitted article may write to Production Quality Control, The New York Times, 229 West 43d Street, New York, N.Y. 10036, or telephone (212) 556-1992.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Whether in Asia, Latin America or the United States, teen-agers in a study dress and think alike.
THE differences that divide nations are dissipating among teen-agers, according to a study by D'Arcy Masius Benton &amp; Bowles, thereby creating a "new world teen," almost one billion strong, remarkably similar across disparate cultures.
The survey, now being released, was conducted from January through March among 6,547 high school students, ages 15 to 18, in 26 countries.
"The D.M.B.&amp; B. New World Teen Study" was undertaken by the agency's worldwide research and strategic planning group with a goal of quantifying teen-agers' cultural attitudes -- and, not surprisingly, their consumer behavior as well.


Lacking Child Care, Parents Take Their Children to Work
When he has to work late, David Cimpl, the chief financial officer of a Kansas City manufacturing company, picks up his 8-year-old daughter, Lauren, at her after-school program and takes her to the office for an hour or two.
There, while Mr.
Cimpl works, his daughter colors, draws pictures, reads, watches TV and, sometimes, gets a little bored.
"I like to put my hand on the copying machine and it makes a copy of my hand," she said, explaining a new way to kill time.
"Then I ask my Dad to frame it."


This Space Brought to You by . . .; Mayor Sees Empty Lots as Privately Run Parks, With Ads
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani is asking private corporations to pay for cleaning up rubbly, garbage-filled vacant lots throughout New York City and turning them into parks and playgrounds.
In return, the city will allow the companies to use the space for advertising.
Imagine, the Mayor's aides say, a basketball court sponsored by Nike; a playground with a billboard exhorting people to "Drink Snapple"; or a sitting area brought to you by Chemical Bank or Coca-Cola.
Almost anything is possible within the bounds of reason and taste, they say, except for advertisements for alcohol and tobacco.





The Large Wake Left by Satchmo
"Louis Armstrong: A Cultural Legacy," a sprawling show at the Queens Museum of Art, is two parts docu-exhibition, one part art.
It proves, not surprisingly, that jazz, Armstrong's primary cultural legacy, is hardly at its best in the exhibition format.
But Armstrong's talent, personality and achievement, not to mention his expressive physiognomy and innate sense of style, created secondary legacies of a more visual sort, most notably in photography, and both jazz in general and his music inspired visual artists of numerous styles and generations.
As a result, this show, which has been organized by Marc H. Miller, a former curator at the museum, swings back and forth between the visual and biographical, and not always with the greatest of ease.
But it partly brings to life a great American hero, sketching in a fascinating chunk of cultural history as it goes.


Displaying A Love For Paris
There is at the Marlborough Gallery a substantial exhibition of sculptures and reliefs, large and small, with associated drawings, by Raymond Mason, a British artist now 74 years old who has lived primarily in Paris since July 1946.
Among "the foreigners in Paris," Mr.
Mason is known for his wit, his wide and genuine reserves of knowledge and his readiness to speak his mind at all times and in all places.
His love for Paris comes out in this show at all levels, from the studies of young people in the Latin Quarter to the polyester reliefs of Le Grand Louvre, and from the drawing of a single plane tree on the Boulevard St.-Michel to the steep-pitched views of the Rue Monsieur-le-Prince, with its unhurrying and villagey atmosphere.


Inside Art
Venezuelan Shift
For 24 hours, Meyer Vaisman thought he was the artist chosen to represent Venezuela in the 1995 Venice Biennale.
The Venezuelan artist, who lives in New York City and is represented by three SoHo galleries, had applied for the coveted position twice before and been passed over for other artists.
But this time, at a Dec. 6 meeting of the National Council of Culture's advisory board (the Venezuelan committee that selects the representing artist for the Biennale), 6 of 10 members voted for Mr.
Vaisman.


King Family Feels Pushed Aside by Park Service
The family of the Rev.
Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr. asserted today that the National Park Service, once its partner in preserving the slain civil rights leader's birth home and memorial here, was now trying to usurp his vision and supplant his heirs as interpreters of that vision.
At the heart of the accusation is the Park Service's plan to build an $11 million visitors center that would be a gateway to the five-block-long Martin Luther King National Historic Site.
The King family has been hoping to use the same location for a multimedia museum, and they said today that if the visitors center was built instead, Dr.
King's vision would be portrayed in a static manner.


Altman's Swipe At Fashion
ROBERT ALTMAN'S "Ready to Wear" makes its ultimate fashion statement with a scene showing models as they parade on the runway of a Paris showroom, wearing nothing but the emperor's new clothes.
Beyond showing off the prurience that has passed for artistic candor in Mr.
Altman's recent work (most notably "Short Cuts"), this sequence has another unintended effect.
It's a reminder that if "Ready to Wear" has stripped anything bare, it's the director's methods that are embarrassingly exposed.
Mr.
Altman is his own naked emperor this time.
Although an all-star swipe at the fashion trade may have sounded tailor-made for Mr.
Altman, his laissez-faire satirical style proves ineffectual for shooting fish in this barrel.
Fashion is too self-conscious to be skewered so casually.
It's more willfully absurd than the worlds of film ("The Player"), country music ("Nashville") or campaign politics ("Tanner '88"), and it calls for a sharp scalpel.
Yet this time Mr.
Altman, such a stunningly intuitive portraitist when he truly plumbs the mysteries that guide his characters, works without inventiveness and with glaring nonchalance.


Ruling on Top Health Care Aide Brings Worry for Administration
A Federal judge's finding that a top White House aide gave misleading testimony and that an independent prosecutor might be needed to investigate him has sent a wave of anxiety through the Clinton Administration.
That finding, issued on Wednesday by Judge Royce C. Lamberth, led him to ask United States Attorney Eric H. Holder Jr. to investigate a sworn statement by the White House official, Ira C. Magaziner, the chief architect of President Clinton's health care plan, for the possibility of perjury or criminal contempt of court.


Youth Caught With 2 Bodies In Car Trunk
A Bronx teen-ager was charged with two counts of murder yesterday after the bodies of two men in their 20's were found in the trunk of a car he was driving on the New York State Thruway late Wednesday night.
Law-enforcement officials said that the driver, Clive Andre Webley, 16, told the police that he shot the men on Wednesday at a house in Utica.
The victims, whose names were not released, were also from New York City and the police said they believed Mr.
Webley was driving back to the city.


Home Video
A Video-Disk Player
Last week Sony announced that it would produce its own version of the digital video-disk player.
DVD, as the system is called, puts a movie on one low-cost compact disk (about $20), a step that many Hollywood and electronics executives say could eventually remake the video business by replacing the VCR and the videocassette.


A Last Briefing for Clinton Press Secretary
As Dee Dee Myers, the first woman to serve as White House press secretary, stepped down today, President Clinton dropped by her final briefing to bid her farewell and to say wryly that he was looking forward to "a very interesting year next year."
The informal moment in the White House briefing room captured some of the uncertainty prevalent in an Administration that will soon have a new spokesman and is trying to reshape its public face.


How Love Is an Art And Not a Science
The nice thing about "I.Q." is that its intelligence doesn't stop at the title.
In a romantic comedy that mingles brilliant physicists with auto mechanics, everybody manages to seem smart.
Most of all Fred Schepisi, the director, who has figured out how to get the absolute best out of his leading actors.
Mr.
Schepisi is so clever that his audience will have no trouble believing Walter Matthau as Albert Einstein, and that's just for starters.
"I.Q.," which opens on Christmas Day, features wonderful comic performances from both Meg Ryan, who is newly calm and composed here, and Tim Robbins, who is all dimples and slow, easy delivery.
Oozing total sexual confidence, Mr.
Robbins plays a mechanic who really likes comets, and Ms.
Ryan plays a scientist who doesn't much like auto mechanics.
And happens to be Einstein's niece.
Another thing Mr.
Schepisi makes easy to believe is that when these two meet, they fall instantly in love.


Riders Give Thanks After Panic on Train
Michael Bailey woke up at home yesterday thanking God for another Christmas and savoring his life's littlest pleasure: Kyana, his 2-year-old niece.
"I could hear my little niece running around calling my name," he said from his home in Crown Heights, Brooklyn.
"I felt like I hit the Lotto."


Corrections
The "How They Do It" chart in Your Money on Saturday misstated the monthly payment on a 30-year mortgage of $94,400 at a fixed rate of 8.5 percent.
It would be $725, not $907.


Out of 125th St., Vendors Are Welcome at Queens Market
Barou Omar has had bundles of his colorful fabrics imported from West Africa seized in periodic police sweeps through 125th Street in Harlem, where he and thousands of other vendors tried to make a living.
The final blow came two months ago, when the city relocated the vendors to a lot on 116th Street.
Business there was terribly slow, he said.


Messages in a Bottle? Now, E-mail at Sea
The inherent solitude of sailing a yacht single-handedly through the vast, remote oceans of the world isn't such a lonely endeavor anymore.
Enter cyberspace, a frenetic computer world of telephones ringing in wave-washed cockpits, keyboards clicking behind bulkhead doors and E-mail drops with affectionate notes from home.
Such is the electronic wizardry that has been the constant companion of the 19 sailors who set out on Sept. 17 from Charleston, S.C., in the BOC Challenge, a four-stage, 27,000-mile yacht race around the world for solo skippers.


Museums at the Holidays
To help in planning outings this weekend and next, here are the holiday hours for some of New York City's major museums:
AMERICAN MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY, Central Park West at 79th Street (212) 769-5100.
Today and next Friday, 10 A.M. to 8:45 P.M; Christmas Eve and New Year's Eve, Monday through Thursday and New Year's Day, 10 A.M. to 5:45 P.M.
Closed Christmas Day.
BRONX MUSEUM OF THE ARTS, 1040 Grand Concourse, at 165th Street, Morrisania, (718) 681-6000.
Today, Wednesday, Thursday and next Friday, 10 A.M. to 5 P.M.; closed Christmas Eve and New Year's Eve, Christmas and New Year's Days, Monday and Tuesday.
BROOKLYN MUSEUM, 200 Eastern Parkway, at Prospect Park, (718) 638-5000.
Today, Christmas Eve and New Year's Eve and Wednesday through next Friday, 10 A.M. to 5 P.M.; closed Christmas and New Year's Days, Monday and Tuesday.
COOPER-HEWITT MUSEUM, 2 East 91st Street, Manhattan, (212) 860-6868.
Today, next Friday, Christmas Eve and New Year's Eve, Wednesday, Thursday and New Year's Eve, 10 A.M. to 5 P.M.; Tuesday, 10 A.M. to 9 P.M.; closed Christmas and New Year's Days and Monday.
FRICK COLLECTION, 1 East 70th Street, Manhattan, (212) 288-0700.
Today, and Tuesday through next Friday, 10 A.M to 6 P.M.; closed Christmas Eve and Christmas and New Year's Days.
Open New Year's Eve, 10 A.M. to 6 P.M.
SOLOMON R. GUGGENHEIM MUSEUM, 1071 Fifth Avenue, at 89th Street, (212) 423-3500.
Today and next Friday, 10 A.M. to 8 P.M.; Christmas Eve and New Year's Eve, 10 A.M. to 5 P.M.; closed Christmas Day; Monday through Wednesday and New Year's Day, 10 A.M. to 6 P.M.; closed Thursday.
GUGGENHEIM DOWNTOWN, 575 Broadway, at Prince Street, SoHo, (212) 423-3500.
Today, 11 A.M. to 6 P.M.; Christmas Eve, 11 A.M. to 5 P.M.; closed Christmas Day, Monday and Tuesday; Wednesday through next Friday, 11 A.M. to 6 P.M.; New Year's Eve and New Year's Day, 11 A.M. to 5 P.M.
JEWISH MUSEUM, 1109 Fifth Avenue, at 92d Street, (212) 423-3200.
Closed today, tomorrow, next Friday and New Year's Eve.
Open Sunday, Monday, Wednesday, Thursday and New Year's Day, 11 A.M to 5:45 P.M; Tuesday, 11 A.M. to 8 P.M.
METROPOLITAN MUSEUM OF ART, Fifth Avenue at 82d Street, (212) 535-7710.
Today and next Friday, 9:30 A.M to 8:45 P.M.; Christmas Eve and New Year's Eve, 9:30 A.M. to 4:45 P.M.; closed Christmas and New Year's Days and Monday; Tuesday through Thursday, 9:30 A.M. to 5:15 P.M.
MUSEUM OF MODERN ART, 11 West 53d Street, Manhattan, (212) 708-9480.
Today, Thursday and next Friday, noon to 8:30 P.M.; Christmas Eve, 11 A.M. to 5 P.M.; closed Christmas Day; Monday, Tuesday, New Year's Eve and New Year's Day, 11 A.M. to 6 P.M.; closed Wednesday.
NATIONAL ACADEMY OF DESIGN, 1083 Fifth Avenue, at 89th Street, (212) 369-4880.
Today and next Friday, noon to 8 P.M.; Christmas Eve, noon to 5 P.M.; closed Christmas and New Year's Days, Monday and Tuesday; Wednesday, Thursday and New Year's Eve, noon to 5 P.M.
QUEENS MUSEUM OF ART, New York City Building, Flushing Meadows-Corona Park, (718) 592-9700.
Today, Wednesday, Thursday and next Friday, 10 A.M. to 5 P.M.; Christmas Eve and New Year's Eve, noon to 5 P.M.; closed Christmas and New Year's Days and Monday and Tuesday.
STATEN ISLAND INSTITUTE OF ARTS AND SCIENCES, 75 Stuyvesant Place, St.
George, (718) 727-1135.
Today, tomorrow and Monday through New Year's Eve, 9 A.M. to 5 P.M.; closed Christmas and New Year's Days.
STUDIO MUSEUM IN HARLEM, 144 West 125th Street, (212) 864-4500.
Today and Wednesday to next Friday, 10 to 5 P.M.; Christmas Eve and New Year's Eve and Christmas and New Year's Days, 1 to 6 P.M.; closed Monday and Tuesday.
WHITNEY MUSEUM OF AMERICAN ART, 945 Madison Avenue, at 75th Street, (212) 570-3676.
Today, tomorrow, Tuesday, Wednesday and next Friday, 11 A.M. to 6 P.M.; Thursday, 1 to 8 P.M.; closed Christmas and New Year's Days and Monday.


Now, Get Back to the Schools
The citizens of New York City can only be pleased that Schools Chancellor Ramon Cortines has agreed to accept the contract extension offered by the Board of Education despite Mayor Rudolph Giuliani's efforts to drive him out of town.
The imperative now is for both men to end this senseless combat and collaborate on how best to improve the troubled school system.
Mr.
Giuliani stood virtually alone in opposing the new contract.
In recent days, as community and business supporters rallied around the Chancellor, Mr.
Giuliani fell back to a suggestion that Mr.
Cortines be offered a one-year extension with performance goals.
The board instead gave the Chancellor another two-year vote of confidence.
But it took some of the Mayor's advice and called on Mr.
Cortines to do "continued work" to reform the system.
Mr.
Giuliani insisted that, in the absence of reform, his criticism would continue.


On Ill-Fated Train a Day Later, Fatalistic Humor
Brett Wilkerson is not a fatalist.
When he was told yesterday he would be the conductor for the 12:47 P.M.
No. 4 express train out of the IRT Woodlawn Terminal in the Bronx, he almost called in sick.
The 12:47, he realized, was the train on which a firebomb ignited Wednesday when it pulled into the Fulton Street station on lower Broadway.


Grit vs. Good Looks In the American West
There's some mighty pretty country on display in "Legends of the Fall," Ed Zwick's big, fancy film based on Jim Harrison's lean, muscular novella.
Not to mention the mighty pretty people roaming through it.
Foremost among them is Brad Pitt, departing from the solemnity of his "Interview With the Vampire" performance and wearing a rakish grin as big as all outdoors.
Mr.
Pitt's diffident mix of acting and attitude works to such heartthrob perfection it's a shame the film's superficiality gets in his way.
But it does, maddeningly so.
In gussying up this tale of a prosperous prairie family at the time of World War I, Mr.
Zwick goes for the Kodak moment at every opportunity, drowning out dialogue with swelling music and sweeping scenery.
Instead of simply letting its characters speak, this film would rather resort to handsome, sincere gazes from the photogenic principals.
Mr.
Zwick, whose visual grandiosity also showed in "Glory," hasn't cast a single actor who wouldn't be perfectly at home in a modeling spread, man, woman or child.


2 Companies Settle in Ticket Inquiry
American Express and a ticketing service called USAssist have agreed to pay a total of $75,000 to settle allegations of ticket scalping, the New York State Attorney General announced yesterday.
The settlement comes after a state investigation found that the two companies had provided holders of American Express platinum cards a "concierge" service that sold prime tickets to Broadway shows and other attractions at illegally high markups, said Attorney General G. Oliver Koppell.
American Express and USAssist did not admit to violations of law.


Florida Town Holds Its Breath for a Pilot in Korea
In what regular patrons said was a first for Miss Kitty's Hilltop Lounge here, the country western bar went dead silent during happy hour.
All eyes and ears were on the television on the wall, which brought the news that a native of this small, central Florida city might soon be released by North Korea.
The North Koreans captured the man, Chief Warrant Officer Bobby W. Hall, on Saturday, when his Army helicopter was forced down just north of the demilitarized zone while on a training mission.
The pilot, Chief Warrant Officer David Hilemon, was killed.


Troubled Democracy in Italy
Another Italian Government collapsed yesterday.
Unless Italy's politicians are careful, public faith in the political system could collapse with it.
The danger is not, as departing Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi would have the world believe, that a new government may be formed without new elections.
The danger lies, instead, in continuing Mr.
Berlusconi's efforts to impede a judicial investigation into corrupt ties between politics and business.


No Headline
"I like to put my hand on the copying machine and it makes a copy of my hand. Then I ask my Dad to frame it." LAUREN CIMPL, 8, a frequent visitor at her father's office, describing one way she kills time there.  [ A1:1. ]


Mowgli as Heartthrob And Young Gentleman
Brashly panoramic in the candy-colored style of a children's story book, the newest film incarnation of Rudyard Kipling's "Jungle Book" is a movie that is absolutely clear in what it wants to say.
Human beings may think they're better than animals, but they are probably worse, since animals kill only for food.
Those who do not seek to live in harmony with nature risk being devoured by nature.
Greed is bad, especially when it involves exploiting the jungle.
Variations on these themes are intoned regularly by Mowgli (Jason Scott Lee), Kipling's Victorian version of a wild child brought up by animals in the Indian jungle.
Even when hunted like an animal by cartoonishly evil British Army officers, Mowgli's attitude is more indignant than enraged.
His only aggressive acts are those of self-defense.


Offering Pearl Jam Tickets in a Lottery
Pearl Jam, the Seattle rock band that has been enmeshed in a dispute with Ticketmaster over service charges, has found a way to perform without selling seats through this ticket-distribution company.
In May, Pearl Jam set off a Justice Department investigation of the ticketing industry when it canceled its low-cost summer tour, accusing Ticketmaster of organizing a boycott against the band and of exercising a monopoly over ticket distribution in the United States. (Ticketmaster has denied these charges.)
The band has scheduled its its first major concerts since the conflict began for Jan. 14 and 15.
These benefit concerts are to take place in Washington, at the 3,500-seat Constitution Hall, and are expected to raise $125,000 for Voters for Choice, an organization that helps the campaigns of abortion-rights candidates.


Bethlehem Journal; On Manger Square, Joyful Tidings Are Delayed
It was supposed to be a different Christmas season here this year, brimming with the spirit of peace and hopes for the expansion of Palestinian autonomy to the entire West Bank.
But preparations in this town of 50,000 seem joyless in this holiday season, the first since the start of Palestinian self-rule in the Gaza Strip and Jericho.


Favorite Moments, All Tied Up in Ribbons
The ghost of Christmases past gets a brisk workout on tonight's CBS special "Television's Christmas Classics." The Michael Hirsh production, made in association with MTM Entertainment, has snipped dozens of scenes from what the network's publicity department calls "some of America's most beloved television shows." Stars whiz by, doing a comedy bit here, singing a carol there.
The art of repackaging has rarely been more crafty.
Promising lots of laughter and quality time with Santa, Marie Osmond as host presides quite pleasantly over the cascade of clips, some going back to the 1950's ("December Bride" with Spring Byington and Vern Felton, or Abbott and Costello on "The Colgate Comedy Hour"), others arranged in inventive collages. (A "White Christmas" medley features Ms. Osmond, Dinah Shore, Liberace, the Temptations and, of course, Bing Crosby.)


Two Umpires Still Aren't Allowed to Forget
You tiptoe into the umpires' dressing room at any baseball stadium and three co-workers do not utter a syllable.
You travel to the next city by yourself because no other umpire wants to share a cab to the airport or board the same flight.
You arrive at the hotel and the reservation you made a month ago has been mysteriously canceled.
None of this treatment should really shock you because you crossed a picket line.


Head of Cancer Institute Says He Will Quit Post in April
Dr.
Samuel Broder, the head of the National Cancer Institute who was among the first government scientists to work on treating AIDS, said today that he would resign in April.
Dr.
Broder, who led a laboratory team that discovered the therapeutic effects of the anti-AIDS drug AZT in 1985, was buoyant in a telephone interview, saying he had served his time in government.


Police Kill an Armed Man
A police officer shot and killed a man after he pointed a gun at the officer and his partner near Prospect Park in Brooklyn yesterday afternoon, the police said.
The officer who fired the shot, Frank Nepoleoni, 25, and his partner, Stephen Emanuele, 23, spotted the unidentified man lying near Prospect Park Southwest and 15th Street and offered him assistance, said Detective Louis Llanes, a police spokesman.


Walter J. Blum, 76, Expert on Tax Law
Walter J. Blum, an expert on tax law and corporate reorganization, died last Sunday at his home in Chicago.
He was 76.
The cause was cancer, said his daughter Wendy Coggins of Minneapolis.


Giuliani Criticized at Wake Of Bystander Shot in Spree
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani offered his condolences last night to the family of a bystander who was killed by a police bullet during a wild gunfight in Rego Park, Queens, on Sunday.
But several family members later said the Mayor had not asked to attend the wake and that they considered his visit disrespectful.
The Mayor spoke with the family last night at a north Bronx funeral home just before services at a wake for the bystander, Laakhraj Dalipram, 31.
After the service family members said they wanted justice and a full investigation of the shooting.


Study Shows Drop in Number of Female Smokers
About two million American women quit smoking last year, a sign that a quarter-century decline in the number of women who smoke has resumed, Federal health officials said yesterday.
A report by the Federal Centers for Disease Control and Prevention in Atlanta said that 23 percent of women smoked in 1993, according to a national survey, down from 25 percent the preceding year.


Art in Review
Kenneth Koch
'Collaborations With Artists'
Tibor de Nagy Gallery
41 West 57th Street
Manhattan
Through Jan. 14


Missing Tables
The futures tables for crude oil, unleaded gasoline, heating oil and natural gas were not available because of a transmission problem at Tribune Media Services.


Homeless Man Shot by Police Dies of Wounds
Marcelino Corniel, the armed homeless man who was shot on Tuesday by a Park Police officer outside the White House, died from his wounds on Wednesday night.
Mr.
Corniel, had brandished a knife before being hit by two bullets fired by the officer, whom the Park Police have declined to identify.


Art in Review
Ann Hamilton
'Seam'
Museum of Modern Art
11 West 53d Street
Manhattan
Through Jan. 3


Group to Widen Access To Federal Data Bases
A coalition of companies and universities plans to announce today an effort to make a variety of Government data bases available electronically at no cost to the public.
Begun with the Government's blessing as a technology demonstration project in January by the Internet Multicasting Service, a nonprofit organization based in Washington, the service is already providing via the Internet portions of the nation's Patent data base and many current corporate filings to the Securities and Exchange Commission.


Nets Seek Some Calm After War Of Words
It's the story of the 1990's in the National Basketball Association: young millionaires battling the game's old guard for power and control.
Chris Webber and Don Nelson may have been an extreme example, but Derrick Coleman and Willis Reed may not be far behind.
Two Nets players confirmed yesterday that there was an ugly altercation between Reed, the team's general manager, and Coleman, the All-Star forward, following a humiliating loss to Minnesota last Friday in Minneapolis.


Zeneca to Extend Its Reach Into Cancer Care Services
In an unusual foray by a drug manufacturer into providing health care services directly to patients, the Zeneca Group P.L.C., a leading maker of cancer drugs, said yesterday that it had agreed to buy 50 percent of Salick Health Care, which operates cancer care centers.
The deal valued Salick at $440 million, according to Zeneca.


Italian Premier, Facing Defeat, Resigns Urging Elections
Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi resigned today in response to major defections from his ruling coalition, leaving Italians to face possible elections and the near-certainty that any new government will not survive for long.
In addition Mr.
Berlusconi's younger brother, Paolo, received a five-month suspended jail sentence today on corruption charges, recalling the bribery and kickback scandals that brought down Italy's former governing elite and now haunt its successors.
Last week the Prime Minister himself was interrogated by Milan magistrates investigating payments his Fininvest business empire made to tax inspectors in exchange for favorable audits.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Crisis in Mexico
With the peso cut free, Mexico's markets had a tumultuous day.
The peso plunged 20 percent more, though stocks rose after roller-coaster trading.  [ Page A1. ]


From Pharaohs, Pots and Pans Forever
From Andres Serrano's morgue photographs to Kiki Smith's sculptures of impaled lifeless figures, current art is obsessed with the harsh facts of mortality.
It is a theme with a long tradition, but its prevalence now makes even more mysterious the exquisitely wrought funerary objects in "Pharaoh's Gifts: Stone Vessels From Ancient Egypt" at the Metropolitan Museum of Art.
Among them is a curved jar created to hold the viscera of a mummified body.
It was found in the tomb of Queen Kiya, a wife of Ikhnaton (the 14th-century B.C. pharaoh who introduced monotheism to Egypt), and her idealized portrait bust is the jar's stopper.
Fine-featured and flatteringly coifed in a wig, her alabaster skin translucent, her eyes highlighted with inlaid stone and glass, she is both an emblem of earthly glamour and the guardian of the organs, her own, once enclosed within.


Dick Campbell, 91, Producer Active in Causes
Dick Campbell, one of the first black theatrical producers and the executive director of the Sickle Cell Disease Foundation of Greater New York, died on Tuesday at Mt.
Sinai Hospital.
He was 91 and lived in Manhattan.
He died after a long illness, said his wife, Beryl.


INSIDE
Park Brought to You by . . .
Mayor Giuliani is asking corporations to pay for cleaning up vacant lots and turning them into parks and playgrounds, in exchange for advertising space in the parks.
Page B1.
Tobacco Merger Cleared
B.A.T.
Industries settled with the Federal Trade Commission in an agreement that will allow it to complete its $1 billion acquisition of American Tobacco.
Page D1.
E-Mail on the High Seas
Electronic wizardry has been a constant companion for sailors in the BOC Challenge, a 27,000-mile yacht race around the world.
Page B11.


St. John's Salvages History
Of the 1,500 victories in St.
John's history, last night's 76-65 triumph over Fordham won't be regarded as one of its prettiest.
For much of the game, the Red Storm looked like a team that hadn't played in 12 days and was mentally weary from final exams.
But as lackluster as St.
John's might have been, its advantage in height, muscle and talent was more than enough to turn back the upset-minded Rams, who, except for the early moments, never gave the Red Storm much of a problem before a sellout crowd at Alumni Hall.


No Weekend Rendezvous Is Expected
There was only brief contact by telephone yesterday between the parties in the National Hockey League lockout, which reaches its 84th day today.
It is possible that no further negotiations will be held until after Monday, which is Boxing Day, a holiday in Canada.
"I doubt if there would be any meetings this weekend," said Arthur Pincus, an N.H.L. spokesman.
"I wouldn't rule it out completely."


Bumping Costs $5,000
Minnesota defensive tackle JOHN RANDLE has been fined $5,000 by the National Football League for bumping an official during the Vikings' loss to Detroit.


For Santa Claus, a Comeback Year
He is more talked about than David Letterman or Newt Gingrich.
He has enjoyed more comebacks than George Foreman or John Travolta.
And though his origins date to the fourth century, he is as contemporary as "ER" or Green Day.
This popular, powerful person is Santa Claus.
And this holiday season, Santa Claus has assumed a far more visible role at the epicenter of the Christmas celebration.


Whose Life and Death Are They Anyway?
To the Editor:
In "Scared to Death of Dying" (Op-Ed, Dec. 16), Herbert Hendin of the American Suicide Foundation pleads for better care for terminally ill patients.
What he and physicians, ethicists and moralists seem to miss is that the right to die is not a privilege to be dispensed by others.
It belongs to all of us.
However, many of us do not have the physical means to act on that right, and we need to be assisted to end our lives with grace.


After Years of Hardship, Help With a New Life
The money she earns as a crossing guard is not enough to support her young son.
But it is a beginning, and after eight years of hardship, Margie DeJesus is inching her way toward security.
She dropped out of high school at 15, and two years later, Ms.
DeJesus had a baby boy.
She moved from Newark to the Bronx to be with the child's father, but the relationship did not work out.


On My Mind; Lighting Bosnia's Fire
By the winter of 1991-92, after months of intense consultation and negotiation, the combined diplomatic knowledge, analysis and foresight of the West, including a half-dozen European nations, the European Community, NATO and the United States, brought about several important results in the Balkans.
They added up to one giant disaster.
These results helped create what is going on in Bosnia now.
They also convinced the American public that the Serbs of Bosnia are foreign invaders, with no legal, political or cultural case for their own self-determination.


For Children
Holiday Lights  1605 Pelham Parkway North (at Westervelt Avenue)  Baychester, the Bronx  Recommended for all ages  Though Jan. 6
The Garabedians, from Mom and Dad down to their now-grown children, have been setting their home ablaze at this time of year for the last 21 years.
Virtually every inch of the facade of their two-story brick house is covered in white lights.
You can spot the scene about half a mile away: it's the wedding cake going up in flames.


Corrections
A headline in Science Times on Tuesday about attempts to create thermonuclear fusion by aiming sound waves at microscopic bubbles misstated the process involved.
It is high-temperature fusion, not cold fusion.


METRO DIGEST
INVESTIGATORS SAY SUBWAY FIREBOMB WAS PART OF BIZARRE EXTORTION SCHEME
The unemployed computer expert accused of making the firebomb that literally exploded in his face on a crowded subway train was plotting a series of firebombs in a bizarre extortion scheme to hold New York City's subways and their riders ransom, police officials said.
A1.
SUSPECT LEFT TRAIL OF CONFRONTATION
At his homes in Brooklyn, Manhattan and New Jersey, at work on Wall Street, even in his son's car pool, Edward J. Leary, charged with building and carrying the firebomb, created a trail of distrust and confrontation.
B3.


Elton Trueblood, 94, Scholar Who Wrote Theological Works
Dr.
D.
Elton Trueblood, a Quaker scholar, teacher and author, died on Tuesday at the Meadowood Retirement Community near Lansdale, Pa.
He was 94 and had lived on the campus of Earlham College in Richmond, Ind., until 1988.
The cause of death was heart failure and low blood pressure, said a spokesman for Earlham, where Dr.
Trueblood was a professor of philosophy from 1946 to 1966.


Lee Brevard, 45, Jewelry Designer
Lee Brevard, a designer of fine jewelry whose clients included many Hollywood actresses, died on Sunday at a friend's home in Los Angeles.
He was 45 and had a design studio in the Venice section of Los Angeles.
The cause of death has not been determined.


The Professional Spectator's Lot
Janet Hill celebrates her 47th birthday today.
As she gives thanks for the assortment of blessings that have come her way, including a wonderful husband and fine son, she laughs when she thinks that one of the most difficult parts of preserving her youth is going to games with her husband to watch their son play basketball.
Junior high to high school to college and now the pros.
Her husband, Calvin Hill, played for the Dallas Cowboys from 1969 to 1974 and, after one year in the World Football League, for the Washington Redskins from 1976 to 1981.
Her son, Grant Hill, a former college all- American at Duke, is a rookie for the Detroit Pistons and has gotten off to a stunning start.


2 Die as Blasts Rip a Market In Sarajevo
Two mortar rounds hit a Sarajevo market today, killing two people and wounding seven, but United Nations officials said they were still hopeful that the promised comprehensive cease-fire would begin across Bosnia on Friday.
The blasts ripped through the Sarajevo flea market, close to the main open market where 68 people were killed by a mortar last February.
Two men, aged 23 and 38, died instantly.


Officials Say Death Penalty Would Deter Terrorist Acts
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani and Governor-elect George E. Pataki both used the firebombing of the No. 4 train this week as an opportunity to push for reinstatement of the death penalty in New York State.
"This can be another reason for why New York State should have a death penalty," Mr.
Giuliani said today.
"So that if someone tries to unleash this kind of terror on the subway, we have the ultimate deterrent to prevent them with."


U.S. Business Gets Mexican Shock
To protect its investment in plants in Mexico, the Chrysler Corporation has periodically considered hedging against fluctuations in the peso.
But it has always decided that hedging was not worth it.
Then the peso dived 28.1 percent this week, falling from 29 American cents on Friday, to 20.83 cents yesterday.
"I was shocked," said Bob Lippens, Chrysler's senior international economist.
"The new Government had sworn up and down that the peso was essentially untouchable."


Sipping and Nibbling One's Way Through Manhattan's Bookstores
The store was too crowded.
The line at the checkout counter was too long.
I had come to Barnes &amp; Noble for one-stop book shopping, but as I stood there with my arms full of fat thrillers, fancy cookbooks and half a dozen literary paperbacks that I'd pulled from the shelves and thrown onto the pile, I began to get that familiar feeling of too much time spent with too many people in too enclosed a space, without enough air.
The prospect of food began to restore me, however.
A cappuccino topped with cinnamon, perhaps, and a chewy chocolate-chip cookie?
I was in luck.
As part of its effort to beat out the competition with things like longer hours and more author appearances, Barnes &amp; Noble had taken the next logical step, placing a cafe on an upper level.
This one had the added advantage of letting me lug all my books, though still unbought, upstairs and dump them on the table in a heap as I restored my blood sugar to its usual level.


Lawyer Risks Jail to Protect Client Information
Every day for two weeks, Oscar B. Goodman, a lawyer so well known in this city of gambling and glitz that the press simply calls him "The Big O," made a reluctant pilgrimage to the United States courthouse, personally taking a check for $2,500 to the clerk of the court in payment of a daily and steadily mounting fine.
"I wanted to know for myself what it's like to turn the money over to those people, who seem to think it's funny," said Mr.
Goodman, not a reticent man.
"They look at me and say, 'Oh, you're not in prison yet?' "


With Season on the Line, Watch the Line and Haley vs. Elliott
On Saturday, his attention will be focused on No. 94 in the Dallas Cowboys' blue and silver uniform.
The key matchup of the afternoon will be offensive tackle Jumbo Elliott against defensive end Charles Haley.
At stake is the blind side of quarterback Dave Brown.
Before he talks about the tango he and Haley will do, Elliott looks around the Giants' locker room and sees a potential for change.
Veterans like Elliott, who have been around for seven seasons, can sometimes see things before they happen.


Restaurants
The sun is sparkling off the water.
A tiny tugboat goes chugging past, nosing a huge black barge forward with an important air.
In its wake comes an even bigger vessel, which has just sailed halfway across the world to duck under the Queensboro Bridge.
From the Water Club, which looks across to the flat and uneventful landscape of Queens, the East River has a solid, workaday air quite unlike the view from the other side.
Waterfront restaurants in Queens and Brooklyn look toward Manhattan, and the light-festooned skyline wraps ships in an aura of romance, but from the Water Club each seems to move purposefully past, bent on a mission.
This works to the Water Club's advantage: While many waterside restaurants attempt a hokey romanticism, the Water Club has a straightforward American quality that is very appealing.
The long simple room is hung with nautical banners and models of sailing ships that send the eye right back to the windows and the river outside.
The service has the same pleasant simplicity; it is solicitous without being overwhelming.
The kitchen is also at its best when it sticks to the basics; when the food becomes too complicated it often loses its appeal.


Last Chance
Here is a sampling of shows and exhibitions in New York City that are to close soon:
Closing This Weekend
"MACBETH," CSC Repertory, 136 East 13th Street, East Village.
Shakespeare's tragedy, by Falstaff Presents; directed by Jack Stehlin.
Last performance today at 8 P.M.
Tickets: $22.50.
Information: (212) 279-4200.
Closing Next Weekend
"DAMN YANKEES," Marquis Theater, 1535 Broadway, at 45th Street.
A revival of the 1955 musical based on Douglass Wallop's novel "The Year the Yankees Lost the Pennant"; book by George Abbott and Mr.
Wallop; music and lyrics by Richard Adler and Jerry Ross; directed by Jack O'Brien.
Closes after New Year's Eve performances and reopens at the end of February with Jerry Lewis.
Performances: Today and Monday, Tuesday, Thursday and Dec. 30 at 8 P.M.; tomorrow at 2 and 8 P.M.; Sunday at 3 P.M.; Wednesday and New Year's Eve at 2 and 8 P.M.
Tickets: $25 to $67.50.
Information: (212) 307-4100.
"THE GLASS MENAGERIE," Roundabout Theater, 1530 Broadway, at 45th Street.
The Tennessee Williams drama; with Julie Harris, Calista Flockhart, Zeljko Ivanek and Kevin Kilner; directed by Frank Galati.
Through New Year's Day.
Performances: Today, tomorrow, Wednesday and Dec. 30 at 2 and 8 P.M.; Monday, Tuesday and Thursday at 8 P.M.; New Year's Day, 2 and 7 P.M.
No performances on Sunday or Dec. 31.
Tickets: $50.
Information: (212) 869-8400.
"A CHEEVER EVENING," Playwrights Horizons, 416 West 42d Street, Clinton.
A play by A. R. Gurney, based on a collection of stories by John Cheever; with John Cunningham, Jack Gilpin, Julie Hagerty, Jennifer Van Dyck, Mary Beth Peil and Robert Stanton.
Through New Year's Day.
Performances: Today at 8 P.M.; no shows tomorrow or Sunday; Monday, Tuesday, Thursday and Dec. 30 at 8 P.M.; Wednesday, New Year's Eve and New Year's Day at 3 and 8 P.M.
Tickets: $37.50.
Information: (212) 279-4200.


Umpires Call Foul on Their Own Salary Talks
It seems as if major league baseball participants can't swing a bat these days without hitting a labor dispute.
That much was evident today when the union representing the major league umpires filed an unfair labor practices charge against the American and National Leagues.


Daniel Arnon, 84, Researcher And Expert on Photosynthesis
Daniel I. Arnon, who added significantly to the understanding of plant photosynthesis, died on Tuesday in Berkeley, Calif.
He was 84 and lived in nearby Kensington.
The cause was complications after cardiac arrest, said the University of California at Berkeley, where Dr.
Arnon retired in 1978 as professor of cell physiology.


Abroad at Home; Civilization And Its Price
Not only Republican voters believe that governments in this country have become too expansive in their functions, too costly and too intrusive.
Whoever wins elections, the years ahead are going to be a time of limits on what governments try to do.
But it is a different thing to believe, as some now seem to believe, that government is evil -- an unnecessary evil.
To hear Newt Gingrich and his followers, the Federal Government should do little but maintain the national defense and pay out such middle-class entitlements as Social Security and Medicare.
Everything else should be left to individual initiative.


Voter Pressure on Tobacco
For the last several years America's cigarette manufacturers have been on the hot seat.
They have been grilled by a Congressional subcommittee, threatened with a whopping tobacco tax increase and accused of knowingly creating and manipulating an addiction.
Today, however, things are looking up for the industry.
Representative Henry Waxman, a particular scourge, has lost his chairmanship of the House Subcommittee on Health and the Environment (but not without a combative last hurrah: His subcommittee staff charged this week that figures cited by the tobacco industry to show that secondhand smoke was not a significant health hazard had been faked).


Bonds Fall as Demand Is Weak for New Notes
Prices of Treasury securities dropped yesterday for the first time this week following weak demand at an auction of five-year notes.
The price of the 30-year bond fell 3/32 of a percentage point, to 95 31/32 .
Its yield, which moves in the opposite direction from its price, rose to 7.85 percent from 7.84 percent on Wednesday.
The new yields on the two-year note, which was auctioned on Wednesday, rose 14 basis points, to 7.71 percent.
The spread between the long end and the short end is now just 14 basis points.
A basis point is one-hundredth of a percentage point.


Corrections
An article in Business Day on Wednesday about the Intel Corporation's decision to replace all flawed Pentium computer chips misstated the date of the announcement by the International Business Machines Corporation that it would suspend shipments of computers containing the chip.
It was Dec. 12, not Nov. 12.
A chart with the article misidentified the trade publication that first published a report about the Pentium problem.
It was Electronic Engineering Times, not Electrical Engineering Times.


B.A.T. Deal Is Cleared By Agency
B.A.T.
Industries P.L.C. reached an out-of-court settlement with the Federal Trade Commission yesterday that cleared the British tobacco giant's $1 billion acquisition of the American Tobacco Company.
The merger of American Tobacco with B.A.T.'s United States subsidiary, the Brown &amp; Williamson Tobacco Corporation, which was completed yesterday, creates a third big contender in the United States cigarette market, with strong brands in both the premium and discount segments.


The State of the Jets: The Most Important Moves Will Not Be on the Field
There's a growing sense among the Jets that a change in the way the club runs things is imminent.
Or at least needed.
The question that the team's owner, Leon Hess, must answer is whether circumstances affected this team or whether Dick Steinberg's vision of it created the 6-9 record.
If this losing operation cannot be pinned on Steinberg, the fifth-year general manager, then how do the Jets turn it around?


On Stage, and Off
Parody, but No One's Laughing
Why is there not more parody on stage today?
Here's an example of why.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.50
8.50
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
4.75
4.75
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
6.50
6.56
2.97
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.45
5.39
3.04
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
6.19
6.12
3.18
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.83
7.79
5.68
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.85
7.84
6.21
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.73
8.71
7.23
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.94
6.94
5.53
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Mr. Gingrich's Foolish Book Deal
Representative Newt Gingrich is not even Speaker yet and already he is trying to cash in on the position.
His reported $4 million, two-book deal with a company owned by Rupert Murdoch is a serious tactical and ethical mistake.
It is certain to cast doubt on his political independence and his dedication to cleaning up Congressional reform.
It is up to the 73 Republican freshmen elected under Mr.
Gingrich's promise of change to shake their leader from his protracted case of post-election hubris.
Otherwise their crusade to end business as usual will -- like Mr.
Gingrich's tenure as Speaker -- be compromised before it starts.


A Former President Offers to Enter the Lineup
Bosnia.
North Korea.
Haiti.
Baseball.
What do they have in common, other than being trouble spots around the world?
Jimmy Carter's interest, that's what.
In a scenario that would have made Federico Fellini cry with glee, the surrealistic panorama that is baseball grew stranger yesterday, when the former President apparently volunteered to enter the fray that used to be the national pastime.
The overture couldn't prevent the game from falling into an abyss the owners call implementation.


Corrections
A picture caption yesterday with the obituary of former Secretary of State Dean Rusk misstated the position held by the late Richard M. Bissell Jr., a planner of the Bay of Pigs operation against Cuba.
He was a special assistant and a Deputy Director for Plans at the C.I.A., but was never the Director of Central Intelligence.


After Forced Holiday, the Christmas Party Is Back
There was a moment at this year's Christmas party for Comedy Central, the cable television channel, when the 400 or so employees and guests in European suits and strapless dresses knew just what kind of year it had been.
Bob Kreek, the chief executive, climbed on top of the bar to dance.
Office Christmas parties, which during the recession were eliminated by many corporate Scrooges, have made a comeback as companies decide it is safe once again to kick up their heels.


A Pass for Palmer
ARNOLD PALMER will be invited to make a farewell appearance at the home of golf.
The Royal and Ancient Golf Club yesterday announced a change in the rules that will allow Palmer one more appearance at the British Open, which returns to the Old Course at St.
Andrews in 1995.


Oakley Back, But Losing Doesn't Go Away
A game that was evolving into a revealing indicator of how important Charles Oakley is to the fortunes of the struggling Knicks deteriorated into another depressing and stunning loss in the fourth quarter.
Not even Oakley could play Superman last night and fully revive the reeling Knicks.
Instead, their desperate situation gained another chapter against the Cavaliers.
Include this 93-90 defeat in a chapter dealing with agonizing losses or setbacks that should never have occurred if there had been better efforts because the Knicks crumbled like a cheap fortune cookie while Mark Price, a star who was also returning to the lineup for his team, was going berserk in the final 12 minutes.


Sylvia Everdell; Champion Sailor, 74
Sylvia S. (Shethar) Everdell, a champion amateur sailor and equestrian, died on Monday in her home in Boston.
She was 74.
The cause was heart failure, said her husband, Romeyn.


Art in Review
'Elemental Images'
Takashimaya
693 Fifth Avenue (at 54th Street)
Through Jan. 7


Diner's Journal
Ornate Italian Fare
An older woman sits alone at a table at Novita, slowly nursing a martini before ordering her lunch.
She looks contented in this small, pretty room with its deep yellow walls and pretty glass accents.
From time to time, she glances over at the big vase of flowers at the entry, and her lips curve into a small, secret smile.
She orders a second martini before attacking her tortino di mozzarella, a large tart made of eggplant, tomato and mozzarella; pretty soon both are gone.


Accounts
*
Romacorp Inc., Dallas, to Hadeler Sullivan Ewing, Dallas, to handle advertising for its Tony Roma's restaurant chain account, previously at the Evans Group, Dallas.
Billings were estimated at $4 million. *
Paramount Enterprises, Baltimore, to Richardson, Myers &amp; Donofrio, Baltimore, to develop and begin an on-line marketing program for the 1995 365 Uproarious Lawyer Jokes desk calendar.
Billings were not disclosed.


Political Perils Showing In Free Trade Accord
Ross Perot is not quite saying "I told you so," but he and other critics of the North American Free Trade Agreement are coming pretty close.
To the discomfiture of the White House, which has counted the passage of the North American Free Trade Agreement as one of President Clinton's clearest triumphs, this week's financial turmoil in Mexico has revived the political perils involved in the agreement.
And the peso's steep drop in currency markets, by making Mexico's exports to the United States much more competitive with American goods, can only make the President's job more difficult.


Art in Review
Claes Oldenburg and Coosje van Bruggen
Pace Wildenstein
32 East 57th Street
Manhattan
Through Jan. 7


Paul Newman in Blue-Collar Gear
You hear Paul Newman before you see him in "Nobody's Fool," yelling affectionately to Jessica Tandy as his landlady, Miss Beryl.
With the raspiness his voice has taken on recently and the irreverence that has always been part of his charm, he shouts: "Still alive in there, old lady? Didn't die in your sleep, did you?" Then he sits in her living room chair to put on his work boots, which isn't easy.
He has a bad knee that is getting worse and an occasional off-the-books job working construction for Carl Roebuck (Bruce Willis), who owes him money.
He lives alone in the apartment above Miss Beryl's, and at 60 he is running out of time for his life to turn out all right.
It says everything about Mr.
Newman's performance, the single best of this year and among the finest he has ever given, that you never stop to wonder how a guy as good-looking as Paul Newman ended up this way.
As Donald Sullivan, called Sully by everyone except Miss Beryl, Mr.
Newman does look good, even with a limp and muddy work clothes.
But he plays Sully from the inside out.
Though the character's humor carries traces of earlier Newman heroes, the effect is as natural as if Sully had watched Butch Cassidy or Cool Hand Luke and decided on a strategy: take life as it comes and face it down with a wisecrack.


From Accused Man, Trail Of Hostility and Suspicion
At his homes in Brooklyn, Manhattan and New Jersey, at work on Wall Street, even in his son's car pool, Edward J. Leary created a trail of distrust and confrontation that left many who knew him deeply uneasy.
Mr.
Leary, charged yesterday with carrying a firebomb that injured more than 40 people on a Manhattan subway, had been investigated by Merrill Lynch in connection with computer sabotage, said people with knowledge of the situation.
There was never any proof of his role, but in January he was dismissed from his job as a computer specialist at the company on grounds of poor performance.


U.S. Asks North Korea to Free Pilot
In response to North Korea's release of the body of an American pilot, the Clinton Administration voiced regret today that his helicopter had crossed into North Korean territory and called on the North to free a second pilot who survived the crash.
Defense Secretary William J. Perry told reporters today: "It was a mistake on the part of the United States. I said there are many reasons I regret that mistake. It was pilot error, not a planned mission."


Art in Review
Bernard Boutet de Monvel
'Paris -- Morocco -- New York'
Barry Friedman Ltd.
851 Madison Avenue (near 70th Street)
Through Jan. 7


Police Say Man Fled On Subway After Blast
The faded gray Dodge, its hubcaps missing, pulled into the spot on Smith Street, half a block south of Atlantic Avenue in Brooklyn, shortly after noon Wednesday.
From his desk, the dispatcher at Atlantic Avenue Limo Ltd. watched through his storefront window as the man in the car with the New Jersey plates just sat for about five minutes.


That's a Strange Way to Finance a Tax Cut; Stimulate More Growth
To the Editor:
"Lean and Very Mean" by A. M. Rosenthal (column, Dec. 16) describes the central reason for today's political sourness thus: "Americans are beginning to understand that the unwritten contract between them and their society is being torn up. The understanding was that in bad times everybody would hurt but that if the boss was doing well so would the workers."


Rabbis Decide Some Israelis Cannot Marry
The young Israeli woman learned suddenly this year that she could not lawfully marry her fiance because his name turned up on a list of people whom the rabbinical authorities declared religious untouchables.
In the last two days the existence of this computerized list, held secretly by the Religious Affairs Ministry and naming thousands of Israelis prohibited from marrying fellow Jews, has stirred a bitter dispute over where theological requirements end and civil rights begin.


Police Say Firebombing Suspect Planned Subway Extortion Plot
The unemployed computer expert accused of making the firebomb that literally exploded in his face on a crowded subway train on Wednesday was plotting to set off a series of firebombs in a bizarre extortion scheme to hold New York City's subways and their riders ransom, police officials said yesterday.
The critically burned suspect, Edward J. Leary, 49, was arrested in his hospital bed around 2 A.M., an hour after officers searching his house in Scotch Plains, N.J., found a half-dozen pages of angry handwritten notes referring to the extortion plan.
They also discovered bomb-making instructions as well as glass jars, nine-volt batteries and kitchen timers identical to those the police believe were used to build the firebomb.


Consumer Spending Up Again
American consumers are on a late-year spending binge that may produce headaches in 1995, according to economic reports released today.
Despite a slight drop in personal income last month, consumer spending climbed briskly again in November, rising six-tenths of 1 percent and embracing a wide variety of goods and services, the Commerce Department reported.


Bring the Trains Back
To the Editor:
How ironic that within two days of Amtrak's announcement that it is drastically reducing passenger service, we hear that one airline is curtailing commuter service and another is shutting down!
Then we are told the price of gasoline will rise because of new environmental rules.
We need more, not fewer, passenger trains.
DANIEL D. CHAZIN  Teaneck, N.J., Dec. 17, 1994


Orange Bowl Elephants
To the Editor:
The Orange Bowl committee is planning to use elephants in its parade and half-time show this year, although to do so may endanger spectators and animal handlers.


'Three Sheets to the Wind,' a Sailor's View
To the Editor:
I would like to contribute to the discussion of the origin of the phrase "three sheets to the wind," which connotes drunkenness.
Robert A. Di Curcio (letter, Dec. 19) suggests this phrase could not have had its origins in sailing, as "letting go a sailboat's sheet to flap in the wind usually gets the skipper out of trouble by causing the boat to come up into the wind on an even keel -- the opposite of the metaphor intended."


Where Santa Is a Probation Officer
In his secondhand bulletproof vest and beat-up county car, Kevin McPhilliamy does not look much like Santa Claus.
But in these last days before Christmas, Mr.
McPhilliamy, a juvenile-court probation officer, has been playing Old St.
Nick 1990's-style for more than three dozen children in trouble with the law.


Don't Let Wall Street Prey on County Funds
To the Editor:
Cuyahoga County, Ohio, whose principal city is Cleveland, recently experienced the same kind of investment fund losses as Orange County, California.
While the magnitude of the losses is different ($2 billion and rising in Orange County and $135 million in Cuyahoga County), and while there were some derivative instruments in Orange County's portfolio (but, apparently, none in Cuyahoga County's), the statutory and oversight issues are the same.


CHRONICLE
As far as REGINA DiMARTINO is concerned, there's no such thing as too much of Erica Kane, the kittenish vixen on the soap opera "All My Children."
Ms.
DiMartino, the director of marketing for ABC Daytime, is the executive producer of a new video, "All About Erica." It is a compilation of the best scenes in the life of Erica, played by SUSAN LUCCI.
Ms.
Lucci, 48, is still center stage on the soap opera and has been almost since its debut 25 years ago.


Cyril Ponnamperuma, Scholar Of Life's Origins, Is Dead at 71
Dr.
Cyril A. Ponnamperuma, a chemist who explored the chemical paths by which life might have originated, died on Tuesday at Washington Adventist Hospital.
He was 71 and lived in Washington.
He had suffered cardiac arrest in his office at the University of Maryland in College Park, the university said.


Jewish Comics Make It a Not So Silent Night
As bells jingle on Christmas Eve, many American Jews, particularly those outside New York, will feel a familiar kind of claustrophobia.
They can't watch television, because it is filled with Christmas specials.
They can't go shopping, because everything is closed.
They can't visit their Christian friends, who are sitting with their nearest and dearest around Christmas trees.
They can't go to church and, at least in many parts of the country, it's too cold to go outside.
For such people, alienation and angst are as much a part of Christmas as Santa Claus and his reindeer.
Traditionally, they seek refuge in movie theaters and Chinese restaurants, but this Christmas Eve 800 Jews in the Bay Area will do even better.
Half of them will dine on an eight-course Chinese meal, complete with Yiddish fortune cookies.
Then all of them will indulge in a six-course feast of Jewish humor.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.50
8.50
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
4.75
4.75
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
4.50
5.80
2.97
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.51
5.45
3.04
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
6.20
6.19
3.18
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.82
7.83
5.68
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.83
7.85
6.21
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.72
8.73
7.23
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.94
6.94
5.53
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Carnival Corp.(CCL,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Yeltsin and the Caucasus: High Hurdles, a Bleak Abyss
In less than two weeks, President Boris N. Yeltsin has turned a smoldering rebellion in remote Chechnya into a conflagration that threatens his presidency.
In the process, Russian politics has been convulsed more violently than at any time since Mr.
Yeltsin turned tanks on the Russian Parliament.
Military commanders publicly ridicule their President and refuse to carry out orders.
Mr.
Yeltsin's onetime allies have become his bitter enemies, and his nationalistic detractors of the past have provided the bedrock of his current support.


Hearst Heir Stepping Down At San Francisco Examiner
William Randolph Hearst 3d ended a sentimental chapter in American newspaper history yesterday by saying that he would step down as the publisher of The San Francisco Examiner, the newspaper his grandfather used as the building block of the fabled Hearst empire.
Because Mr.
Hearst had become so closely identified with The Examiner, the city's afternoon daily, the move raised new questions about the future of the two newspapers in San Francisco, one of the few American cities with more than one daily.


Last-Minute Shoppers and Travelers


Lawrence R. Dewey, Retired General, 93
Lawrence R. Dewey, a retired major general who was a combat commander in World War II and chief of staff of the IX Corps in the Korean War, died last Sunday at his home in Washington.
He was 93.
His family said the cause was Parkinson's disease.


Bus Owner Is Convicted In Six Deaths In New Jersey
The theme of Robert Campbell's defense was ignorance: he argued that he had known nothing about bad brakes on his charter bus, which crashed and burned on a treacherous New Jersey hill in July 1992, killing six passengers, including his wife.
The jury, however, was not persuaded.
After some 12 hours of deliberation on Thursday, the jury convicted Mr.
Campbell of six charges of aggravated manslaughter for the fatalities and several counts of aggravated assault for injuries to some of the other 48 passengers.


MAYOR VETOES BILL CREATING A PANEL TO MONITOR POLICE
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani yesterday vetoed a bill that would have created the first permanent, independent agency to monitor corruption in the Police Department.
He said that under the City Council's bill, the panel would have had too much investigative power and might have interfered with other law-enforcement agencies.
The bill has been championed by Council Speaker Peter F. Vallone, and the veto by the Mayor represents the newest source of tension in the increasingly stormy relationship between the Council and Mr.
Giuliani.
Council leaders say the veto will almost certainly be overridden.
It is the fifth veto since Mr.
Giuliani took office in January and comes just weeks after the Council took the Mayor to court in a bitter dispute over the city's budget.


A Day Late, QE2 Sets Sail For Florida
After being delayed for more than 24 hours when Coast Guard inspectors cited safety violations, the problem-plagued Queen Elizabeth 2 sailed from New York early today.
The departure came after a day of continued complaints from passengers who described the luxury ship as a floating work-in-progress whose $45 million renovation was nowhere near finished when it left Southampton, England, last week.
A number of passengers left the ship as repairs continued at a furious pace yesterday.


Foraging For Stocks With Life In Mexico
IT is hard to make distinctions during disasters.
But for investors looking at Mexican stocks now, that's just what they must do.
About 50 Mexican companies -- the largest number from any emerging nation -- sell their stock here in certificates known as American depository receipts, which represent varying amounts of foreign shares.
The A.D.R.'s, available for companies both large and small, are the only practical way for the average investor to own individual equities from Mexico or any foreign nation.


No Headline
"I am fast becoming convinced that the majority of the owners are trying to break the players' association." -- SENATOR ORRIN HATCH, who will head the Judiciary Committee.  [ 1:1. ]


Investors' Wish List For the New Year
It is the time of year when many people fantasize about what they would love to be given.
So herewith a wish list for investors in the new year.
Lower tax rate on capital gains.
The Republicans have been talking about this idea for years, Now that they have control of Congress, they can act.
Cutting the maximum tax rate on capital gains from 28 percent would make it sweeter for investors to take profits, and might even prompt a round of selling in the stock market.
But the Republicans argue it would promote growth and could even pay for itself by producing more capital gains for the Government to tax.


Players' Next Step Is Legal Challenge
Major league club owners made it through the first day of their imposed salary cap unscathed yesterday, but the players' onslaught against their impasse will begin immediately after the holiday weekend.
The Players Association plans to begin its challenge to the salary cap Tuesday by filing an unfair labor practice charge with the National Labor Relations Board's regional office in New York.
That step will trigger a series of legal maneuvers that could extend to 1998, and that's not even including time for the case to reach the potential ultimate stage -- the United States Supreme Court.


At the Ailey, Dudley Williams Just Keeps Going and Going
There were two good reasons for rejoicing when the Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater performed on Tuesday night at City Center.
The program was devoted to vintage works by Ailey.
And it honored Dudley Williams, who is celebrating his 30th year with the company.
Mr.
Williams looked sly and almost feline in the after-dark merrymaking of "Night Creature." Sinking backward in the solo from "Revelations" called "I Want to Be Ready," he became a religious penitent awed by God.
He appeared to relish the sheer act of moving in "Reflections in D." Letting his body curl up in some sequences of "Love Songs" and snap outward in others, he conveyed changing states of insecurity and determination.


Cubic Corp.(CUB,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


A Cloisters Christmas, With Kansas Wheat


Replacement Players? Never in Toronto
Major league baseball owners have made a decision to proceed with the 1995 season, even if it means bringing in replacements for striking players.
Now the sport may face the possibility of proceeding without one, and perhaps two, of its premier franchises as a result.
Those franchises are the Baltimore Orioles and the Toronto Blue Jays, the first boasting an owner who is offering vociferous resistance to the actions taken by his fellow lords as baseball barrels toward possible picket-line confrontations.
As for the Blue Jays, they are a team fully caught in between a bitter labor dispute and a hard place.
For Toronto, unlike any other major league team, is legally barred from using replacement players in its own stadium.


Congressmen Pledge to Revoke Baseball's Antitrust Exemption
Angered by baseball club owners' decision Thursday night to impose a salary cap on players, several senior members of Congress -- Republicans and Democrats -- said today that they would try to revoke the industry's 72-year-old exemption from antitrust laws.
Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan, Democrat of New York, said he would use his seniority to introduce legislation on Jan. 4, the first day of Congress next year, to repeal the exemption for major league baseball.
Senator Orrin Hatch, the Utah Republican who will head the Senate Judiciary Committee, said he no longer opposed such legislation and would try to push it to the Senate floor quickly.


Crash Delays Metro-North
About 15,000 frustrated Metro-North riders encountered cancellations and long delays yesterday after a work train sideswiped a passenger train in northern Manhattan, halting service on the Hudson commuter line for more than an hour.
Damage was minor, but three railroad workers and a passenger were slightly hurt as the rear of the train was hit at 4:30 P.M. at Marble Hill Station just north of the Harlem River.
A Metro-North spokesman said the cause was under investigation.
Service on the Hudson line, which runs to Irvington, Croton-Harmon and Poughkeepsie, was shut down in both directions until 5:40 P.M.


Antitrust Exemption History
The baseball antitrust exemption that has become such a hotly debated issue this year stems from a 1922 United States Supreme Court decision.
The ruling came in a case brought by one of the teams from the defunct Federal League, a rival baseball league that sued the major leagues for allegedly trying to destroy it.
In its decision, the court ruled that baseball did not fall within the scope of antitrust laws because its business did not involve interstate commerce but instead was purely a state affair.


Religion Journal; In the Cherish Life Circle, Revenge Is No Sweet Thing
The Nativity scene on the front of the Christmas card didn't look unusual: a woodcut of the Holy Family under the words "The Prince of Peace . . ."
Then Sister Camille D'Arienzo opened the card to reveal a depiction of the Crucifixion with the tag line: ". . . was a victim of Capital Punishment."


Top Isn't Very Big. Just the Hearts.
The battered red-and-white tent in Riverside Park has more than 250 patches on it.
Almost all the performing animals have been saved from pending slaughter.
The 10 human performers, who come from Moscow and Paris and various American circuses, work for just $100 a day.
The hundreds of children in the bleachers are charged little or nothing because they are poor.
The air smells of popcorn and cotton candy, and, yes, that is real sawdust in the one ring.


Corrections
The caption of a drawing on Dec. 14 with a book review of "The Annotated Charlotte's Web" misidentified the pig shown with Charlotte, the spider.
He was Uncle, not Wilbur.


Violence Frustrates White House Protectors
The White House, which has long attracted protesters of all kinds, seems lately to have become a magnet for random violence, leaving its protectors and some of the people who work there feeling vulnerable and frustrated by the limitations of Presidential security.
In the last four months, one man killed himself by crashing his plane onto the rear lawn of the mansion, a gunman sprayed the front of the building with a semiautomatic rifle, bullets from an unidentified gunman landed on the portico and driveway and pierced the window of the State Dining Room, and just this week, the United States Park Police, rattled by the incidents, shot and killed a homeless man who was brandishing a knife on the sidewalk in front.


METRO DIGEST
MAYOR VETOES AGENCY TO MONITOR POLICE Mayor Giuliani vetoed a bill that would have created the first permanent, independent agency to monitor corruption in the Police Department.
He said that under the City Council's bill, the panel would have had too much investigative power and might interfere with other law-enforcement agencies.
Page 1.
WHITMAN'S SCHOOL VOUCHER PLAN FALTERS Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman of New Jersey has a national reputation, a Legislature controlled by fellow Republicans and enough popularity points to make most politicians turn green with envy.
Yet she is having a surprising amount of trouble mobilizing support for an issue dear to many in her party's conservative wing: school vouchers.
Page 1.
Mayor Bret Schundler of Jersey City is offering city employees $500 toward private-school tuition starting next fall.
But critics say he has gone too far.
Page 30.
LAWYER SAYS SUSPECT DENIES BOMB PLOT Handcuffed to his hospital bed, fading in and out of consciousness from the morphine dulling the pain of his burns, Edward J. Leary, the man charged with firebombing a subway train, proclaimed his innocence, his newly hired lawyer, Stephen J. Murphy, said.
Page 1.
Jitters that have swept the city following the firebombing of a subway car have driven up calls to the police bomb squad.
Page 29.
NEW YORK CITY  RAP STAR SURRENDERS AND IS HOSPITALIZED Tupac Shakur, the rap star, surrendered to New York City prison officials and will spend at least the weekend in the prison ward at Bellevue Hospital Center after failing to post $3 million in bail.
Page 30.
WITH LUCK, A TINY HEART GROWS STRONGER Krystina Bartkowicz stroked her 12-year-old daughter's hair and said that over the last eight years, she knew good luck existed in the world and that it was a mathematical probability that she and her family would run into some one day.
But then, when it happened, the dose was so big, so sudden, so unexpected, it has left her dazed and leery.
About New York, page 29.
REGION  SPEAKER IS URGED TO GET TOUGHER For two years, Thomas D. Ritter, the Democratic Speaker of the Connecticut House of Representatives, has cultivated an image as the nice guy of Connecticut politics.
But now, in the wake of the November election, many are wondering how Mr.
Ritter's conciliatory approach will work in a different political climate.
For the first time in decades, Connecticut has a Republican Governor and a split legislature, making Mr.
Ritter the point man for the Democrats.
Page 31.
DEMOCRAT TO HEAD CONNECTICUT AGENCY Crossing party lines again, Governor-elect John G. Rowland named a Democrat, J. William Burns, to head the Connecticut Department of Transportation, the agency Mr.
Burns ran under Gov.
William A. O'Neill from 1981 to 1991.
Page 31.
MAN IS KILLED BY POLICE IN NEW JERSEY A distraught man who had been drinking was shot and killed by the police in Linden, N.J., after firing shotgun rounds at two officers, wounding one.
Page 31.
Neediest Cases...28  Holiday schedule...29


Treasury Prices Are Flat in Short Session
Prices of Treasury securities were little changed yesterday in a shortened trading session.
More signs of economic growth failed to quicken pre-holiday trading, which was thin and ended in New York at 2 P.M.


Noel Pointer, 39, Classical Violinist Turned Jazz Artist
Noel Pointer, the jazz violinist, singer, pianist and composer, died on Monday at New York-Methodist Hospital in Park Slope, Brooklyn.
He was 39 and lived in Brooklyn.
The cause was a stroke, said his wife, Chinita.


Transactions
Baseball  American League BALTIMORE ORIOLES -- Agreed to terms with Harold Baines, designated hitter, on a one-year contract.
Failed to offer 1995 contracts to Dwight Smith, outfielder; Jim Poole, pitcher, and Jeff Tackett, catcher, making them free agents.
BOSTON RED SOX -- Failed to offer 1995 contracts to Tony Fossas and Chris Nabholz, pitchers, making them free agents.
CALIFORNIA ANGELS -- Failed to offer 1995 contracts to Mark Leiter and Bob Patterson, pitchers, making them free agents.
CHICAGO WHITE SOX -- Failed to offer a 1995 contract to Joey Cora, infielder, making him a free agent.
CLEVELAND INDIANS -- Named Ken Stefanov vice president of finance, Ron McQuait controller and Dave Powell MIS director.
DETROIT TIGERS -- Failed to offer 1995 contracts to Mike Gardiner and Gene Harris, pitchers; Chad Kreuter, catcher, and Junior Felix, outfielder, making them free agents.
KANSAS CITY ROYALS -- Failed to offer a 1995 contract to Stan Belinda, pitcher, making him a free agent.
MINNESOTA TWINS -- Agreed to terms with Jeff Reboulet, infielder, on a two-year contract.
NEW YORK YANKEES -- Failed to offer 1995 contracts to Jim Abbott, pitcher, and Randy Velarde, infielder, making them free agents.
OAKLAND ATHLETICS -- Failed to offer a 1995 contract to Scott Hemond, catcher, making him a free agent TEXAS RANGERS -- Failed to offer 1995 contracts to Brian Bohanon and Cris Carpenter, pitchers, and Doug Strange, infielder, making them free agents.
National League ATLANTA BRAVES -- Failed to offer 1995 contracts to Derek Lilliquist and Mike Stanton, pitchers, and Greg Olson, catcher, making them free agents.
CHICAGO CUBS -- Failed to offer a 1995 contract to Jose Bautista, pitcher, making him a free agent.
COLORADO ROCKIES -- Failed to offer a 1995 contract to Charlie Hayes, third baseman, making him a free agent.
FLORIDA MARLINS -- Failed to offer a 1995 contract to Rich Renteria, infielder, making him a free agent.
HOUSTON ASTROS -- Agreed to terms with Scott Servais, catcher, on a one-year contract.
MONTREAL EXPOS -- Failed to offer a 1995 contract to Lenny Webster, catcher, making him a free agent.
NEW YORK METS -- Failed to offer 1995 contracts to Pete Harnisch and Roger Mason, pitchers, making them free agents.
PHILADELPHIA PHILLIES -- Failed to to offer 1995 contracts to Ben Rivera, pitcher, and Todd Pratt, catcher, making them free agents.
PITTSBURGH PIRATES -- Agreed to terms with Orlando Merced, catcher, on a one-year contract.
ST.
LOUIS CARDINALS -- Agreed to terms with Brian Jordan, outfielder, and Geronimo Pena, infielder, on one-year contracts.
Failed to offer 1995 contracts to Mike Perez, pitcher, and Terry McGriff, catcher, and Gerald Young, outfielder, making them free agents.
SAN DIEGO PADRES -- Failed to offer a 1995 contract to Billy Bean, outfielder, making him a free agent.
SAN FRANCISCO GIANTS -- Failed to offer a 1995 contract to Steve Foster and Trevor Wilson, pitchers, making them free agents.


Suspect in Bombing Says He's Innocent, His Lawyer Asserts
Handcuffed to his hospital bed, fading in and out of consciousness from the morphine dulling the pain of his burns, the man charged with firebombing a subway train proclaimed his innocence on Thursday, his newly hired lawyer, Stephen J. Murphy, said.
Edward J. Leary, the unemployed computer expert who the police say created and carried the firebomb that injured 48 subway riders in lower Manhattan on Wednesday, said he was just another victim of the explosion, Mr.
Murphy said.


Egypt Doesn't Drag Feet on Privatization
To the Editor:
Your Nov. 22 article on ZAS airline implies that the Government of Egypt is waging a monopoly turf war against a private airline company in favor of EgyptAir, the country's national carrier.
You confuse the issue by claiming that the Egyptian Government is delaying the selling of some Government-owned companies as part of the economic reform program.


Webber Is Sidelined Six Weeks for Bullets
CHRIS WEBBER was placed on the Washington Bullets' injured list yesterday after dislocating his left shoulder Thursday night in a game at Golden State.
He was expected to miss six weeks, said JOHN NASH, the Bullets' general manager.
"Obviously, this is a tremendous loss for us," Nash said.
"Webber's injury, coupled with injuries to several of our other key players, including REX CHAPMAN and DON MacLEAN, will make it tough."


AmeriCares Relief Reached Rwanda First
To the Editor:
"Compassion Wasn't Enough in Rwanda" (Week in Review, Dec. 18) paints for your readers an incomplete picture of the important charitable efforts that were made by the private disaster relief organization AmeriCares in Rwanda.
AmeriCares was the first private United States relief agency to airlift aid to the refugees, starting just days after the civil war erupted last April.
AmeriCares also:


Russians Say Rebel Center Is Encircled; Protests Rise
The Russian military reported that its forces had completed their encirclement of Grozny today in an attempt to isolate the besieged Chechen capital.
As Russian air strikes against the city increased and the death toll mounted, protests against the military action in the breakaway region grew both at home and abroad.


Italian Premier's Fall: Perils of Overreaching
When they come to sum up his career, the line they might reserve for Silvio Berlusconi is: He wanted it all.
Not content to follow his father into banking, he built a business empire that now stands among Italy's biggest.
Unwilling to remain on the political sidelines, he became Prime Minister.
And, not satisfied with high office, he moved to stamp his mark on a swath of institutions, from broadcasting to the judiciary.


Natural Gas Cars Hit the Road Every Day
To the Editor:
"Star Fades for Natural Gas Autos" (news article, Dec. 16) cites advantages in natural gas vehicles, but does not support the headline's conclusion.


Corrections
An article on Thursday about a $6 million Federal tax deficiency notice presented to the estate of a man killed in the Pan Am jetliner crash in Scotland in 1988 misstated, in some copies, the number of deaths in that crash.
It was 270, not 189.


Time Warner Said to Seek Cable Stakes
Time Warner Inc. is reported to be asking the Itochu Corporation and the Toshiba Corporation to put up as much as $300 million apiece to help it buy more cable television systems.
Time Warner was closed yesterday for the holidays and executives could not be reached to comment on the report, which appeared yesterday in Nihon Keizai Shimbun, the Japanese financial newspaper.


Fans Have Mixed Feelings About the New Dead-Ball Era
Major league players on strike?
Replacement players carrying on the national pastime?
Hey, the San Diego Padres might actually improve.
At least that was the feeling of one California resident who was among several fans across the country fielding questions yesterday concerning the haywire status of the summer game.


New Rules Send Mets And Yanks Into Action
On a historic day in baseball on which every front office was bustling with pre-Christmas activity, the Yankees and the Mets weighed the new rules set by the owners and then employed different strategies regarding premier starting pitchers they had obtained in trades in the last month.
It was the first day for the new category of restricted free agents in the new world of baseball and the Yankees made a qualifying offer to Jack McDowell while the Mets declined to make one to Pete Harnisch.
The Yankees decided that McDowell was worth 110 percent of his 1994 salary by offering him a one-year, $5,830,000 contract.
The Mets did not offer Harnisch a one-year, $3.525,000 deal.
What these decisions mean is that the Yankees can now match any offer McDowell receives from another team and the Mets will have to compete with other teams for Harnisch because he is now an unrestricted free agent.


Corrections
A picture caption on Thursday about the emergency response to the subway firebombing referred incorrectly in some editions to the station involved.
It was in Manhattan, not Brooklyn.


N.F.L.'s Final-Weekend Math: Nine Must Go Into Six
For some National Football League teams, it will be the happiest of holidays.
Others won't be feeling so festive.
Going into today's games, nine teams are competing for six remaining playoff spots.
The tightest competition is in the National Conference Central, where the Vikings, Lions, Bears and Packers can each wind up with a division championship or out of the playoffs altogether.
As many as four teams from that division could make it to the post-season.


Raul Julia's Last Film, With Van Damme
If Jean-Claude Van Damme's newest action-adventure film, "Street Fighter," is remembered for anything, it will probably be for Raul Julia's flaming portrayal of Gen.
M.
Bison, an international villain of Hitlerian proportions.
An insane warlord in the make-believe South Asian country of Shadaloo, General Bison is hellbent on world conquest.
One of his tools is a lethal laboratory-engineered soldier, programmed to kill, who looks like a Frankenstein monster and speaks in an electronic drone.
General Bison has tricks up his sleeve that are not deployed until the movie's chaotic final action sequence.
The most spectacular is a pair of electromagnetic shoes that enable him to levitate and fly around like Superman while proclaiming himself a god.
This role was Mr.
Julia's final screen performance (the movie is dedicated to him).
And the actor gives it his all, widening his eyes into an electric glare of cartoonish ferocity, swishing his cape and cackling fiendishly.


CKE Restaurants (CKR,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 7


U.S. Securities: Safe? Yes. Risky? Yes.
Most people think of Government securities as safe, and that is true with regard to credit risk.
But not in terms of interest rate risk.
The Government bond funds have suffered this year -- losing an average of 4 percent -- as the Federal Reserve raised interest rates.
The Fed's actions have been especially damaging because the typical fund in the category owns long-term issues, which lose value quickly as rates rise.


Sugarplums Add One To the Ranks
Debuts in principal roles continue to stud the New York City Ballet's "Nutcracker," which introduced Jenifer Ringer as a new Sugarplum Fairy on Thursday night.
That a corps member would step into a ballerina role might be unusual in other companies.
But formal hierarchies have never stood in the way of talent at the City Ballet, and Ms.
Ringer's confident manner and firm technique have brought her to the fore in the last year.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 2-5  BOSNIA CEASE-FIRE SET
The Bosnian Government and Serbs signed a four-month cease-fire to take effect Saturday, but the hesitation on both sides about the link to renewed peace talks suggested that it could unravel. 1


Samuel Kushner, 79, Ex-Medical Chemist
Dr.
Samuel Kushner, a retired pharmaceutical chemist at Lederle Laboratories, died on Monday at his home in Nanuet, N.Y.
He was 79.
He suffered a long illness, his family said.


Garlands for the Cathedral


Speaker Faces Pressure To Go Tougher on G.O.P.
For two years, Thomas D. Ritter, the Democratic Speaker of the State House of Representatives, has cultivated an image as the nice guy of Connecticut politics.
After one legislative battle divided his caucus, he asked both sides to patch up their differences with a hug.
He refers to the House as a family.
At meetings, he sometimes talks about how much love there is in the room.


Foes in Bosnia Sign Cease-Fire Accord, But Pitfalls Remain
The Muslim-led Bosnian Government and the Bosnian Serbs signed a four-month cease-fire agreement today to take effect at noon Saturday, but hesitations on both sides suggested the accord could easily unravel.
The cease-fire, negotiated during a visit to the Balkans by former President Jimmy Carter and completed over the last two days by senior United Nations officials here, is supposed to last until May 1.
Its application was delayed for 24 hours and its scope reduced because of disagreements between the warring sides over the text.


Officials Deny Murdoch Link To Book Pact For Gingrich
Senior executives of two corporations controlled by Rupert Murdoch came to the defense of Representative Newt Gingrich yesterday in the continuing dispute over the Georgia Republican's $4 million book contract.
In letters to Representative David E. Bonior of Michigan, the Democrat who will become the minority whip when Mr.
Gingrich becomes Speaker of the House in January, the executives repeated that the deal was made without Mr.
Murdoch's involvement and was not intended to influence the Federal Communications Commission in its dealings with the Fox television network, which Mr.
Murdoch also controls.


Corrections
A headline yesterday about an appeal for emergency aid for Somalia referred incorrectly to the status of the United Nations there.
Its aid agencies are committed to remain in Somalia; only its military operation is winding down.


FARMERS INSURANCE IS ORDERED TO MAKE REBATES
The Farmers Insurance Group, a subsidiary of B.A.T.
Industries P.L.C., London, was ordered yesterday by California regulators to rebate $183 million to customers under a 1988 insurance reform law.
The company said it planned to fight the order and noted that an earlier offer by the state, which it rejected, was for a much smaller settlement.


Lott Didn't Move Jets Up, So He May Move On
Even after 15 games, uncertainty reigns on the 6-9 Jets.
So as they go into their regular-season finale on Saturday against the Oilers, they may be saying goodbye to Ronnie Lott, the man who symbolized the failed direction of their present.
Lott, now 35 years old, is ending his second Jets season at free safety.
He has no interceptions, a lot of tackles and his four Super Bowl rings, earned elsewhere.
He was the centerpiece of the Jets' entry into the era of free agency.
The two years have produced a 14-17 record.


BOC Yacht Goes Aground
The French solo sailor Jean Luc Van den Heede went aground late Thursday in the BOC yacht race around the world.
He was in second place at the time.
The next BOC boat was more than 250 miles behind him.
Van den Heede's 60-foot sailboat, Vendee Enterprises, was less than 50 miles from Sydney, Australia, after having sailed nearly 7,000 miles in a passage from Cape Town.
Race officials said he had fallen asleep while sailing through the Bass Strait, an area with strong currents, headwinds, island masses and heavy shipping traffic.
"I didn't sleep at all through the Bass Strait," Van den Heede reported.
"I had to be very close to shore to avoid the current. In the beginning of the afternoon, I fell asleep. When I awoke, I was on the sand."


Shoney's Inc.(SHN,N) reports earnings for 12wks to Oct 30


Ex-Banesto Chairman Is Arrested
Mario Conde, the flamboyant former chairman of Banco Espanol de Credito, was arrested and jailed without bail today on charges of fraud and embezzlement involving more than $53 million.
His arrest followed five days of questioning by a Spanish investigating magistrate, a judge who determines whether sufficient grounds exist for a criminal trial.


U.N. to Pay Woman In Harassment Case
The United Nations will pay more than $210,000 to settle a sexual harassment case brought by an American employee in 1988 against a former high-ranking United Nations official.
The settlement is believed to be the first made by the United Nations in a sexual harassment case.


Hans Herlin, Novelist, 68
Hans Herlin, a best-selling German novelist, died on Tuesday at his home in Southern France.
He was 68.
The cause was a heart attack, a family spokesman said.


Congress May Deliver Biggest Hit to Owners
It's never wise to poke a bear in the nose with a stick.
Major league baseball, not too wisely these days, has decided to hit a grizzly on the schnozz with a 34-ounce bat.
That grizzly is the United States Government and it seems that at least one of its branches is stirring in anger and alarm over the disarray baseball continues to exhibit as standard operating procedure when it comes to labor disputes.


Quick &amp; Reilly Group Inc.(BQR,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 25


Peso and Mexican Stocks Calmer
After diving almost 30 percent since the beginning of the week, the Mexican peso settled down today, closing at 4.7 to a dollar from 4.8 pesos the day before.
With the peso floating freely for the first time in seven years, the Mexican stock market also regained lost ground and the bolsa index closed at 2,339.58, a modest but encouraging gain of 1.44 percent.
The Government devalued the peso from about 3.6 pesos to the dollar to 4, and then, when the move failed to calm markets, set it free.


In a Shadowy Marketplace, America Buys Russian Arms
A company whose chairman was once the Secretary of Defense teamed up with a Canadian arms dealer and some enterprising officials in the former Soviet republic of Belarus in a most unusual arms deal, financed in secret by the Pentagon.
The deal came to light when the sun rose on Monday morning on a huge Russian-made transport plane parked within sight of an interstate highway in Huntsville, Ala.
Its cargo: components of the S-300, the Russian equivalent of the Patriot missile defense system.
The buyer: the Defense Intelligence Agency, the Pentagon's chief military intelligence branch.


Only the N.F.L. Uniforms Looked Familiar
Doug Allen calls it the darkest day in labor relations in the National Football League.
For a three-week period in October 1987, with their regular players on strike, the league's owners decided to stage games with replacement players.
"It's something that people on both sides regret having happened," said Allen, the N.F.L.
Players Association assistant executive director.


Holiday on Monday
Christmas, which falls tomorrow, will be legally observed on Monday.
NEW YORK  GOVERNMENT OFFICES Closed.
POST OFFICE Express Mail and special delivery only; main post office, at 33d Street and Eighth Avenue, open.
BANKS Closed.
PARKING Sunday rules in effect.
SANITATION No pickups, street cleanings or recycling.
SCHOOLS Closed.
FINANCIAL MARKETS Closed.
TRANSPORTATION Subways and buses on holiday schedule.
Long Island Rail Road on normal weekday schedule.
Metro-North Railroad on Saturday schedule.
NEW JERSEY  GOVERNMENT OFFICES Closed.
POST OFFICES Closed.
BANKS Closed.
SCHOOLS Closed.
TRANSPORTATION Rail service on holiday schedule; no service on the Boonton, Montclair, Port Jervis and Pascack Valley lines.
Buses on Saturday schedule.
CONNECTICUT  GOVERNMENT OFFICES Closed.
POST OFFICES Closed.
BANKS Closed.
SCHOOLS Closed.
TRANSPORTATION Metro-North on Saturday schedule.


INSIDE
No Glory for Russia
Russian troops closed in on the capital of a separatist region, but it brought leaders in Moscow under fire at home and abroad.
Page 4.
Mexican Markets Calmer
The peso and Mexican stocks steadied, after a turbulent slide this week set off by the Government's decision to devalue the currency.
Page 41.
Poultry Giant Fights Inquiry
Tyson Foods vowed to fight a special prosecutor's expansion of the investigation of a cabinet secretary into activities of the company.
Page 7.


A Volcano Continues to Threaten Towns in Mexico


Excerpts From Mayor's Veto Message
Excerpts from Mayor Giuliani's letter formally presenting his reasons for vetoing a bill to establish an independent agency to monitor police corruption:
Although I believe that an independent body may be a proper vehicle to continue the City's efforts to combat police corruption, I believe that certain provisions of Introductory No. 402-A violate the City Charter and for that and additional reasons the bill is not the best means for furthering these efforts. . . .


Cavaliers Put an End To Streak By Nets
Jayson Williams, both hands taped heavily around the thumbs, found everything but the net with four free throws in the final two minutes.
Kenny Anderson, twinging shoulder and all, was banking more on his pride than his aching body as the clock ticked away in the fourth quarter.
New Jersey's patchwork job finally ended tonight against a professional basketball team that is on fire.
It lasted three adventurous games and then some for the Nets, who were beaten not by themselves, but by the superior execution of the streaking Cleveland Cavaliers.


Wounded Rapper Jailed at Bellevue After Failing to Post Bail
The rap star Tupac Shakur surrendered to New York City prison officials early yesterday morning and will spend at least the weekend in the prison ward at Bellevue Hospital Center after failing to post $3 million in bail.
On Dec. 1, Mr.
Shakur was convicted of sexually abusing a 21-year-old woman.
He faced a court-imposed deadline of 11 A.M. yesterday to report to Bellevue for a medical evaluation and to put up a $3 million surety bond as a condition for bail.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an obituary on Thursday about Jean Ickelheimer Stralem, a New York philanthropist and art collector, misstated her relationship with the American Theater Wing.
Mrs.
Stralem, who died on Tuesday, was a current and active officer and board member -- not a former one -- at her death.


RESULTS PLUS
MEN'S BASKETBALL  UConn Stays Unbeaten  Ray Allen had 21 points and Doron Sheffer 16 as both keyed runs that helped No. 10 Connecticut to an 85-68 victory last night over Fairfield in Hartford.
UConn (5-0) never trailed, breaking from a 7-7 tie on 5 straight points by Sheffer early in the game.
The Stags (5-3) kept it close, trailing, 19-16, before Allen had 5 points during a 9-0 run to a 28-16 lead.
The Huskies led, 43-30, at halftime. (AP) Arkansas 82, Tulsa 63: Corliss Williamson scored 7 of his 21 points, and Davor Rimac made two straight 3-pointers as third-ranked Arkansas opened the second half with an 18-0 run and went on to beat visiting Tulsa.
Tulsa (3-2) made just three turnovers in the first half while building a 36-32 lead, but committed seven in the first 4 minutes 14 seconds of the second half.
The Razorbacks (8-1) hit 6 of 9 shots during the run. (AP) Maryland 138, Morgan State 72: No. 11 Maryland had its highest-scoring game ever, getting 25 points from Joe Smith in routing a winless Morgan State team.
The Terrapins (8-2) scored the opening 12 points in notching their 1,000th victory.
The 138 points surpassed the record of 130 against East Carolina on Dec. 7, 1977. (AP) Minnesota 115, San Jose State 68: No. 16 Minnesota put seven players in double figures -- including Townsend Orr with 17 points -- and beat San Jose State in Minneapolis.
The Golden Gophers (7-3) snapped a three-game losing streak. (AP) Wisconsin 75, Loyola Marymount 60: No. 20 Wisconsin spotted Loyola Marymount a 7-0 lead before romping.
The Badgers (6-1) got 16 points and 15 rebounds from Rashard Griffith. (AP) WOMEN'S BASKETBALL  Lobo Sparks Huskies  Rebecca Lobo made all 11 of her shots and scored 25 points yesterday as No. 2 Connecticut coasted to a 101-42 victory over Iona.
Lobo also had 9 rebounds and 4 blocked shots for the Huskies (6-0), despite playing only 19 minutes.
Connecticut, which shot 62 percent from the floor and outrebounded Iona by 56-21, scored the first 6 points.
Teresa Tacopina's 10 points led Iona (3-5). (AP) TENNIS  Halsell's Bid Ends  Jennifer Hall of Oklahoma City, 17 years old, advanced to the semifinals of the Orange Bowl International tournament yesterday in Miami, beating the third-seeded Stephy Halsell of Cypress, Tex., 6-1, 6-4.
Halsell, the only American to win an Orange Bowl title last year, failed in her bid to become the first junior to win consecutive Orange Bowl 16's and 18's titles since Jim Courier did it in 1986 and 1987. (AP) SCHOOLS  Career Scoring Record  Caryn Schoff, 17, not only led her team to a 77-16 win over Cherry Valley-Springfield yesterday, but she also broke New York's state high school record for career points in the process.
The crowd erupted when the 6-foot forward for St.
Johnsville Central shot her record-breaking point, a free throw with three minutes left in the game to break the state record of 2,871 career points set by Tammi Reiss of Eldred High School in 1988.
Schoff scored 32 points -- 1 more than she needed -- to raise her total to 1,873.
The girls' record is higher than the boys' record (2,621), set by Nets point guard Kenny Anderson in 1989, when he played for Archbishop Molloy in Queens. (AP) COLLEGE HOCKEY  Tigers Top No. 1 Maine  Princeton shocked No. 1 Maine, beating the Black Bears on their home ice, 3-2, last night in the Dexter Classic championship game in Orono, Me.
Maine (15-1-5) scored the first and final goals of the game, but Princeton's James Konte made 23 saves.
The loss snapped Maine's 20-game unbeaten streak. (AP)


In Ornaments From Poland, Reflections of an Art
Richly decorated handmade glass Christmas ornaments have become a brisk and fashionable seasonal business in the United States, and many of the high-priced baubles come from an expanded farmhouse here in the Polish countryside.
The revived taste for traditional tree trimmings -- pushed by department stores, catalogues and this year by Vice President Al Gore, whose Christmas tree is adorned with handmade European ornaments -- comes from an old art that is now produced on a commercial basis in Poland and the Czech Republic.


A Fading Industrial City Totters Toward Revival
At his City Hall office in this put-upon but spirited immigrant town across the Mystic River from Boston, Harry Spence was recently telling a delegation of Russian officials how he came to be the only reigning authorized dictator in America.
He said that Chelsea, trapped in corruption, gutter politics, mismanagement and poverty, was on the brink of bankruptcy three years ago.
Things were so dire that the Mayor, John (Butchie) Brennan, begged the state to step in.
And so it did, suspending democracy -- which meant that Mr.
Brennan was out of a job -- and placing the city in receivership.
As receiver, Mr.
Spence was given the powers of mayor, aldermen and treasurer, to rule essentially by fiat.


Risk Is Cited in 6 More California Counties
The aggressive investment practices that drove Orange County, Calif., into bankruptcy have also been used by at least six other county governments in California, according to a leading Wall Street credit-rating agency.
The agency, Moody's Investors Service Inc., reported late Thursday evening that the six counties -- Monterey, Placer, San Bernardino, San Diego, Solano and Sonoma -- had engaged in "significantly more aggressive" investment strategies than other California counties it surveyed.
The strategies included investing with borrowed money, a practice called "using leverage," and investing in the complex interest-sensitive securities known as derivatives.


Falcons Keep Heyward
The Atlanta Falcons signed running back CRAIG HEYWARD, who is having the best year of his career, to a new two-year contract yesterday.
Heyward, whose nickname of Ironhead has been with him since his high school years in Passaic, N.J., and his college years at Pittsburgh, has 1,041 combined yards this season, the highest total of his seven-year National Football League career.
He also has career highs with 746 rushing yards, 8 touchdowns and 30 receptions for 295 yards heading into the Falcons' season finale. (AP)


What Now for New York City's Budget?
Halfway through the fiscal year, New York City faces a budget deficit of at least $1 billion with no clear way out.
A ruling from the State Supreme Court this week wiped out spending cuts proposed by Mayor Rudolph Giuliani two months ago, as well as the City Council's alternate plan.
The Mayor has given the Council a few days to draw up an acceptable new plan; if unsatisfied, he will proceed to cut on his own, as he must, by impounding funds.
That is a clumsy way to manage, and undemocratic too, in that it excludes the Council.
But New York's budget distress is urgent and getting worse.
Time does not allow more sparring.


Off Course on Voting Rights
When the Supreme Court questioned the shape of a North Carolina Congressional district last year, it set in motion far-reaching -- and far-fetched -- challenges to the way many states have tried to comply with the Federal Voting Rights Act.
Now a case from Louisiana gives the Court a chance to correct its own erratic course and preserve hard-won gains for minority voters.
The North Carolina decision was a stunning departure from the Court's earlier, more generous interpretations of the act.
It suggested that district lines drawn to give North Carolina its first black Congressional representatives since Reconstruction represented a form of segregation, an American version of apartheid.
That ruling, in turn, has since prompted lower courts to argue that race-conscious line-drawing that helps to integrate Congress is wrong because, in effect, it assigns voters to districts on a racial basis.


Guantanamo Journal; Finding Relatives Across the Fence
Victor and Mirtha Thomas were somewhat used to refugee camps springing up across the street from their two-bedroom house.
The Haitians came first, in 1991, and stayed for about a year.
They were back again last June.
But when the Cubans arrived in August, the couple's placid life on the suburban side of the concertina wire received a jolt.
In the chaos of the tent cities, Mr.
Thomas found a distant cousin.
Soon, some of his friends on the base were also running into cousins, nephews and even siblings.


A Rough Day for the Queen Elizabeth 2


Spurs and Rivers Talk
The San Antonio Spurs acknowledged yesterday that they are talking with the waived Knicks point guard DOC RIVERS, but said that no contract has been signed.
The New York Post reported yesterday that Rivers was signed to a National Basketball Association-minimum $150,000 contract with the Spurs on Thursday.
The Post reported that the 33-year-old Rivers, waived by the Knicks on Dec. 15, turned down more lucrative offers to come to San Antonio.
"If DENNIS RODMAN plays, I think they have the best shot to win a championship, which is the only thing I'm after," Rivers said.


A Nervous City Sees Bombs Everywhere
Just before rush hour yesterday, a security guard spotted a briefcase sitting atop two cardboard boxes outside a luggage store at Five World Trade Center.
Wary, the guard called 911 to report a suspicious leather bag, and the police summoned the bomb squad.
As the squad raced to the scene, sirens carving a path through commuter traffic, an absent-minded businessman returned to the luggage store and retrieved his briefcase, which, it turned out, contained nothing more perilous than a Bible and a laptop computer.


Jeffrey Carples, 44, Dinkins Aide on Homelessness
Jeffrey Land Carples, a government official in New York City whose 20-year career focused on homelessness and health care, died yesterday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 44 and also lived in Philmont, N.Y.
The cause was complications from AIDS, his companion, Richard Orient, said.


Actor Arrested at Airport
Christian Slater, the actor who starred in the recent movie "Interview With the Vampire," was arrested yesterday at Kennedy International Airport when he tried to board an airplane with a handgun, the Port Authority police said.
Mr.
Slater, 25, was stopped near a metal detector at about 5 P.M. in the Delta Air Lines terminal, said Officer William Zika, a police spokesman.
Officer Zika said it was unclear whether Mr.
Slater was carrying the gun, a 9 millimeter pistol, or whether it was in his carry-on luggage.


A Dose of Luck, and a Tiny Heart Grows Stronger
KRYSTINA BARTKOWICZ stroked her 12-year-old daughter's hair and said that over the last eight years, she knew good luck existed in the world and that it was a mathematical probability that she and her family would run into some one day.
But then, when it happened, the dose was so big, so sudden, so unexpected, it has left her dazed and leery.
"Some part of my brain has not been able to fully accept what has happened," she said.
"Still, each day I look at my beautiful daughter and I believe. I watch her bloom."


The View From Behind the Cash Register
My feet are swelling out of my loafers.
My back aches from standing for nine hours straight, three days in a row.
My shoulders are sore from folding, lifting and stacking merchandise in an endless battle to keep it neat.
And now a customer is insisting that the state-of-the-art cash register on which I rang up his purchases has cheated him out of the 10 percent discount he was promised for shopping before 11 A.M.


A Pioneer's Essence Distilled by Her Heirs
The coming dance year is bound to be full of tributes to Doris Humphrey, one of the early American modern dance masters, in acknowledgement of the centennial of her birth.
"The Legacy of Doris Humphrey," presented by the Dance Center of the 92d Street Y on Tuesday night at Playhouse 91, ought to serve as a model.
Thoughtfully put together, the program offered a taste of Humphrey technique and dances by her, by a colleague and by her heirs.
The evening opened with illuminating comments by Ernestine Stodelle, the Humphrey scholar who staged the choreographer's works on the program.
Then came a neatly put together demonstration of technique, arranged by Nona Schurman, that suggested the underpinnings of Humphrey's dances and those of Charles Weidman, her colleague and partner.


Rarities as a Change From 'Messiah'
For many performing groups, Christmas is an excuse to run through the most obvious music in the repertory: "Messiah," the "Brandenburgs," and so forth.
On Monday night at Kaye Playhouse, Newell Jenkins's Clarion Society was seized with the opposite impulse, resurrecting some thoroughly obscure Christmas music by Johann David Heinichen and Jan Dismas Zelenka.
Drawing on archives in Dresden and Prague, Mr.
Jenkins found works that have been heard on only a few occasions in recent centuries, if at all.
Both composers worked at the court of Elector Augustus the Strong in Dresden in the early 18th century, Heinichen as Kapellmeister, Zelenka as court composer.
They were sharply opposed in temperament: Heinichen, all but forgotten until the Musica Antiqua Koln recorded his remarkable Dresden Concerti for DG last year, wrote in an extrovert, ornately inventive style, while Zelenka generally struck a more brooding and reflective tone.


Oneok Inc.(OKE,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Super Food Services (SFS,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 19


Bridge
It is important to look for small silver linings.
Consider, for example, the diagramed deal from a rubber bridge game last week at the Town Club, 9 East 86th Street.
North and South, Michael Prahin of New City, N.Y., and David Berah of Manhattan, bid to the normal contract, and West, thinking Christmas had come early, had good reason to double.
Berah gambled with a redouble on the strength of his aces.
"David, one of us will be sorry," announced Allen Kahn of Manhattan, sitting West, as he placed the heart king on the table, "and I don't think it will be me."


A Scarred Life That Ended in the Capital
The life of Marcelino Corniel, the knife-wielding homeless man fatally shot by a Park Police officer outside the White House on Tuesday, had been one of gang violence, armed robbery and imprisonment.
But its defining moment, the point at which it took its most decisive turn for the worse, came on an August night in 1992, when he was badly burned in an automobile accident.
According to police records and accounts by friends and neighbors, Mr.
Corniel had been drinking heavily when his car ran out of gasoline in the town of Wilmington, about 20 miles south of downtown Los Angeles.
He walked to a nearby service station, bought a canister, filled it with gas and returned to empty it into his tank.
Then he threw the canister onto the back seat, started the car, lighted a cigarette and absent-mindedly tossed away a match.
It landed on the canister, which still had some gasoline inside.


Home Cooking? Knicks Don't Even Get Leftovers
Madison Square Garden used to be a place where the Knicks dominated opponents with stifling defense, destroyed them with strong inside play and sharp shooting and watched their raucous crowd of 19,763 fans make visitors feel quite unwelcome.
But the invincibility that once made the fabled court on 33d and Eighth so wonderful for the Knicks has methodically vanished.
Coach Pat Riley can clap his hands and scream from the bench as often as he wants and Spike Lee can try taunting opposing superstars until his baseball cap tumbles off his head, but the Knicks have been playing like a wounded bunch and they are definitely not as commanding at home, where they have lost three straight games for the first time in more than four seasons.


Sports of The Times; The Hunter Is Captured By the Game
Monday night (airborne) -- Emmitt Smith sits in the coach section of the Dallas Cowboys' charter flight from New Orleans, where the Cowboys narrowly squeaked by the Saints on "Monday Night Football." The team is generally ebullient, but Smith stares pensively out the window.
He had been forced out of the game with a serious hamstring injury.
The injury threatens to end his 82-game string of not missing a game because of injury.
It also threatens to end his pursuit of John Riggins's single-season touchdown record; Smith is 2 touchdowns short of tying Riggins's 1983 mark of 24.


Brown Has Added Motivation Against the Cowboys: Revenge
In the last few weeks, as Dave Brown has walked the streets doing his Christmas shopping, enjoying the praise of his winning streak, there has been a constant theme among the comments from Giants fans.
Well, Dave, the winning streak has been nice, but can we make one thing clear?
Beat Dallas.
Five in a row, 20 straight, 50 straight.
Gee, that's swell.
But what would be really nice for Christmas is a victory over the Cowboys.
The Giants need a victory over Dallas Saturday, plus help from Tampa Bay in its game against Green Bay, to qualify for a National Football League wild-card playoff spot.
And there may be no one on the Giants who would like to beat Dallas in the Giants' final regular-season game than Brown himself.
The quarterback position is the most visible on the field to begin with, and when you are being blown out by the world champions, as happened to the Giants on a Monday night in November, then it is like being an amoeba on a microscope slide.


Corrections
A picture yesterday with an article about fighting in Bosnia carried an incorrect credit.
The picture, showing a woman in Sarajevo grieving over the body of her brother, was by Debbi Morello of Black Star.


Olympic Coin Deal in China
The United States Mint has signed a million-dollar agreement with China Gold Coin Inc. to promote and sell the 1995-96 United States Olympic coins within China.
The large-scale purchases by the Chinese could result in some of the United States Olympic coinage being sold out because the quantities struck are restricted by Congress.


Harding Skates Again
That certainly wasn't Santa Claus's wife skating at a Portland, Ore., shopping mall yesterday.
It was the controversial Olympian TONYA HARDING, in a short Mrs.
Santa suit with fur trim, skating a routine to "Have Yourself A Merry Little Christmas" before an estimated 2,000 people who lined the rink at Clackamas Town Center.
Harding had to dodge 10 or so other skaters to complete what was billed as her first performance since she pleaded guilty to conspiracy to hinder prosecution in the assault on her fellow skater NANCY KERRIGAN and was placed on probation and sentenced to 500 hours of community service.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy  For workers on the front lines of retailing, the holidays are a time of great pressure, when they are forced to juggle many customers at once while exhausted by hours of overtime.
The $1,500 sale that provides a huge high is rare, and the housekeeping tasks are endless.
For many, the season is make-or-break.  [ Page 1. ]


Fighting Heats Up in Israel's 'Security Zone' in Lebanon
Israeli forces and guerrillas of the pro-Iranian Party of God exchanged artillery and rocket fire today in some of the heaviest fighting in southern Lebanon this year.
Two Israeli soldiers and two Lebanese police officers were reportedly killed, and seven Israelis were wounded.
After years of relentless fighting in southern Lebanon, where Israel controls a border strip that it calls its "security zone," the Israeli Army and its allied Lebanese militia have begun suffering significantly higher casualties.


New Governor Has Opportunity to Set Course for Adirondacks
To the Editor:
When the New Year's ball drops in Times Square this holiday season, the first 100 years of the Forest Preserve in New York's Adirondacks will come to a close.
The year 1995 will mark the beginning of the second century of the most successful forest protection mechanism in the world.
It is a time for celebration, opportunity and concern.


CHRONICLE
Just in time for Christmas, LIZA MINNELLI checked out of a hospital where she underwent hip replacement surgery last weekend, The Associated Press reported.
"I feel so much better I can't tell you," she said at a news conference Thursday in the lobby of the Century City Hospital in Century City, Calif.
"I suffered with degenerative arthritis for 10 years and never told anyone. I was ashamed of it. I don't know why."


COMPANY BRIEFS
CULP INC., High Point, N.C., which makes and markets upholstery fabrics and mattress ticking, agreed to buy Rayonese Textile Inc., a privately owned maker of fabrics for home furnishings that is based near Montreal.
Terms were not disclosed.
LOCKHEED CORP., Calabasas, Calif., said that as part of the Joint Advanced Strike Technology program, it had received three contracts totaling $22.3 million to help develop military aircraft.


Mexico's Devaluation: Not So Scary
Mexico's decision to let the peso plummet about 30 percent this week roiled bond and stock markets and hurt Mexico's credibility with international investors.
Critics of Nafta, the free-trade accord between the U.S., Mexico and Canada, chimed in with the proposition that the peso's fall would turn bilateral trade against the U.S., thereby vindicating their opposition to open trade.
Much of the criticism is unwarranted.
President Ernesto Zedillo, who took office only three weeks ago, had little choice; as foreign reserves dwindled, he could no longer afford to spend billions propping up the value of the peso.
And though his decision angered many foreigners, whose investments plummeted in value along with the peso, Mexican economic policy remains sound.


The Life and Times of a Personal Shopper
Among all the established holiday shoppers are a few people who just can't get enough of the retail experience.
That describes Lani Miller Schecter, whose parents owned a fabric store when she was growing up.
During her youth, she worked at the store on school holidays and in the evenings.
Although she loved it, she shunned the idea of starting a retail shop as an adult because the hours would be so confining.
Instead, she decided to turn her skills, contacts and reputation for finding good deals into a personal shopping venture in Manhattan.
Unlike the busy executive who uses a shopper to save time, her clients are often looking for great selection and buy in quanity.
"The reason people use a personal shopper is that they save clients a lot of money," Ms.
Schecter said.
"And by going with the shopper, the client gets to see a greater variety at just one or two manufacturers than in several department stores."


Support for New Jersey School Vouchers Falters
Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman has a national reputation, a Legislature controlled by fellow Republicans and enough popularity points to make most politicians turn green with envy.
Yet she is having a surprising amount of trouble mobilizing support for an issue dear to many in her party's conservative wing: school vouchers.
When the State Senate adjourned on Monday and the Assembly four days earlier, voucher legislation had not even been introduced, even though the issue had seemed to enjoy considerable political momentum throughout much of this year.


The Neediest Cases; Some Replace Shopping With Special Donation
Some are frustrated by the frenzied materialism of the holiday season.
Others, moved by the daily desperation they see on city streets, want to offer their generosity to those who need it most.
For a variety of reasons, some New Yorkers have chosen to give to The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund this year instead of exchanging Christmas or Hanukkah gifts.
In a letter accompanying her check, Margaret Darby-Hoegger of Manhattan wrote that her family was contributing $400 to Neediest Cases rather than buying one another Christmas presents.
"This year, not only is there no shopping frenzy but the warm knowledge that our gift money will help so many," she wrote.


Wilkens Is One Victory Short of Record
Hawks 97, Pistons 77
Mookie Blaylock had 18 points and 8 assists last night to lead visiting Atlanta to a 97-77 rout of Detroit, leaving Lenny Wilkens one victory shy of Red Auerbach's record for coaching victories.


'Fledermaus' Pratfalls In Realist Settings
The persistent lack of integrated dramatic thinking at the Metropolitan Opera has resulted in some peculiarly jumbled sights and sounds in recent years.
Otto Schenk's eight-year-old production of "Die Fledermaus," which returned on Thursday night, might set an in-house record for incoherence on a monumental scale.
Here is a "Fledermaus" in which the cast sings in German and speaks in English; in which American sopranos drawl alongside crisp German baritones; in which crude comedic pratfalls are framed by grand realist settings, and in which an artist of the exalted international stature of Hermann Prey shares a stage with the comedian Dom DeLuise.
The inconsistencies of this production are by now familiar; nearly the whole cast on Thursday, Mr.
Prey and Mr.
DeLuise included, participated in the revivals of 1989 and 1991.
There was, however, one startling new twist this time round: the trouser role of Prince Orlofsky was sung not by a mezzo-soprano but by a countertenor.
When Jochen Kowalski entered in Act II with his ringing male contralto voice, the famous drunken party scene threatened to become a little too topsy-turvy for its own good.


Sudan Linked To Rebellion In Algeria
The Sudan's Islamic Government, censured for its human rights violations and its support for various armed Islamic militant groups, is now helping Muslim fundamentalists in their effort to topple the Algerian Government, according to Western intelligence reports.
The Sudan, the reports say, is assisting the Algerian guerrillas by permitting Iran to use the Sudan as a transit point for weapons being smuggled to Algerian guerrillas.


M. L. Gelfand, 89, Medical Professor
Dr.
Maxwell L. Gelfand, a professor of clinical medicine at New York University School of Medicine, died on Wednesday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 89.
The cause was leukemia, said Dr. Ariel Distenfeld, his physician and a former student.


Tyson Foods Fights to Keep Out of Espy Investigation
Describing the independent prosecutor in the Mike Espy case as politically motivated, officials of Tyson Foods Inc. are fighting his efforts to expand the inquiry into the departing Secretary of Agriculture to include activities of the Arkansas-based poultry processor.
"What's the guy investigating?" the company's general counsel, James Blair, said of the independent prosecutor, Donald C. Smaltz, in an interview with Reuters today.
"He's hunting for something to politically punish Tyson Foods. The irony is that 90 percent of Tyson's executives are Republicans."


Bodies Found in Car Trunk Are Identified
Authorities in upstate New York yesterday identified the two New York City men whose bodies were found late Wednesday in the trunk of a car driven by a Bronx teen-ager.
The driver, Clive Andre Webley, 16, of the Bronx was charged with two counts of murder on Thursday after telling the authorities he had shot the two men in a house in Utica.
State troopers had pulled him over on the New York State Thruway in the town of Glen and found the bodies after spotting blood on the car's rear bumper.


Kanazawa: Local Flavor On Japan's West Coast
KANAZAWA, the cultural and culinary center of Japan's western coast, is a modern metropolis of 430,000 people that is steeped in four centuries of history.
Although the area is famous for exquisite silk brocades, lacquerware and gold leaf -- a result of a legacy of arts and crafts dating back to its origins -- given its size and population, it also has one of the greatest concentrations of excellent restaurants of any Japanese city.
The present-day city and environs were known in feudal times as the Kaga region.
The local cuisine, known collectively as Kaga ryori, includes regional dishes such as jibu ni (literally "bubbling pot," a thick duck and wheat-gluten stew), gori no tsukuda ni (tiny soy-simmered river fish) and kuzu kiri (opalescent arrowroot noodles served chilled with a dark honey-like dipping sauce).
They are found on nearly every restaurant menu in Kanazawa.


Amy Had Golden Curls; Jo Had A Rat. Who Would You Rather Be?
WAS there ever a more passive-aggressive trio than those whiny little March sisters, Meg, Jo and Beth?
Meg, the dutiful oldest, sighing as she tosses off her frequent complaint that it is dreadful to be poor, but she can bear it; Jo such a martyr she lops off her hair to sell for quick cash, when she could easily have borrowed the money from her aunt; Beth wasting away and not once snarling about it.
Only Amy, the spoiled baby of the family, refuses to beg for attention.
She simply accepts it as her due.
The pretty one who marries the handsome boy next door, Amy is the pampered princess of "Little Women." That's what I liked about her.
Among female readers and especially writers, there is no more sacred a cow in all of literature than "Little Women." We are all supposed to have worshiped Jo, identified with her, found in her a role model for our writing lives.
Louisa May Alcott clearly adored Jo, her idealized self, and generations of readers have fallen in line behind her.


A Ripping Good Time Off Montauk
The voice on my answering machine quailed with excitement.
"If you are ever going to come, come now," the caller said.
"It's really happening!"
It was the East End fly-rod outfitter, Paul Dixon, talking on his phone from Montauk Point.
Gulls screamed in the background.
The bass were in, he said, big stripers, acres of them.
I hung up the phone, dragged out my waders and headed for Montauk, which I shall ever after think of as Bass Hampton.


The Evergreens Have It, Every Season
SINCE this is a day to relax and enjoy, it might be helpful to review why so many Christmas traditions are, well, traditional.
Greenery has always dominated holiday decorations.
Bright velvet bows, colored balls and plastic berries may be added with regularity for reasons of sentiment or taste, but the greens always form the background.
This greenery could be clippings from the yew hedge, branches of holly purchased at the garden shop or light twigs snipped from the yard's trees.
In all cases, this decorating flourish reflects an old belief that evergreens symbolize eternal life.


'The Last Shot'
To the Editor:
As director of the Public Schools Athletic League (P.S.A.L.), I believe Brent Staples's review of Darcy Frey's book "The Last Shot" (Nov. 13) defamed the public school sports program of New York City by calling it "corrupt." Nevertheless, in some respects I welcome Mr.
Staples's (and Mr. Frey's) attention to public school athletics in New York.


Catching Prime Numbers
To the Editor:
Mary Breasted's review of Kathryn Lasky's book "The Librarian Who Measured the Earth" (Nov. 13) contains a short description of the sieve of Eratosthenes, a simple way to find prime numbers.
The description is brief and essentially accurate, but it omits one important detail and includes an unnecessary complication.


New Life Over the Store
THE streets of New York City's neighborhoods are lined with older two- to four-story buildings with a store on the ground floor and an apartment or two above.
Most were built around the turn of the century to house immigrant families pouring in from Europe.
Such people were accustomed to living in the same building as their small-business enterprises.
And for a while they could not afford to do otherwise.


Turning The Tables
To the Editor
Any unwanted sexual advance by one's boss that comes with the threat of destroying one's career and ability to make a living is a serious matter.


At the Park, A Holiday On Ice
A skating party for the Central Park Conservancy, Dec. 11


Bulgaria
To the Editor: Those of us in the travel business in Bulgaria find Ms.
Spano's article puzzling in some ways.
Why did she spend days scouring New York for Bulgarian currency when an inquiry at the Bulgarian Embassy, at Balkan Travel, Balkan Holidays or Balkan Air would have yielded the information that it was readily available at Sofia Airport on arrival or at virtually the same rate at any of the numerous private exchanges on the Sofia main street and all the hotels?
Our tours are available at all price levels, for individuals if desired, but most travelers come in pairs.
Group rates begin at six people at Bulgarian hotels, and many of them throughout the country can offer, for virtually the same amount paid by Ms.
Spano, self-contained rooms with breakfast, minus the threadbare carpets and cracked plaster.
Since the changeover three years ago, privatization is growing at all levels.


Russians Again Bomb Caucasus Rebels
Russian troops continued to bomb the capital of the rebellious Chechnya republic today as President Boris N. Yeltsin struggled to explain his handling of the conflict. i
"The President is studying the situation around Chechnya in detail as well as the reaction by the public, by parliamentary deputies and by the news media," his office said in a statement.


Cleaning Streets and Changing Images
No one asked them to do it, but everyone seems delighted that they are.
Since mid-November, a volunteer crew of 14 formerly homeless men has been sweeping sidewalks and gutters and bagging trash from 85th to 87th Streets between Park and First Avenues.
"It's excellent," said Alexander Poulos, as he slapped hot dogs into buns at the Papaya King at the hectic corner of Third Avenue and 86th Street.
"They're always here, working conscientiously every day. They keep things clean. They give us a good image -- and help us avoid getting sanitation summonses."


A Fragrance Maker Sprays the Elegance on Itself
UNTIL this year the world's largest fragrance and flavors manufacturer might have been described as the city's least pretentious corporate landlord.
The decidedly unglamorous appearance of the two warehouse buildings on West 57th Street between 10th and 11th Avenues where International Flavors &amp; Fragrances Inc. has its headquarters gave no hint of the company's association with glamour itself.


The Imperious Imperative
"GET OVER WHATEVER PERSONal hang-ups you got," said Marion Barry, re-elected Mayor of Washington, after having been brought low four years before on a cocaine charge.
To those who did not vote for him, he repeated, "Get over it."
This imperious imperative caused a small furor in politics' hometown.
The satirist Mark Russell hailed get over it as "the city's new motto," adding cruelly about Mayor Barry that "his will be the most watched nose since Cyrano de Bergerac's."


Half a World From London, Goose and That Pudding
If Christmas is a time for surprises, New York Times correspondents have had their share: along with the Japanese Santa and tree-trimming Muscovites there were the Serbian snipers, the bullets in Beirut, the tragic fire in Tennessee.
In writing of their most memorable Christmases away from home, 10 correspondents range around the world; some recall elegant feasts, in a Swabian castle or a Hong Kong hotel; others cannot forget the fruitcake they could not possibly eat in Somalia, the joy radiating from a Saigon cathedral, or the tearful Mass in Sarajevo.
All remember how they counted their blessings.


Correction
Picture captions on Dec. 11 with an article about country blues reversed the identities of two performers.
The picture at the right showed Son House; at the left, the Rev.
Gary Davis.


Ivy View
To the Sports Editor:
Bill Rhoden, a very good writer, had a very bad source for "The Quakers Are Feeling Their Oats," (The Times, Dec. 17).
His Penn alumnus's assertions about the Ivy League's views toward Penn are false, and I'm surprised to see them repeated so casually.


THE AGE OF INDOLENCE
It seems to me that your Sunday feature does the same thing that "Mystery Science" does: it presents an image to the audience and then silhouettes obnoxiously witty commentary over it.
I'll say one thing for the characters of "MST 3000": at least they come out of the darkness every once in a while to show their faces.
MATT CAHILL New York


With Four Hands at the Piano . . . and Four Hands at Two
WHEN TWO PIANISTS collaborate, a new sociology is born.
To follow its arguments, first separate the music intended for four hands at one piano from music for four hands at two.
For even if the second art seems only an aggrandizement of the first, these are different enterprises.
The dichotomies run like this: private versus public, intimate versus extravagant or domestic versus marketplace.
Three splendid CD's from Teldec played by Martha Argerich and Alexandre Rabinovitch examine both sides of the division.
Three of four items on a Mozart CD (4509-91378-2) are for piano, four hands.
Everything else, including a Brahms disk (4509-92257-2) and a Rachmaninoff collection (9031-74717-2), is played on two instruments.


A Century of Rolling 'Em
The movie business may be said to have started in 1894 with "Fred Ott's Sneeze," a kinetoscope that featured Thomas Edison's assistant.
Hollywood has been tickling and irritating the national fancy ever since.
In AMERICAN CINEMA: One Hundred Years of Filmmaking (Rizzoli, $50), Jeanine Basinger, who teaches film studies at Wesleyan University, has combined informative text and sumptuous photographs to tell the story of movies, beginning in earnest with the definitive victory of sound over silence around 1928.
A knowledgeable guide, Ms.
Basinger briskly, if somewhat pedantically, covers all her subject's angles.
She cuts quickly, for example, from a glance at technical tricks of the trade to a thumbnail discussion of that glittering phenomenon known as the star.
She discusses screwball comedy and film noir, and traces the decline of the studio system and the rise of conglomerates and powerful agents, with their deals and packages.
Readers looking for discussion of Hollywood's treatment of minorities or of its timorous or distored responses to momentous off-screen events, however, will be disappointed.
The allure of Ms.
Basinger's book, like that of its subject, lies in its glamorous photographs.
Catch Rita Hayworth stairing voluptuously off into space.
LEE SIEGEL


Tatiana Prybylski, Nicholas Blair
Tatiana Alice Prybylski, the daughter of Sophia Prybylski of New York and the late Vladimir Prybylski, was married on Wednesday to Nicholas Anthony Blair, a son of Tonia and Vachel Lindsay Blair of New York.
Rabbi Burt Aaron Siegal performed the ceremony at Grant's Tomb in New York.
The bride, 28, graduated from Hunter College and received a master's degree in special education from the Bank Street College.
She is a teacher and therapist at the Karen Horney Clinic in New York, a therapeutic nursery for developmentally delayed children.
Her mother is an editor for Cambridge University Press in New York.


The Evergreens Have It, Every Season
SINCE this is a day to relax and enjoy, it might be helpful to review why so many Christmas traditions are, well, traditional.
Greenery has always dominated holiday decorations.
Bright velvet bows, colored balls and plastic berries may be added with regularity for reasons of sentiment or taste, but the greens always form the background.
This greenery could be clippings from the yew hedge, branches of holly purchased at the garden shop or light twigs snipped from the yard's trees.
In all cases, this decorating flourish reflects an old belief that evergreens symbolize eternal life.


Pollution Action Turns to Urban Runoff
In a case that could set a national precedent, A Federal judge has become the first to enforce a section of the nation's Clean Water Act that requires public agencies to reduce the levels of solvents, lawn chemicals and heavy metals that flow into the nation's waterways from streets and storm drains.
Calling the law a "national priority," Judge Edward Rafeedie of Federal District Court ruled on Dec. 14 that the California Department of Transportation must curtail the release of millions of gallons of contaminants that have found their way to the Pacific Ocean near Southern California.
He had previously found the department in violation of the 1987 Clean Water Act at a hearing in November.


F.Y.I.
Masonic Mysticism
Q.
There's a building on West 73d with these huge globes on its front that light up and give off a strange Gothic effect.
What's the story of the globes, and the rest of the building?


Crime
Unlike a rose, a cop is not a cop is not a cop.
Not, at least, in the pages of the American police procedural, which turns out lawmen with such distinctive regional markings they wouldn't make it alive over the state line.
Joe Gunther, the square-jawed chief of detectives who keeps the peace in Brattleboro, Vt., in Archer Mayor's FRUITS OF THE POISONOUS TREE (Mysterious Press/Warner, $19.95), and Joe Kiley, the scrappy street cop from Chicago in Clark Howard's CITY BLOOD (Otto Penzler, $23), are a couple of genre specimens who would probably shoot each other on sight.
It's a real education to follow their antithetical philosophies and to watch the radically different styles of law enforcement they bring to similar problems.


At Soup Kitchens, Demand Rises, But Supplies and Funds Are Low
OFFICIALS at nonprofit organizations that care for the poor say they are having a hard time keeping pace with the demand for food this winter.
A Federal emergency food program has been drastically cut, and holiday donations of food and money are somewhat down from last year.
At the same time, requests for perishable and nonperishable food items are up substantially.
Several organizations say the new demand is coming from pockets of rural as well as urban poverty.
Most of the increase, said Pattie Apgar, director of the Northwest Community Action Program in Phillipsburg, consists of "working people who either don't have a job or have one that pays them minimum wage -- people who never imagined they would need a service like ours."


The Tears on One Soap Opera Were Real, While a Drama and a Comedy Rang True
Poignancy on MTV -- Television "entertainment" transcended itself, movingly, with Pedro Zamora, a Cuban immigrant with AIDS who joined the San Francisco commune created for MTV's "Real World," the "real-life soap opera" series.
Between lecturing student groups about unprotected sex and coping with the hostility of a narcissistic housemate, Mr.
Zamora evolved, over eight one-hour episodes, into the group's spiritual anchor.
A November marathon cablecast of the entire series took place just two days after Mr.
Zamora's death, at age 22.
The soap opera did indeed turn profoundly real.


Memorial to Weprin Stalls Over 'Boulevard'
Soon after Saul Weprin died in February, his family started efforts to name 188th Street after the late Assembly Speaker.
The two-lane residential street, on which the much beloved political fixture of northeast Queens raised three sons, would be renamed Saul Weprin Boulevard.
The process was going smoothly. Until two weeks ago.


Terrorism: Difficult to Prevent or Forget
There is something about a bomb attack -- like the letter bombings in the Unabom case or Wednesday's firebombing on the subway -- that provoke a particularly intense fear.
The explosions seem to come out of nowhere, transforming an ordinary routine like going to work or opening a package into a deadly act.
And, there is the randomness of it, the fact that it can seemingly happen anyplace and at any time.
Yet despite last week's explosion on the subway, which injured more than 40 people, as well as the vastly larger blast at the World Trade Center nearly two years ago, officials and experts on security and terrorism were cautioning against overreacting to what were terrible but very rare incidents.


An Industry in Need of Regulation
To the Editor:
In "Stop the Subsidies to Europe's Airlines" (Viewpoints, Nov. 27), Lawrence Chimerine and Gregory Stanko recite one of the ancient economic beliefs that was used to justify airline deregulation.
The argument was and is that economic regulation, including cash subsidies, perpetuates overcapacity (too many flights); in a free market, competition forces airlines to cut capacity.


Toilets at the Ready, Flushed With Pride to Help a Cause
New Yorkers have seen all manner of unusual stunts by political demonstrators, from the Greenpeace zealots who dangled off the Triborough Bridge in protest of sewage dumping in the Atlantic to the animal-rights advocates who marched naked up Fifth Avenue to protest fur coats.
Now, a group of upper Manhattan leaders is planning a new one: a "flush-in" of hundreds of thousands of people flushing their toilets at the same time.


The World; U.S. Stays Aloof From Russia's War Within
RUSSIA'S pro-democracy movement was outraged as Moscow's troops tightened their grip around Grozny last week.
But the Clinton Administration, which says it shares the goals of the democracy advocates, all but blessed President Boris N. Yeltsin's efforts to bring the breakaway Chechen republic to heel.
The Russian military campaign there barely rated a mention when Defense Secretary William J. Perry met in Moscow on Dec. 16 with Gen.
Mikhail Kolesnikov, the chief of Russian general staff, to talk about Bosnia and NATO issues.
And after his trip, Mr.
Perry repeated the Administration's line, that Russia's handling of Chechnya was an internal affair, though one Washington hoped would involve a minimal amount of bloodshed.


New Orleans Journal; On Bourbon And Canal, Santa Plays A Cool Sax
Santa Claus is blowing a cool saxophone near the corner of Bourbon and Canal.
Now and then someone flips a quarter in his box, and the old man behind the dime-store beard dips his head in thanks, and puffs a little more soul into "Silent Night."
It is probably not the real Santa. Everybody knows, Santa don't play the blues.


Time Travel in Heathen Muscovy
SLEEPER AT HARVEST TIME  By Leonid Latynin.
Translated by Andrew Bromfield.
Illustrated. 184 pp.
Boston:  Zephyr Press.
Cloth, $21.
Paper, $11.


To Pay the Pollution Cleanup Piper, Call for a Plume-Dater
RICHARD GREENBERG is a 35-year-old entrepreneur with a Ph.D. in chemistry and a specialty that has made him one of the most sought-after expert witnesses in high-stakes environmental litigation.
As a leading practitioner of plume-dating, he seeks to determine when underground chemical pollution took place -- a finding with multimillion-dollar implications.
Mr.
Greenberg is the founder of Environmental Waste Management Associates, an environmental consulting firm based in Wayne.
The company specializes in providing pollution cleanup and environmental consulting for corporate customers.
Over the last few years, however, Mr.
Greenberg has carved out a niche for himself as an expert witness in lawsuits brought to determine who is to blame for pollution and who is to pay for getting rid of it.


A Worthy Veteran Triumphs Amid New Faces (and a Facade)
Domingo Spins Magic -- Crowning a triumphant season, Placido Domingo brought his interpretation of Verdi's Otello to the Metropolitan Opera in March.
To paraphrase the Bard, there was magic in the web of it.


ALSO INSIDE
URBAN DECORATOR 3  These trees aren't the Christmas kind.
They're public trees, decorated with bits of the city blown, or thrown, skyward.
NEW YORKERS &amp; CO. 4  Last spring, Shade magazine was born with big ambitions.
Now it's suspending publication.
A cautionary tale.
PLAYING IN THE NEIGHBORHOOD 4  A tot's "Nutcracker" and Babar on the screen: holiday events for children.
LETTERS 7  Jackson Heights joys; landlords' woes; the Dominican community, well served.
GOOD EATING 10  East-West in Manhattan's Mideast: Pakoras at Akbar, dumplings at Shun Lee, enchiladas at Arizona 206 Cafe.
SOAPBOX 11  Hunters Point: a time warp worth saving.
Plus Photographer's Journal and a tale from the Christmas lost and found.


The World; Defying the Skies in Chechnya
SOME of the worst people in the world live in this city: murderers, thugs, drug dealers and thieves.
On bomb-cratered streets, stolen Mercedeses and BMW's still have their Moscow license plates.
Last week, new Volvos were going for $3,000.
Molotov cocktails are stacked in the pantry of one of the city's only functioning restaurants.
But anyone who looks at Chechnya and just sees a bunch of gangsters isn't looking very hard.
There is an honesty and sincerity among the people here that disappeared from the cash-crazed streets of Moscow a long time ago.


A Tale of Old Christmas Eve
"Will ye come?" Harold's raised voice rang metallic in the space before Bett's crumbling front porch, no proper yard at all but only a hand-span cut through the brush with a swing-blade, maybe.
"Will ye not come?"


The 1994 Honor Roll (of Sorts)
1994 will be remembered with fondness by Republicans, but investors may agree more with Democrats in wishing it had never happened.
Rising rates hurt bondholders -- and a California county.
A big brokerage firm learned its ace bond trader wasn't really trading.
And arithmetic tripped up computers and money managers alike.
On with the awards!
By Floyd Norris.
Consumer Deception Award
To Intel, which discovered in July that its Pentium computer chip has a small problem -- it sometimes messes up long division problems that a smart fifth-grader could handle.
Instead of disclosing the bug, Intel went on promoting the chip as the best on the market.
It fell to Thomas R. Nicely, a professor in Virginia, to let the rest of us know.
Foreign Aid Award
To CS First Boston and Lehman Brothers.
Between them, they raised $958 million by selling stock in two electric utilities that had been owned by the Chinese Government.
Neither found much interest among investors, although the underwriters presumably made friends in Beijing.
By Christmas, the value of the stock was down to $709 million.
Mr.
Magoo Award
To General Electric, which reported hundreds of millions in false profits from its Kidder Peabody brokerage firm, only to belatedly figure out that its top trader, Joseph Jett, was recording nonexistent trades. 19th Hole Award
To L. Glenn Orr, the outgoing chairman and chief executive of the Southern National Corporation, a North Carolina bank holding company.
Forced to leave as part of a merger deal, Mr.
Orr, 54, negotiated a deal that will pay his country club dues for life.
Otherwise, he might have had to pay greens fees out of the $1.66 million-a-year salary that he is also to get for life.
Should he die before his wife, she would get the cash for the rest of her life, but have to pay her own club dues.
Gunsmoke Only Award
To Smith &amp; Wesson, the gun maker, for promising in help-wanted ads to provide a "smoke-free workplace."  Neighborhood Leader Award
To Burton Lifland, the bankruptcy judge overseeing the Macy's case.
Although no party had raised the issue, he ordered Macy to keep its July 4 fireworks on Manhattan's East Side, not far from his apartment.
Mark to Theory Award
To David Askin of Askin Capital Management, who figured his computers knew more than the markets did.
So he told investors the mortgage derivative securities his firm owned were worth what the model said, not what bidders were willing to pay.
By the time investors found out what was really going on, most of the capital was gone.
Brooklyn Bridge Award
To Marion Merrell Dow, which claimed it had invested with Askin after being promised that it could earn 15 percent a year with virtually no risk.
Arthur in Wonderland Award
To Arthur Levitt, chairman of the Securities and Exchange Commission.
After the Financial Accounting Standards Board caved in to political pressure and abandoned an effort to force companies to recognize the expense of stock options given to executives, Mr.
Levitt praised the F.A.S.B.'s "great courage." Lemon Underwriter Award
To Merrill Lynch and Rauscher Pierce Refnes.
In June, after interest rates had begun to leap, Rauscher Pierce underwrote $200 million in bonds so that school districts in Orange County, Calif., could put extra money in the county's investment fund.
A month later, Merrill did the same for $600 million in county notes.
No one noticed that the fund -- highly leveraged and stuffed full of securities whose value dropped as rates rose -- was losing money at a rapid rate.
A few months later the fund's woes threw the county into bankruptcy.
Sure Thing Award
To A. Lorne Weil, chairman and chief executive of the Autotote Corporation, a supplier of gambling equipment.
Using a derivative called an equity swap, he effectively sold 500,000 shares of Autotote for $26.78 a share -- but in a way that dodges capital gains taxes and keeps the votes for himself.
By late December, the stock price was just above $13.
Penny Stock Award
To M. H. Meyerson &amp; Company, a penny stock peddler that went public by issuing -- what else? -- a penny stock.
Those who got in on the offering, at $4 for a share and a warrant, and got out quickly, doubled their money.
But within a few months the package sold for under $2.
Name Change Award
To Repossession Auction, a peddler of used cars, which sought to cash in on the casino stock craze.
It changed its name to Latin American Casinos and announced plans to put slots in Peru.
Top Bargainer Award
To Sumner M. Redstone, chairman of Viacom Inc., who ignored advice to sweeten the terms of Viacom's offer for Blockbuster Entertainment.
Viacom's stock price plunged after it won the battle to buy Paramount Communications, making the deal with Blockbuster look like it would never get shareholder approval.
He sat tight, the Viacom share price rallied and Viacom got Blockbuster on the original terms.
Bottom Bargainer Award
To David Mathis of the Kemper Corporation.
He fought bitterly when General Electric tried to buy his company just as its performance was souring.
In the end, his preferred suitor was unable to finance a deal and G.E. was unwilling to spend anything like what it had previously offered.
And Kemper stock fell to below where it was before the takeover fight erupted.
Fumbled I.P.O.
Award
To Las Vegas Major League Sports Inc., owner of the Las Vegas team in the Canadian Football League.
It went public in April at $8 for a unit of two shares and a warrant to buy another share.
The units topped $11 in May, but as the team headed toward last place it stayed in business only with loans from the league.
The units now are worth less than $2.
Remedial Arithmetic Award
To Fidelity Investments, for miscalculating, by $2.4 billion, the amount of profits in its Magellan Fund.
Fidelity won't say how it made the error.


The Giants All Agree: This Was Dallas Lite
There's no question that when the Giants and Dallas Cowboys think about this game, both will remember the Giants' final drive, the one where Giants players say the Cowboys looked like they weren't playing to win but instead were playing not to get hurt.
And amazingly, some Dallas players said the same thing.


New 'Helpful' Curbs Handicap the Handicapped
It may sound pedestrian, but some people have a serious beef with the person who decided to construct curb cuts -- or pedestrian ramps, as they are also known -- at the apex of street corners.
The problem?
First, these one-per-corner curb cuts are wider than the more common two-per-corner perpendicular cuts.


In This Season, American Troops Remain on Duty in Haiti
To the Editor:
My son, a mechanic in the United States Army's 10th Mountain Division in Haiti, called me a Sunday or two ago.


Giants Get Every Gift but One: A Playoff Spot
The gifts weren't under the tree but strewn all about the football field.
Dallas's all-world running back Emmitt Smith sat on the sidelines and watched the game with a sore hamstring.
The Cowboys' quarterback, Troy Aikman, played less than a half.
Later, their star receiver, Michael Irvin, found a spot on the bench.
There was a sloppy mix of wind and rain, which meant it was either reindeer weather or Giants football weather.
The Giants won their sixth straight game today, beating a watered down Cowboy team, 15-10, and ending the season at 9-7.
But for all the things that fell into place for the Giants, one crucial thing did not.
To make the playoffs, the Giants first had to beat Dallas and then have Green Bay lose to Tampa Bay.
They had one foot in the playoff door, but any time a team is relying on the Buccaneers, it is in trouble.
Tampa Bay was never in the game and was beaten handily by the Packers, 34-19.


Images of 3 Worlds: Asian, Gay and Black
Looking East -- With the opening of the Metropolitan Museum of Art's long-awaited Irving Galleries for the Arts of South and Southeast Asia in April, East met West in a big way.
The installation looked dazzling.
And to walk its processional route from Indian terra cottas to Himalayan bronzes to Cambodian stone figures was to enter a magical world.
The galleries marked a watershed both for Asian culture in the city and for a museum whose claim to be encyclopedic took a giant step closer to reality.


The True Meaning Of Christmas
All month long, the children of St.
Saviour's Elementary School in Brooklyn were reminded that Christmas is about the birth of Jesus.
They were made intimate with the deep pleasures of sharing and giving.
They understood.
It made sense.
But it was still hard for them to forget about Power Rangers.
"Constantly, I would say, let's remember the real meaning of Christmas," Jennifer Buonafede, a prekindergarten teacher, said last week.
"I'd tell them that presents aren't everything. It's better to give than to receive. The mood would last about two seconds, and then they were back to what they wanted to get -- the Barbies and the Power Rangers."


The Beckoning Frontier of the New and the Rare
THERE is a sort of gardener who, on being shown around a new place, glances calmly about, spots a plant and suddenly stiffens, as if stuck with a pin.
"What is that?" exclaims the gardener, moving toward it quickly.


The Executive Computer; In Marketing Wars, Apple Holds Its Fire
IF there was ever any question which was the kinder, gentler computer company -- Apple Computer or I.B.M. -- their respective handlings of the recent missteps at Intel and Microsoft should set aside all doubt.
I.B.M. played pit bull, Apple pussycat.
It doesn't necessarily mean that the people at Apple are fundamentally nicer -- just that they have their own good reasons for diplomacy.


Gunman, 22, Is Shot At a Brooklyn Club
A 22-year-old man who opened fire at four police officers outside a Brooklyn nightclub early yesterday was shot by them and charged with attempted murder, the police said.
The man, Juan Pablo Andujhl of 660 Miller Avenue in East New York, Brooklyn, was in stable condition at the Brookdale Hospital Medical Center with bullet wounds in the face and left arm.


Breathing New Life Into Albee And Shakespeare, And a Tale Told By a Dead Man
Spontaneous Shakespeare -- In the prologue of the all-male Cheek by Jowl production of "As You Like It," seen at the Brooklyn Academy of Music in the fall, one actor abruptly smeared another's cheeks with mud.
With that gesture, a blank white stage, inhabited by a corps of identically dressed men, was transformed into a pulsing, spontaneous-seeming world: an instant metamorphosis that defined the elemental magic at the root of all theater.
Albee Reborn -- Early in the first act of "Three Tall Women," which opened at the Vineyard Theater in February, there was a jubilant moment when it became clear that Edward Albee had discovered a brilliant, barbed cosmic poetry in the wandering rhythms of a mean old woman's senile speech and that in the magnificent Myra Carter, he had just the right actress to put it across.
Even for those who had written off Mr.
Albee, it was a luminous signal that this major playwright's career had been reborn.


Gunmen in Algeria Seize French Plane; Scores Held Captive
Four armed men believed to be Islamic fundamentalists seized control of an Air France plane at Algiers airport shortly before noon today as it prepared to take off on a scheduled flight to Paris.
Air France said there were 271 passengers and 12 crew members; the Algerian Interior Ministry put the number of passengers and crew at 232.
Algerian Government officials said tonight that the gunmen had killed at least two men among the passengers and had announced their intention of forcing the plane to fly to an unknown destination.
The gunmen released 57 Algerian passengers, mainly women and children.


Rough Days on the Magazine-Start-Up Front
IT was early spring of 1993 when Sheryl Huggins and Beverley Williams went over to a friend's Harlem loft and began kicking around the idea of starting a magazine devoted to black music, fashion and urban street culture.
"As I recall, I was the one who said we could do it," said Ms.
Huggins, who had worked as a freelance writer and an editor for community newspapers in Brooklyn and New Jersey.
"We all had ideas, and I said I could get the financing."


The Poetry of the Everyday, Then a Nude Attacked a Piano
A Mysterious Connection -- People and objects, mysteriously connected, formed a glowing microcosm in Steve Gross's "Crush and Glitter," at the Dia Center in October.
When RoseAnne Spradlin lowered her head slowly into the empty dish she had just unpacked and then raised it -- her face and long hair suddenly and surprisingly gleaming with water -- she proved the power of dance to distill the poetry of the everyday.
The Face of AIDS -- Neil Greenberg walked forward in his "Not-About-AIDS-Dance" at the Kitchen in May and stood still, his face becoming the sweet, sleeping face of a brother dying of AIDS.
The moment humanized a plague and a political issue, in the process suggesting that dance can uniquely cut to the heart of even complex social problems, without rhetoric.


Plan for S.I.-Midtown Ferry About to Go to City Council for Vote
A contract for a long-awaited ferry route between Staten Island and midtown Manhattan is about to be submitted to the City Council for approval.
An approval would clear the way for service to begin in the spring of 1996.
Details of the plan have been taking shape for months.
Under the proposal, the New York Fast Ferry Services company would run three high-speed boats between St.
George, S.I., and the Union Ferry Terminal at the foot of West 39th Street, a 10-mile trip, in 18 minutes.
The 350-seat vessels would be built at a shipyard in Mamaroneck.


More Lights for a Deadly Parkway
In a victory for community leaders who have waged a long struggle for more traffic lights on Brooklyn's deadliest street, the Department of Transportation has approved new left-turn signals for the 18th Avenue and Avenue I intersections on Ocean Parkway in Midwood.
Since 1988, there have been more than 30 traffic fatalities on Ocean Parkway, which runs six miles from Church Avenue in Flatbush to Brighton Beach Avenue in Coney Island.


Bankruptcy Termed Highly Unlikely For Westchester
A DAY after well-to-do Orange County in California filed for bankruptcy protection, Stephen V. Reitano, Westchester's Finance Commissioner, fired off a press release.
From his offices in the county seat, Mr.
Reitano said that what happened a continent away could never happen here.
"Our investment policy has been and is purposefully conservative," Mr.
Reitano said, adding that Westchester law allows only nonspeculative investments.


School Board President Gains New Respect in Cortines Fight
The first time Carol A. Gresser took heat from City Hall over a school leader's future came last year, when Mayor David N. Dinkins pressured her for a week to cast her Board of Education vote to renew Chancellor Joseph A. Fernandez's contract.
Portrayed by some as an impressionable political novice, she nonetheless resisted the pressure and was the decisive vote in Mr.
Fernandez's ouster.
Last week, Mrs.
Gresser emerged triumphant from a second round of mayoral testing after rallying support for Chancellor Ramon C. Cortines in the face of a campaign by Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani to persuade him to step down.
And this time, educators and politicians were portraying Mrs.
Gresser, now the board's president, with a good deal more deference.


INSIDE
U.S. Pilot Still Held
Christmas Eve came and went, but the United States reported no progress is winning release of a pilot held by North Korea since his copter went down a week ago.
Page 12.
Peso's Political Fallout
The devaluation of Mexico's peso not only forces the Government to revise its economic strategy but it also will bring political problems if Government spending is cut.
Page 14.
Growing Force in the Schools
The Board of Education President, Carol Gresser, has a newfound reputation for firm leadership.
Page 33.


Profile; The Beard Is Real. The Joy Is Real. (Shhh: So Is He.)
IT's debated in every household.
Various films grapple with the issue -- from "The Santa Clause" to "Miracle on 34th Street." It's clearly time to put this raging controversy to rest.
Yes, there is in fact a Santa Claus, though -- don't breathe a word! -- he sometimes goes by the name Brady White. (For simplicity's sake, and to avoid offending non-believers, we'll just call him Mr. White.)


POSTINGS: N.Y.U. Completes a Renovation; Social Work Brownstones
The three brownstone buildings at 1, 2 and 3 Washington Square North in Greenwich Village have a colorful artistic and literary history.
The artists William Glackens, Ernest Lawson, Guy Pene duBois, Rockwell Kent and Edward and Jo Hopper lived and worked there, as did the poet E. E. Cummings, the novelist John Dos Passos and the critic Edmund Wilson.
On the fourth floor of No. 3, Hopper's easel is preserved.
These days the three buildings belong to New York University, and N.Y.U. has just completed $5 million worth of extensive interior renovations for its new Center for Social Work.
The center houses the Shirley M. Ehrenkrantz School of Social Work, named for a former dean who died last summer.
It includes conference rooms, classrooms, meeting areas, offices and a student lounge.


No Reading Behind the Lines
In Canada, court censorship of the media is not as difficult as it is in this country.
And the photograph, above, of two pages in "Karla's Web: A Cultural Investigation of the Mahaffy-French Murders," by Frank Davey, shows what it looks like.
The idea is to make sure that the accused gets a fair trial, to prevent prejudicial publicity.
In this case, Karla Homolka was convicted of two counts of manslaughter in July 1993.
But a ban on certain details remains because Paul Bernardo, Homolka's husband, has yet to be tried for the grisly murders.
Penguin Books Canada responded to the ban with a solution that also works as a sales gimmick.
They blacked-out the contraband information, about 2 percent of the text.
Each book comes with a postcard to send in, once the ban is lifted, for the missing details.
Neither Penguin nor the author (who supports the ban) will disclose what information was blacked out.


New Year's Eve Galas Include Foie Gras in a Towel
SIMPLE fare and sophisticated feasts, one-man bands and 19-piece orchestras, $100-a-person bills and regular a la carte prices are all on the agenda for New Year's Eve.
The last dinner of the old year can be eaten in settings as varied as an Art Deco spot overlooking Huntington Harbor, a spiffy diner in Southampton or a bar stool in East Hampton.
There will even be a New Year's Day hangover clinic for those who have celebrated too strenuously.


Using Government Waste
When the White House wound up with a ton of asbestos-laden junk from a recent renovation project, it had no trouble getting rid of it.
A Catholic University physics professor, Pete Macedo, happily melted it into harmless chunks of black glass.
Macedo's Vitreous State Laboratory, which has experimented for more than a decade with safe ways to dispose of dangerous waste, treated the White House refuse at 2,200 degrees in an electric furnace.
The result is "absolutely safe," he says.
"You could make drinking glasses out of this." Crafts people who want to take him at his word can obtain the glass free (1,000 pounds are available) from Macedo or through an environmental technology company, GTS Duratek of Columbia, Md.
Tel. (410) 312-5100.


Never Mind; Reform Taxes? Give Us a Break!
AT this time 10 years ago, politicians and lobbyists throughout the capital were digging their trenches for the forthcoming battle over rewriting the United States tax code.
What followed over the next two years was one of the fiercest legislative fights in this century.
In the end, against heavy odds because the stakes were so high, a tax system that was universally seen as hideously complicated and inequitable was completely overhauled.
The principle behind the new law, one that academic authorities had advocated for years, was to keep rates as low as possible and to allow relatively few deductions, exemptions and other exceptions.


Tsongas, Soured on Clinton, Looks to Powell
Paul E. Tsongas, Bill Clinton's most formidable rival in the Democratic Presidential primaries in 1992, has so soured on the President that he is strongly encouraging the notion of a third-party candidacy in 1996.
And he says that Gen.
Colin L. Powell might make the best candidate.
After months of refraining from any harsh criticism of Mr.
Clinton, Mr.
Tsongas has embarked on a personal campaign in which he argues that the President not only lacks moral conviction but is also pursuing irresponsible policies, like promises of tax cuts for the middle class.


Dislike Those Suspenders? Don't Complain, Quantify!
WELL, it's over.
That monthlong shopping frenzy is ending in a stunningly quick blizzard of wrapping paper and ribbon, glee and gratitude (and occasional gloom).
This orgy of altruism, though, can leave some people (dare one say it?) with a vague sense of unease -- a sense that somehow that Lucite swan from Great Aunt Clara was not quite the best of all possible gifts.


Transcendent Voices: 3 Who Bridged The Decades With Song
A Majestic Streisand -- Barbra Streisand's return to the concert stage in June after a 27-year absence was a once-in-a-lifetime event that the singer made the most of by following up her tour with a Home Box Office special, a two-disk album and a videocassette of her performance.
The high point of it all was the moment Ms.
Streisand stepped onto the stage of the USAir Arena in Landover, Md.
Like an exiled queen returning to claim her throne, she delivered a thrilling rendition of "As if We Never Said Goodbye," from "Sunset Boulevard." With its lyrics emended for the occasion, and sung with a 65-piece orchestra, it became a grand pop aria and the perfect opening salvo of a concert tour that re-established Ms.
Streisand as pop music's reigning diva.


Canine Guide to New York
St.
Patrick's Cathedral is definitely off-limits.
But according to a new book, "The Dogs' Guide to New York City" (Richmond Press), well-trained canines, accompanied by equally well-behaved humans, can visit a surprising number of New York's department stores, specialty shops and even hotels.
"The best way to get into a store with a dog is to walk with a sense of purpose," according to the author, Jane M. Rohman, who, with her 85-pound golden retriever, Fred, found more than 200 Fido-friendly walks, shops and services.


Family Programs Fill Week After Christmas
CHRISTMAS is a family holiday, and over the next few days there will be children's programs all across the county.
For the 15th year, the Paper Bag Players are spending their pre-New Year's week at the Emelin Theater in Mamaroneck.
The troupe is giving the musical " 'Rubbish!' She Cried," which takes "a whimsical look at the environment and recycling, with imagination and surprises." The show, intended for children 4 through 9, will be performed tomorrow through Friday at 11:30 A.M. and 1:30 P.M.


In Mourning for the Lives Lost to Drunken Driving
PHOTOGRAPHS of Regina Baker, Michael Tesler, Edward Farrell, Lisa Marie LaRochelle and many, many others were displayed on the altar of United Methodist Church in Gales Ferry.
Their smiling faces belied their circumstances.
All had been either injured or killed as a result of drunken driving.
About 65 family members and friends attending a candlelight vigil sponsored by Mothers Against Drunk Driving came forward one by one and lit candles in memory of those whose young, promising lives had been wiped out by drunken drivers.
The church was decorated for Christmas.
But there were tears instead of celebration.


Theatrics on the Public Stage, and the Nation Was the Audience
Small-Screen Theatrics -- Try though one may, who can forget the peculiarly stately O. J. Simpson pilgrimage along the Los Angeles freeways in June, cheered on by fun lovers and watched by millions who never saw him run for a touchdown or an airplane?
Or the legion of lawyers, witnesses, relatives, friends, rented experts and television personages tumbling like a troop of clowns from a Ford Bronco.
The tabloid shows and news magazines produced enough steam to heat California's courts until the end of the trial.


The Avenue of Splendor, Past and Present
Fifth Avenue is most brilliant when dressed for Christmas.
From its residential beginnings downtown in 1826 to its development uptown around the turn of the century, it has remained the centerpiece of the city's holiday celebration.
And once more this season, it has retained many of its traditions.
Sightseers in midtown took trips down memory lane in horse-drawn carriages and even a hay wagon.
Caroling, once performed on mansion stoops, resounded from church steps.
The Salvation Army, whose red kettles first appeared on the avenue in 1899, spread the spirit of sharing.
And double-decker buses, first on the street in 1908, were there again, this time bearing tourists and even Santa Claus.


Colleges Luring Students With Discounts in Tuition
It is not quite the "These-deals-are-INSA-A-ANE" world of late-night stereo and sleep-sofa ads, but increasingly discount merchandising is coming to academia.
At Lehigh University here, a new program allows top students to get a fifth year of undergraduate or graduate education free, and the university, for the first time, has offered scholarships not based on financial need as a way to attract top students.


SURFACING
Beverage  Holiday beers: It's a bumper crop this year of specially produced traditional Christmas lagers, ales, stouts and porters, with almost two dozen available in stores and bars.


Who Was Jesus? A Search for Clues Grows
On this day in particular, Christian churches proclaim the story of Jesus, a Savior conceived by the Holy Spirit and born of a virgin.
But ever since the Enlightenment in the 18th century, some people have hungered for more, a way to reach beyond the creeds to Jesus the man, a historical figure who can be known in human terms much like, say, Washington, Charlemagne or Julius Caesar.


A Christmas Reversal
In December of 1883, 40 years after Charles Dickens's "A Christmas Carol" was first published, this page may have sounded its most curmudgeonly note ever.
That was the year in which The Times approvingly noted that there seemed to be a decline in the popularity of "the German Christmas Tree -- a rootless and lifeless corpse."
On its German origins we were not mistaken, unless scholarly readers insist on examining the pagan roots of the festal use of greenery at the winter solstice, including the various forms of Saturnalia, and Celtic and Nordic tree worship.


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
SCIENTIFIC MAZE
An amazing maze is on exhibit at Scienceport in White Plains through Jan. 22.
The new participatory museum entices children and adults into the world of science by means of entertainment.
The current exhibition is a 2,500-square-foot labyrinth into which the visitor steps and eventually emerges at the other end, or back at the beginning, or wherever the maze makers intended.


Critic's Choice: A Fond Look Back at the Favorites of '94
IT is time again to look back at the restaurants reviewed in the past year that were rated Very Good or Excellent.
As usual, the Excellent were few -- a mere 3 in 1994 -- and the Very Good ones, just 14.
The only discernible trend was that many new restaurants continue to be Italian, but relatively few have risen above the ho-hum level.


London, 1788


Skiing the Adirondacks' Jackrabbit Trail
LIKE many cross-country skiers, I am a former downhiller who became disenchanted with crowded slopes, long lift lines and the increasing expense of lift tickets.
Cross-country provided an attractive alternative -- solitude, aerobic exercise and low cost -- but the excitement of skiing varied terrain in scenic settings was not to be found on the typical prairielike golf course trails.
Last year, however, some of my neighbors in the upstate Adirondack Mountain village of Lake Placid, N.Y., told me about the Jackrabbit Trail system, a 25-mile network of groomed trails that takes skiers deep into the forests and brings them back to comfortable lodges with pub menus and roaring fires.


School Days And Beyond
To the Editor
It is an amazing coincidence that of the five pianists mentioned in "A Fresh Relic of a 'Lost Generation' "  [ Dec. 11 ] , three attended C.G.S., which is now Columbia Grammar and Prep, on 93d Street near Central Park West in Manhattan.
In addition to Mr.
Janis, students included William Kapell and Gary Graffman.


Dec. 18-24; Baseball Returns To Washington
Maybe you haven't noticed it -- you can observe a lot by watching -- but Washington and Major League Baseball are converging.
Before the original Senators snuck out of town back in '61, they played both baseball and politics hard but clean.
The players were innocents, in it for the love of the game.
Fans were admiring and loyal.
And now?
The leagues are in gridlock, the players throw firecrackers and peddle their books, commissioners are just figureheads.
As far as the fans are concerned, you can t'row da bums out.


Exhibit by Italian-Americans Poses Question About Ethnicity
AT Krasdale Foods Gallery here, "The Art of Italian-Americans" comes right out in its subtitle with the question that so often underlies shows of this kind: "Is Ethnicity Relevant?"
Reviewers who have covered their share of ethnic art might well respond with another question: "Relevant to What?" After all, a device that was introduced 30 or so years ago as a means of highlighting and rectifying the discrimination visited on black artists has become little more than a gimmick available to any group that, for whatever reason, would secede from the herd.


Streetscapes/The 1893 Church of the Master; Reviving a Building Unused for 20 Years
THEY don't want Nintendo, or a BMW, or Candyland Bingo, or new skis.
All the congregation at the Church of the Master, at West 122d Street and Morningside Avenue, wants today is its own church.
Members walked away from the little 1893 structure 20 years ago because of concerns about its structural safety.
But the pastor, the Rev.
Glen C. Missick, has found no real reason for the closing, and is trying to raise the $700,000 required to repair the damage of a generation of neglect.


2 Ships to Ply The Pacific Northwest
Summer is a prime time to travel on the Columbia River and Snake River in the Pacific Northwest, but suitable vessels are usually in Alaskan waters then.
Now Alaska Sightseeing/Cruise West is putting the newly refurbished Spirit of Columbia into service for seven-night cruises out of Portland, Ore., from March 25 to Nov. 18.
The 80-passenger vessel, launched in 1979, will make a 1,000-mile round trip tracing the final leg of the Lewis and Clark Expedition of 1804 to 1806.


Luck Runs Out
To the Sports Editor:
When Harvey Araton chided Patrick Ewing for not sounding off at John Starks in Game 7 of the N.B.A.
Finals (" 'Riley's Son' Is a Net in Knicks Clothing," The Times, Dec. 12), his blame was misplaced.
The person who should have taken action was Pat Riley.
It should have been obvious that Starks was not on target.


Four Weddings, a Funeral, a Party (That Fizzled) and a Nasty Encounter
Pulp Samurai -- About to escape the hellish pawnshop in "Pulp Fiction," Bruce Willis chose to go back and do the right thing.
He tried out weapons -- a hammer? a baseball bat? a chain saw? -- and selected a samurai sword as the perfect implement for his mission.
That gesture affirmed both the wild humor and the unexpected decency of Quentin Tarantino's exultantly imaginative crime drama, the very best film of the year.
Film Verse -- The graveside scene in "Four Weddings and a Funeral," when one character eulogized a dead friend, did wonders for W. H. Auden, bringing one of his untitled poems great new popularity and even a name ("Funeral Blues").
Not a bad byproduct for this sparkling, literate English comedy.


Bavaria
To the Editor: "Hiking the Bavarian Way" (Sept. 4) provided information that was right on the mark for this old hiker.


Journal; Where Christmas Went
Pop culture is the emotional weather of our country, and it is never more oppressive than at Christmas, when it reaches blizzard force.
Thinking back on the Christmas days of my own childhood, I find my recollections, however joyous or sad, inevitably accompanied by a jarring soundtrack not of my own choosing.
It's hard to summon up platonic, Truman Capote-esque Christmas memories when Alvin and the Chipmunks are lodged permanently in your brain.
This holiday season pop culture is ruled by one man -- a nondescript-looking stand-up comic named Tim Allen.
Unlike John Lennon, he may actually rival Jesus' popularity.


Peso's Woes: A Very Familiar Diminuendo
IT has turned out to be a not-so-feliz Navidad for thousands of Americans who, wittingly or not, have invested in Mexico.
The value of their holdings plunged 30 percent in five short days last week purely because the Mexican Government could not or would not support the peso any longer.
United States mutual funds that specialize in Latin American stocks dropped as much as 15 percent, as did some international bond funds.
The Telefonos de Mexico shares that trade on the New York Stock Exchange are now worth about half what some investors paid for them in February.


Parcells's Patriots Surge Into Playoffs
Almost two months ago, Patriots Coach Bill Parcells started a whisper campaign to bolster his team's confidence.
At the time, New England had a dismal 3-6 record, was in a tailspin from four straight losses and faced the prospect of playing two division leaders -- Minnesota and San Diego -- back to back.
"He told us just to keep winning and good things would happen," said veteran tackle Bruce Armstrong.
"Then he told us if we kept winning we'd make the playoffs. Later he told us if we kept winning, they couldn't keep us out of the playoffs."


Islands of Light, of Ghosts and of the Mind
Luminous Lily Pads -- Dana Reitz and Sara Rudner balanced on lily pads of light on a stage floor dark as the deepest ocean in "Necessary Weather," their seamless collaboration with the lighting designer Jennifer Tipton at the Kitchen in March.
Hovering there, the pair of dancers were engulfed by a silence as solemn as organ music.
And when they started moving, light became a power that magically seemed to bring them out of a realm of shadows and then return them to it.
Private Yet Public -- Trisha Brown resolutely kept her back to the audience and her face averted from it in "If You Couldn't See Me," her solo at the Joyce Theater in May.
Yet she could not be ignored, for though she seemed to focus on something visible only to her, her intense concentration drew everyone's eyes always to her, making her private immersion a public concern.


Search Lags for Company To Run Idle Concrete Plant
After a yearlong search for a private company to run a troubled, city-subsidized concrete plant, the Giuliani administration is left with two candidates: a bidder who was previously rejected as unqualified and a contractor who was once linked to organized-crime payoffs.
Since the plant opened eight years ago at West 57th Street and the Hudson River, it has been beset by managerial shake-ups, ownership battles, complaints of inflated concrete costs for the city and bankruptcy.
Previous operators said that a construction slump in the city cut into their earnings and made the plant unprofitable.
It has not produced concrete this year.


Women 'Weeping' and Brave, Men Obsessed and Stylish, And the Artist as a Circus
What Wilke Knew -- Hannah Wilke's "Intra-Venus" series, seen in a posthumous show at Ronald Feldman Fine Arts in February, seared the psyche.
These large-scale color self-portraits showed a face and body ravaged, but a spirit untouched, by cancer, and cast her career in a new light.


Corrections
The Guide to New York Dining last Sunday misstated the telephone number for Maison Caribe on East 85th Street.
It is (212) 744-1227.
The guide also misstated the phone number and address of Gramercy Tavern.
The restaurant is at 42 East 20th Street; the number is (212) 477-0777.


In a Harsh Land, Faith at Christmas
MUCH more than at any time in recent years, Haitians have good reason to celebrate this Christmas.
The dictatorship that subjugated them has fallen, their beloved president-priest has returned to power and hope has been reborn.
But religion is deeply woven into the fabric of daily life here, so much so that even buses bear names like "Trust in God" or "God Knows." To a degree difficult to imagine elsewhere, Haitians testify daily, not just on holidays or in a church or in a time of reborn hope, to their belief in the redemptive power of faith.
"Here the scope of religion is wider than in the United States and other countries," said the Rev.
Jean-Yves Urfie, a French-born Roman Catholic priest who lived in New York City before transferring here and becoming a colleague and friend of President Jean-Bertrand Aristide.
"Maybe in the Middle Ages, France was just as religious as Haiti. But the question is what kind of religion do Haitians have?"


Mideast Manhattan: An East-West Mix
AKBAR * (212) 838-1717; 475 Park Avenue, near 57th Street; $$; all major credit cards


In America; Santa Claus?
The letter to The New York Times came from Yoshiyuki Miyashita, a third-grader in Kawasaki City, Kanagawa, Japan.
Yoshiyuki is a believer in Santa Claus.
"However," he writes, "there are now two opinions in my school. One is there is a Santa Claus. The other is there is no Santa Claus in this world. I was very confused. Please let me know that there is a Santa Claus around us or not."


They Also Play Who Stand and Watch
When you take the field for the regular-season finale with an 11-4 record and you have already clinched your division title and assured yourself of a bye week to start the playoffs, you don't worry too much if you win or lose that last game.
All you care about is staying healthy.
So the Dallas Cowboys were not draped in gloom after today's 15-10 loss to the Giants.
Their three key offensive players -- running back Emmitt Smith, quarterback Troy Aikman and flanker Michael Irvin -- were all questionable for the game because of injuries.
Aikman and Irvin played some and did not aggravate their injuries.
Smith did not even play.
He watched from the sideline, bundled against the wind and wet in a cold-weather sweat suit.


It's Father Gorman Versus the Sex Businesses
It is just before 10 A.M., and the Rev.
Richard Gorman is leading two visitors on a tour of Baychester's topless bars and sex clubs.
On Boston Road, the car stops at Fool's Paradise, housed in a squat, concrete structure whose facade is covered by a spray-painting of two suggestively clothed women.
The building used to be an auto-body shop, Father Gorman explains.


REPUBLICANS PLAN SWEEPING BARRIERS TO NEW U.S. RULES
House Republicans are preparing to push quickly next year for legislation that would radically restrict the Government's ability to regulate everything from auto safety to wilderness protection.
Republicans in the House have pledged to push to a vote within the first 100 days of the new Congressional session legislation that would increase the ability of groups affected by regulations to challenge them before they take effect or are even formally proposed.
For the first time, analyses of costs and benefits prepared in the initial phase of drafting regulations would be subject to review by outside experts, and these analyses could be challenged in court.


Conversations / Telford Taylor; The Laws of War Are Many, but Self-Interest Is the Only Enforcer
AT Nuremberg in 1945, a young American Army officer named Telford Taylor helped write the rules for prosecuting Goering and other top Nazis.
He went on to become chief prosecutor of their henchmen, and an authority on the laws of war.
Today he looks at Bosnia and warns: Don't expect any avenging angel in any courtroom to punish the war crimes of the Balkans.
If you want to do some good there, work for a truce that will stop the killing.
What the United Nations can do in Bosnia simply is not the same as what the Allies could do at Nuremberg, he maintains.
If anyone is tempted to hope otherwise, he implores that one thing be understood first: "The laws of war are going to be used only by those who think it will do them good."


NEW &amp; NOTEWORTHY
PICASSO AND DORA: A Personal Memoir By James Lord.
Fromm, $16.95.
The author met the painter and his onetime mistress Dora Maar toward the end of World War II.
He entered their lives brazenly, exited from them acrimoniously, and had intense relationships with both individuals in between.
The result is "a wickedly perceptive and daring book," James R. Mellow said here last year.
GHOSTS By John Banville.
Vintage International, $11.
The world of fine art becomes the world of fiction in this novel, which takes place on an unnamed island.
All the characters are somehow interested in imagery -- the cast includes an art forger, a photographer and several art historians -- and all are not quite what they seem, including the narrator, who appeared in Mr.
Banville's previous novel, "The Book of Evidence." Last year our reviewer, Wendy Lesser, said, "The achievement of 'Ghosts' is to use words as brushstrokes, to create in language an artwork that has all the appeal of a complex painting."  BIG BLUES: The Unmaking of IBM By Paul Carroll.
Crown, $14.
The author shows how I.B.M.'s rigid policies and company culture failed to keep pace with the times, with the resultant loss of dominance in the personal computer market.
It is "a detailed and devastating portrait," William Taylor said here last year.
GARBAGE By A. R. Ammons.
Norton, $9.
Winner of a National Book Award, this poem is a long ode to trash -- but it is also an autobiographical meditation and a reflection on humanity, which is, the poet points out not uncharitably, a form of garbage, too.
Last year our reviewer, Edward Hirsch, said, "In this major new installment to his life work, A. R. Ammons has given us an American testament." Mortality and trash are also subjects explored in THE ROAD TO SAN GIOVANNI, by Italo Calvino, translated by Tim Parks (Vintage International, $10).
In these five essays detailing his life and development as a writer, Calvino reflects on language and the significance of events like the disposal of rubbish, which he calls "an offering made to the underworld." The book is "a provocative reminder of how truly international" Calvino's writing is, Lawrence Venuti said here last year.
FIMA By Amos Oz.
Translated by Nicholas de Lange.
Helen and Kurt Wolff/Harvest/Harcourt Brace, $11.95.
This novel charts the transformation through tragedy of the man of the title, a 54-year-old Israeli whose political commitments and promise as a poet have, like his marriage, dwindled away.
Last year our reviewer, Francine Prose, said the author "succeeds in making us believe in the particular, individual life of this man."  THE WHOLE TEN YARDS By Frank Gifford and Harry Waters Jr.
Ivy, $5.99.
Those who can tear themselves away from televised football long enough to read about the sport will find several new paperbacks, like this autobiography of the man who gained celebrity first as a star player for the New York Giants and then as an ABC-TV commentator.
His book "will attract even more" attention, Michael Swindle said here last year.
A player who had talent but not discipline is remembered in 3RD DOWN AND FOREVER: Joe Don Looney and the Rise and Fall of an American Hero, by J. Brent Clark (St. Martin's, $12.95).
Looney, who appeared to have a sure future in professional football, threw it away through erratic and rebellious behavior.
Last year our reviewer, Michael Lichtenstein, called the book "a compassionate, sensitive account of a frustrated life." There's a happier story in TURNING THE THING AROUND: Pulling America's Team Out of the Dumps -- and Myself Out of the Doghouse, by Jimmy Johnson as told to Ed Hinton (Hyperion, $14.95).
This memoir by the former coach of the Dallas Cowboys chronicles Mr.
Johnson's early career as well as his stint with Dallas, which began inauspiciously but ended with Super Bowl glory.
"Perhaps best of all is a chapter entitled 'Hair,' " Charles Salzberg said here last year.
LOVE, STARS, AND ALL THAT By Kirin Narayan.
Washington Square/Pocket Books, $10.
This first novel describes the long pursuit of the perfect mate, beginning with a meeting in Berkeley, Calif., between the heroine, a graduate student from India, and a local poet.
Earlier this year our reviewer, Bapsi Sidhwa, called it "an engaging portrait."  VARIATIONS ON NIGHT AND DAY By Abdelrahman Munif.
Translated by Peter Theroux.
Vintage International, $12.
Set in the 1930's in a fictional desert land that is obviously Saudi Arabia, this novel depicts the fortunes of Sultan Khureybit, a character patterned after the real desert chieftain and king Abdul Aziz ibn Saud.
This final volume in the author's "Cities of Salt" trilogy allows the reader to "get to know something of the desert itself," Fouad Ajami said here last year.
THE DEVIL KNOWS YOU'RE DEAD By Lawrence Block.
Avon, $5.99.
This Matthew Scudder mystery has the unlicensed private eye coming to the aid of a mentally unstable derelict accused of murdering a yuppie lawyer.
Earlier this year our reviewer, Marilyn Stasio, called this "streetwise sleuth . . . just about the best there is."  ALBURQUERQUE By Rudolfo Anaya.
Warner, $5.99.
A young man of mixed Indian and Anglo ancestry learns of his true parentage in this novel, which takes place during a bitter mayoral race in Albuquerque, N.M., once called Alburquerque.
Several mystical experiences are "wonderfully told and mesmerizing," Antonya Nelson said here in 1992.
LAUREL GRAEBER


Corrections
An article last Sunday about a dispute over the title to a lot in West New Brighton, S.I., on which a topless carwash had been planned, misstated the date of the city's takeover of the lot for nonpayment of taxes.
It was January 1992, not 1988.


Paris Is in the Details
METROPOLITAIN  A Portrait of Paris.
By Matthew Weinreb and Fiona Biddulph.
Illustrated. 240 pp.
San Francisco: Phaidon Press/Chronicle Books. $49.95.


On Farmland Preservation
In the recent article about New Jersey's Farmland Preservation Program ("Farmland Preservation Is Lagging"), the number of acres preserved was compared with the number of acres developed since the program began.
This is worse than comparing apples with oranges.
The Farmland Preservation Program is not trying to compete with real estate development.
To do so would be absurd and a losing proposition.
The program's goal is to save key farms in important agricultural areas, thus helping to stabilize farming by showing it has a future there.


Strike Zones (and Erogenous Ones, Too)
Tribute to Fosse -- "The Blooper Ballet" in the current revival of the 1955 Broadway hit "Damn Yankees" makes you laugh out loud.
The Washington Senators dance, tumble, do flips and gravity-defying leaps to illustrate why they're the worst ballplayers, with the most buttery fingers, in the league.
Rob Marshall's spectacular choreography is a tribute to Bob Fosse's seminal dance routines for the original show.
Voices of 'Passion' -- "Happiness," the opening duet of "Passion," the Stephen Sondheim-James Lapine chamber-opera on Broadway, is a difficult number to top: the nude lovers, warmed by what used to be called afterglow, sing of their golden moment in what's possibly Mr.
Sondheim's most rapturous composition.


Finally, One Pay Toilet Finds a Home
It has taken 13 months, six site proposals, and five presentations.
Committees and subcommittees have met repeatedly; a task force has been formed.
Residents from Central Park West to Riverside, from blocks in the low 60's to the 100's, have written letters, made phone calls and attended meetings.
And now an end may be near for one of the more divisive recent debates on the Upper West Side.
Sometime next year, the neighborhood may get a single public toilet, at the southeast corner of 81st Street and Columbus Avenue.


The Working Poets Society
To the Editor:
I was fascinated to learn of the strength of the tradition of business people who also are poets.
As the director of the art gallery of Baruch College, which is well known for its school of business, I have long been committed to presenting to our students the benefits of combining business and the arts.
"Poetry in Painting/Painting in Poetry," which opens at Baruch on March 16, will feature the poetry of Wallace Stevens, who was a vice president of the Hartford Insurance Company ("Wally, I didn't know you wrote poetry," a bewildered colleague once complained) as well as one of this century's finest American poets.
SANDRA KRASKIN  Manhattan, Dec. 13  The writer is the director of the Sidney Mishkin Gallery at Baruch College.


With Peso's Devaluation, Political Problems Loom
When Ernesto Zedillo Ponce de Leon first stood before the nation as President less than a month ago, the plans he unveiled were a measure of Mexico's recovery from its foreign-debt crisis of the 1980's.
With the economy apparently restored to health, Mr.
Zedillo proposed finally to risk the power of his long-governing party with "definitive" steps toward democracy.
With investment rising, he could afford to promise more public spending to help the millions of poor Mexicans left behind by the country's progress.


THE AGE OF INDOLENCE
Your dismissal of "Mystery Science Theater 3000" as the acme of anesthetic television is off the mark (Sunday: "The Age of Indolence," Dec. 4).
The show's on-screen wisecrackers may temporarily exempt its viewers from coming up with their own commentaries, but, more significant, is the way that the hair-trigger, contrarian sensibility of the program lingers.
Switch to another channel after watching an episode of "Mystery Science" and experience an urge to heckle and snipe back at your television.
CLIFF DOERKSEN Princeton, N.J.


Q and A
Tours of Sicily  Q.  My daughter and I will be traveling to Rome in April.
Are there any tours from there to Sicily, preferably in English? -- Frances Carbonaro, Mahopac, N.Y.


BEST SELLERS: December 25, 1994
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
27
POLITICALLY CORRECT BEDTIME STORIES, by James Finn Garner. (Macmillan, $8.95.) Classic tales respun to avoid offending current sensibilities.
2
2
43
THE CELESTINE PROPHECY, by James Redfield. (Warner, $17.95.) An ancient manuscript, found in Peru, provides insights into achieving a fulfilling life.
3
3
4
WINGS, by Danielle Steel. (Delacorte, $23.95.) A woman pursues her ambition to become a record-setting aviator in pre-World War II America.
4
4
17
DEBT OF HONOR, by Tom Clancy. (Putnam, $25.95.) Jack Ryan and C.I.A. agents vs. a Japanese plot to strike America's territory and economy.
5
5
10
INSOMNIA, by Stephen King. (Viking, $27.95.) A widower and a widow, victims of sleeplessness, behold sinister forces at work in their small Maine town.
6
6
7
THE LOTTERY WINNER, by Mary Higgins Clark. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $22.) Stories about a couple who win a lottery and devote themselves to solving crimes.
7
8
5
DARK RIVERS OF THE HEART, by Dean Koontz. (Knopf, $24.) A man and a woman, who meet by chance, must flee a powerful Government agency.
8
9
124
THE BRIDGES OF MADISON COUNTY, by Robert James Waller. (Warner, $16.95.) A photographer and a farmer's lonely wife in Iowa.
9
7
5
GOD'S OTHER SON, by Don Imus. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $23.) A 1981 novel about Billy Sol Hargus, a lecherous television evangelist from Texas.
10
10
12
TALTOS, by Anne Rice. (Knopf, $25.) The survivor of a species of witches copes with his heritage; a sequel to "The Witching Hour" and "Lasher."
11
12
22
THE GIFT, by Danielle Steel. (Delacorte, $15.) A woman's casual visit to a small town changes the lives of many of its inhabitants, as well as her own.
12
13
24
THE CHAMBER, by John Grisham. (Doubleday, $24.95.) A lawyer represents a racist who is on death row for his part in a 1967 bombing in Mississippi.
13
11
14
NOTHING LASTS FOREVER, by Sidney Sheldon. (Morrow, $23.) Three women doctors in San Francisco contend with lovers, betrayers and killers.
14
14
12
MUTANT MESSAGE DOWN UNDER, by Marlo Morgan. (HarperCollins, $18.) In Australia's outback, an American woman learns about aboriginal philosophy.
15
3
STAR TREK GENERATIONS, by J.M.
Dillard. (Pocket, $20.) Capt.
Jean-Luc Picard and Capt.
James T. Kirk must track down a scientist with a dangerous weapon.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Nonfiction
1
1
12
DON'T STAND TOO CLOSE TO A NAKED MAN, by Tim Allen. (Hyperion, $19.95.) Anecdotes and meditations on life by the star of "Home Improvement."
2
2
8
CROSSING THE THRESHOLD OF HOPE, by John Paul II.
Edited by Vittorio Messori. (Knopf, $20.) The Pope discusses matters of belief, suffering and hope, and Christianity's relationship to other faiths.
3
4
16
COUPLEHOOD, by Paul Reiser. (Bantam, $19.95.) Essays on the ups and downs of marriage by the television star and stand-up comedian.
4
3
13
JAMES HERRIOT'S CAT STORIES, by James Herriot. (St. Martin's, $16.95.) A collection of tales by the Yorkshire veterinarian.
5
7
53
THE BOOK OF VIRTUES, by William J. Bennett. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $30.) Moral stories adapted from the Greeks, the Bible, folklore and elsewhere.
6
5
15
BARBARA BUSH: A Memoir, by Barbara Bush. (Drew/Scribners, $25.) The former First Lady recalls her life, from childhood to the present.
7
6
11
DOLLY, by Dolly Parton. (HarperCollins, $25.) The autobiography of the country singer.
8
9
11
THE HOT ZONE, by Richard Preston. (Random House, $23.) The discovery of a lethal virus, more infectious than H.I.V., and the efforts to keep it from spreading.
9
8
8
THE BELL CURVE, by Richard J. Herrnstein and Charles Murray. (Free Press, $30.) Ways in which differences in intelligence affect American life.
10
10
4
THE WARREN BUFFETT WAY, by Robert G. Hagstrom Jr. (Wiley, $24.95.) An account of the career of the man said to be the world's most successful investor.
11
11
12
BASEBALL, by Geoffrey C. Ward and Ken Burns. (Knopf, $60.) An illustrated history of the game.
12
1
SISTERS, by Carol Saline.
Photographs by Sharon J. Wohlmuth. (Running Press, $27.50.) The relationships of 36 sets of sisters of varied callings and backgrounds, reported in words and pictures.
13
14
2
IT WASN'T ALWAYS EASY, BUT I SURE HAD FUN, by Lewis Grizzard. (Villard, $20.) A collection of essays by the late Southern humorist.
14
12
42
MIDNIGHT IN THE GARDEN OF GOOD AND EVIL, by John Berendt. (Random House, $23.) The mysterious death of a young man in Savannah, Ga.
15
13
10
NO ORDINARY TIME, by Doris Kearns Goodwin. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $30.) The roles of Franklin and Eleanor Roosevelt during World War II.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous
1
2
83
MEN ARE FROM MARS, WOMEN ARE FROM VENUS, by John Gray. (HarperCollins, $23.) Ways to improve communication and relationships between the sexes.
2
1
35
IN THE KITCHEN WITH ROSIE, by Rosie Daley. (Knopf, $14.95.) Recipes by Oprah Winfrey's cook.
3
3
13
MAGIC EYE III, by N.E.
Thing Enterprises. (Andrews &amp; McMeel, $12.95.) Oscillating designs in color.
4
4
4
THE BUBBA GUMP SHRIMP CO.
COOKBOOK. (Oxmoor House, $14.95.) Seventy-five shrimp recipes, said to have been inspired by Forrest Gump.
Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending Dec. 10, at 3,050 bookstores plus wholesalers serving 28,000 other retailers (gift shops, department stores, newsstands, supermarkets), statistically weighted to represent sales in all such outlets nationwide.
An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
And Bear in Mind (Editor's Choices of other recent books of particular interest) THE ART AND ARCHITECTURE OF ISLAM, 1250-1800, by Sheila S. Blair and Jonathan M. Bloom. (Yale University, $65.) A bold, competent and fresh attempt to rewrite the history of later Islamic art from scratch, with plenty of splendid color illustrations and other useful graphics.
BOREDOM: The Literary History of a State of Mind, by Patricia Meyer Spacks. (University of Chicago, $24.95.) A persuasive account of a concept invented in the 18th century; its roots include a growing concentration on "inner experience" as the locus of personal reality.
THE COLLECTED STORIES OF LOUIS AUCHINCLOSS. (Houghton Mifflin, $24.95.) Nineteen stories, the oldest from the 1940's, by a writer unfashionably and passionately concerned with the beliefs and behavior of the WASP civilization that until very recently produced America's ruling class.
THE FIRST WORLD WAR: A Complete History, by Martin Gilbert. (Holt, $35.) Mr.
Gilbert's enormous breadth of view seeks to render this dreadful conflict as soldiers lived it on many fronts, often relying on the poetry and prose of the many gifted writers who saw action.
GENTLEMAN SPY: The Life of Allen Dulles, by Peter Grose. (Richard Todd/Houghton Mifflin, $30.) A biography, full of new information, of the irresistibly charming (and manipulative) man who headed -- and embodied -- the Central Intelligence Agency from 1953 to 1961.
IN PHARAOH'S ARMY: Memories of the Lost War, by Tobias Wolff. (Knopf, $23.) The follow-up volume to Mr.
Wolff's memoir "This Boy's Life" is a series of small, elegant, personal sketches of his year in Vietnam.
LONG WALK TO FREEDOM: The Autobiography of Nelson Mandela, by Nelson Mandela. (Little, Brown, $24.95.) On the evidence of his own version of his amazing life, the President of South Africa is no moralist or messiah but a pragmatic politician who always chose what might work over what was ideologically agreeable.
THE MASTER OF PETERSBURG, by J.M.
Coetzee. (Viking, $21.95.) The hero of Mr.
Coetzee's grimmest novel yet is Dostoyevsky himself, trapped in generational and political clashes, trying to scrape meaning from the death of a son.
MONSTERS OF THE SEA, by Richard Ellis. (Knopf, $30.) A delightful and learned adventure in cryptozoology (the study of hidden life-forms, including the leviathan, the sea serpent, the kraken, the blob and the globster).
TOULOUSE-LAUTREC: A Life, by Julia Frey. (Viking, $34.95.) A valuable life of the only great painter of France's golden age who was an aristocrat, incorporating much family correspondence recently made available.
WHERE THE SUCKERS MOON: An Advertising Story, by Randall Rothenberg. (Knopf, $25.) A lively rendition, by a former advertising columnist for The Times, of real life at an agency that tried to sell cars by ridiculing ads for cars.


Lynn E. Marx and Richard A. Jordan
Lynn Ellen Marx, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Daniel S. Marx of Milburn, N.J., was married on Thursday to Richard Anthony Jordan, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard A. Giangiordano of Westlake Village, Calif.
Rabbi Steven Bayar officiated at Crystal Plaza Caterers in Livingston, N.J.
Mrs.
Jordan, 24, and her husband, 25, graduated from the University of Pennsylvania.
She received a law degree from Rutgers University.
Her father is the president of Custom Packaging Service, a manufacturer of industrial packaging in Milburn.
Her mother, Sheila Marx, is the deputy municipal clerk of Irvington, N.J.


The Evergreens Have It, Every Season
SINCE this is a day to relax and enjoy, it might be helpful to review why so many Christmas traditions are, well, traditional.
Greenery has always dominated holiday decorations.
Bright velvet bows, colored balls and plastic berries may be added with regularity for reasons of sentiment or taste, but the greens always form the background.
This greenery could be clippings from the yew hedge, branches of holly purchased at the garden shop or light twigs snipped from the yard's trees.
In all cases, this decorating flourish reflects an old belief that evergreens symbolize eternal life.


Efforts to Free American Pilot Held in North Korea Continue
Hopes that an American helicopter pilot being held by North Korea would be freed by Christmas seemed to evaporate today when the United States and North Korea were unable to agree on holding further talks on his release.
The American side had been expecting to meet on Saturday in Panmunjom, on the border between South Korea and North Korea.
Contacts between the two sides continued into the night and up until midday today, but North Korea did not consent to a meeting, a spokesman for the United States military in South Korea said.


Getting to Know George
DAY after day, for two summers and three winters now, George Brown has found his way to a heating grate in the center of some of the city's richest, ritziest real estate.
The grate, on the corner of 86th Street and Madison Avenue, is an outlet for pipes that heat vast, big-lobbied apartment buildings where cloaked and hatted doormen escort residents to taxis.
Mr.
Brown practically owns the rectangular metal grid.
Mr.
Brown may be among the thousands of chronically homeless people living on the city's streets, exposed and vulnerable and, these days, categorically despised.
But he has, at least, had the presence of mind to claim for himself a warm place on an affluent, rather safe and clean street.
Having staked out the grate, he is carefully affable, never argumentative, eager to get along in -- or rather, outside of -- the swank surroundings.
When the manager of the next-door apartment building asks him to move on, he nods and surrenders his scrounged cardboard -- only to return a few hours later.


Many States Adopt an Easy Way to Raise Money for Charities
For many Americans, charity begins at home and ends up going through the personal-income-tax offices of 41 states and the District of Columbia.
Checkoff boxes that let taxpayers convert part of their tax refunds into donations to good causes have proliferated on the front pages of state tax forms to such a degree that in some states, tax calculations are pushed inside the return to make room for them.


Sephardic Jews Shift Leadership, Father to Son
By sacred tradition and ancient Jewish law, Rabbi Jacob S. Kassin's funeral was also, in a way, his son's coronation.
Rabbi Kassin, who died Dec. 9 at age 94, had been Chief Rabbi of the American Sephardic Jewish community since 1932.
In his will, read at his funeral, earlier this month, he named his 73-year-old son, Rabbi Saul J. Kassin, as his successor.


Commercial Property/Chain Drugstores; Drugstore Chains Turn to Manhattan
FOR Manhattan drugstores, the lines of demarcation used to be clearly drawn.
The local pharmacy, with its white-jacketed pharmacist who dispensed homilies along with high-priced pills, ruled the residential neighborhoods.
Commercial areas were largely the domain of the ubiquitous Duane Reade, home of the off-price health and beauty aids and just-the-facts-ma'am pharmacy: Present the prescription along with the insurance card, pick up the pills later.


Party Line
Committed to the ideology of having fun.


POP BRIEFS
Justice System: 'Rooftop Sound Check'  MCA; CD and cassette.


The Usery File
To the Sports Editor:
I have enjoyed (and invariably almost always agreed with most of) George Vecsey's columns in The Times in recent years.
Regrettably, I must take issue with "Usery Can Play Hardball" (The Times, Dec. 2).


WHO WILL HELP THE BLACK MAN?
Thank you for your round-table discussion with these bright, passionate men ("Who Will Help the Black Man?" Dec. 4).
The most important issue was not that any of the participants was right or wrong, but that they acknowledged and thrashed out some of the problems we face.
Enough of the simple, one-line fixes.
Please give us more of these debates.
ELEANOR REISSA New York


Headed South: Why One Couple Is Leaving the State
THIS month, David O. Thorp packed his car and a small trailer and drove out of Connecticut, heading south to join his wife, Elizabeth, in Macon, Ga., where they have bought a home.
The Thorps have left the state because both lost their jobs and saw little hope of getting others.
In doing so, they became two more statistics for Connecticut as a state that is losing population.
A major difference between the departure of David Thorp and the other emigrants of 1994 is that for close to a decade and a half he has helped run the state he is leaving.
For seven consecutive two-year terms, he has been a member of the General Assembly, the representative from District 89 that included his home town of Cheshire and also the towns of Prospect and Bethany.
The reason he remained in Connecticut until December was to complete his last term.
His wife has been in Georgia for several months.


Career Move
To the Editor:
In her review of "Disclosure," Caryn James reveals a bias that obscures elementary logic  [ "Tales From the Corner Office," Dec. 11 ] .
She first asks why Anita Hill followed her alleged harasser from job to job, citing a new book that answers, "because it was good for her career."


All in the Family
The American-Italian Foundation for Cancer Research  honors the Fendi Sisters at the Waldorf, Dec. 12.


Bulgaria
To the Editor: An article about Bulgaria without a single mention of yogurt?
Something is wrong.
After all, the curdling culture is lactobacillus bulgaricus.
Nearly 25 years since my first visit to Sofia I hardly remember the interior of Alexander Nevsky Cathedral, Stambolisky Boulevard is a blur and the former royal palace suffers by comparison with others seen before and since.
But oh, the yogurt!
Each morning a cool jar of that thick, creamy and just slightly bitter treat was on my breakfast tray.
So thick that a spoon could stand upright in it and none of your cheating food starches or gelatins.
It was pure cultured milk and it was divine.


Mowgli We Know, but Who Are Major Boone and Kitty?
"PHEW," SAYS MAJOR Boone after tasting the liquid dripping from a dank corridor in a ruined Indian city.
Major Boone has kidnapped the lovely heroine Kitty, and a second after he touches a match to the liquid, the two of them stare in wonder as flames race along a passageway.
Who are these people?
Major Boone, a smirking villain, and Kitty are certainly not in Rudyard Kipling's books, nor were they in the two previous "Jungle Book" movies, neither the 1942 live-action version with Sabu or Disney's animated version in 1967.
Still, Major Boone and Kitty are at the center of "Rudyard Kipling's 'Jungle Book,' " a $30 million Disney film that opens today.


How to Tell the Apes
To the Editor:
We linguists are cast as the heavies in Douglas H. Chadwick's review of recent books on language in apes (Dec. 11).
But are we really "intent on keeping language and reason for humans alone"?
Of course not.
Mr.
Chadwick confuses conclusions with intentions.


Expos Come Up Losers in Owners' Plan
The owners' determination to get a salary cap stemmed from their desire to reduce salaries and to put their revenue-sharing plan into effect (approval of the plan was linked to creation of the cap).
The cap-and-sharing system was intended to help low-revenue teams.
The Montreal Expos are one of those low-revenue teams.
Look what the new system has done for the Expos already.


The Evergreens Have It, Every Season
SINCE this is a day to relax and enjoy, it might be helpful to review why so many Christmas traditions are, well, traditional.
Greenery has always dominated holiday decorations.
Bright velvet bows, colored balls and plastic berries may be added with regularity for reasons of sentiment or taste, but the greens always form the background.
This greenery could be clippings from the yew hedge, branches of holly purchased at the garden shop or light twigs snipped from the yard's trees.
In all cases, this decorating flourish reflects an old belief that evergreens symbolize eternal life.


Jury Trials
To the Editor:
George Fletcher's review of my book "We, the Jury: The Jury System and the Ideal of Democracy" (Dec. 11) is also -- appropriately -- a statement of his own negative views on the jury.
I accept whatever criticism inheres in his remark that my defense of the jury demands a "strong faith in the people." What I do not accept as legitimate are the two occasions where Mr.
Fletcher employs points, even language, in my book, and uses them against me as if they were not in the book at all.
Mr.
Fletcher ends his review with the remark that the jury "captures the best and worst of the American criminal justice system." The first line of my book happens to be "Trial by jury is about the best of democracy and about the worst of democracy." Mr.
Fletcher also seems to have to remind me against the villainy of the jury that convicted the Scottsboro Boys against the law.
Yet I bring up precisely this case, in order to drive home the "vicious side" of so-called "verdicts according to conscience."


Washington Closes A Visitor Center
The Washington Visitor Information Center, a drop-in site at 1455 Pennsylvania Avenue, has closed after losing its rent-free space.
The Washington, D.C., Convention and Visitors Association had operated drop-in sites since 1983.
A new White House Visitors Center, expected to open next April at the Department of Commerce, 1450 Pennsylvania Avenue, will distribute information published by the visitors association.
Information: (202) 523-3847.


Dec. 18-24: Yellow Ribbons Again; A U.S. Helicopter Goes Down Over North Korea
On Christmas Eve, yellow ribbons continued to blanket Brooksville, Fla., as townspeople awaited word that North Korea would release a resident, Chief Warrant Officer Bobby Hall.
His OH-58 Kiowa helicopter went down a week ago when, according to the Pentagon, it unwittingly strayed across the Korean demilitarized zone during a training mission; the North then hesitated to free Mr.
Hall until it investigated the incident.
The North said it shot down the Army helicopter in the belief that it was on a hostile spying mission; the larger fear, on both sides, was that the dispute could derail the two-month-old agreement for North Korea to freeze its nuclear weapons program.


Ecological Lessons At Toronto Tower
The observation deck of the giant CN Tower in Toronto is being used to present a series of interactive, computer-simulated exhibits on ways people pollute air, water and land.
An air-quality display shows emissions from cars as a purple haze engulfing the city.
Other exhibits provide crash courses on energy and water conservation or show what the Toronto harbor would be like with all the water drained out.
The attractions, known as Ecodek, opened this month on the main indoor and outdoor observation decks.


Feeding Fish
To the Editor: I refer to your feature "The Greening of the Caribbean" (Oct. 30).
While I was thrilled that The Times featured this exciting and important topic, I was troubled by one photograph, showing a scuba diver feeding fish on the wreck of the Rhone.
Fish feeding attracts a multitude of fish and is a thrill for snorkelers and novice divers.
Most experienced divers and responsible dive operators understand the potentially devastating effect that it will have on the delicate underwater ecosystem and do not advocate it.


Airports Merge Car-Rental Vans
PROF.
PAUL DELANEY, head of the journalism department at the University of Alabama, says he is never going back to Dallas.
The source of Professor Delaney's antipathy is the way Dallas-Fort Worth airport distributes passengers to rental-car offices.
The four rental companies that use a single site on the airport grounds do not send around vans emblazoned with their individual logos; instead, they are all served by a pair of airport-operated vans with the four names listed on the side.
"This caused passenger logjams as we were deposited in one big bunch at a single location and landed in a big crowd of people waiting for the bus," said Professor Delaney, a former Times correspondent.
He noted a similar system at National Airport in Washington.
"Most of us professional renters hate this," he wrote.


Palm Trees In Connecticut
To the Editor:
In "No Matter What They Say, Bridgeport Is Not L.A."  [ Dec. 4 ] , Daniel Asa Rose misquoted the line and then wrongly attributed it to the immortal Preston Sturges.
According to the book "The Portable Curmudgeon," this was a Fred Allen line and refers to the speaker's view that outside of New York, the rest of the country had all the cultural allure of Bridgeport.
When they asked, "But what about Hollywood?" Mr.
Allen answered, "Hollywood is Bridgeport with palm trees."


Dec. 18-24; A Queen Arrives In Tatters
Considering that the ship had just undergone a three-week refurbishing in Germany, a passenger might expect a bit of perfection aboard the Queen Elizabeth 2.
But the shakedown cruise, a crossing from Southampton, England, to New York last week, was anything but perfect.
Passengers recalled plumbers shouting "Niagara, Niagara," as toilets overflowed or, worse, exploded.
Hot water poured from cold water taps, some cabins weren't finished and furniture was stacked in corridors.
The Cunard line's chief executive, John Olsen, acknowledged that Cunard had been "remiss in not delivering the ship in absolutely perfect condition." British newspapers were blunter, calling the ship a "floating construction site." One passenger went so far as to label it "a floating Bosnia."


A Shelter When Feelings Halt Learning
A SECOND GRADER, three weeks into the school year, breaks down when confronted with a reading test.
The next day he refuses to go to school.
Even with the support of his teachers and the presence of his mother in an adjoining classroom, he breaks down.
A 14-year-old's disruptive behavior occurs so frequently that his teachers are forced to evict him from the classroom.
Despite his high I.Q., he is attending school less and less and his learning is halted.


Q. &amp; A.
Changing Landmark Windows Q The windows in our condominium building are old and allow easy access for drafts, dirt and noise.
We would like to install insulated, energy-efficient windows.
However, our building is landmarked.
We have heard windows cannot be replaced because doing so would change the exterior appearance.


The Mystery Of the Boots
Is L. L. Bean, the pillar of Yankee rectitude and traditional values, shying away from its roots?
The Maine mail-order company's most famous product is its Maine Hunting Shoes -- the boots with the leather tops and rubber bottoms -- that Mr.
Bean invented in 1912.
"The Official Preppy Handbook" (Workman, 1980) cited them as the only ones with "the true chain-tread outersole" and named them the second most important shoe (after Weejun loafers) in the preppy male's wardrobe.
They are so iconographic that the company used to make polo shirts with the boot embroidered over the heart.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-19  RUSSIAN MILITARY FAILING  In the Russian invasion of a separatist region, the military is facing its most severe test since the Soviet Union collapsed, but it is proving to be dispirited and disorganized. 1  Russia continued bombing separatists and defended its stance. 10


Dec. 18-24; The Customer Was Right, After All
After stonewalling angry customers for more than a month, the Intel Corporation reversed itself last week and established a no-questions-asked return policy on its flawed Pentium microchip.
The world's largest chipmaker had been arguing that the tendency of the Pentium microprocessor to make occasional division errors was a minor glitch that would not affect normal users.
But after I.B.M. stopped shipping Pentium-based systems, Intel's position became increasingly untenable.


Students Learn That Charity Begins in Elementary School
WITH the fervor of ripping open a birthday present, students in Suzanne Hoch's fourth-grade classroom at Concord Road Elementary School here filled several large cartons with clothes, food and brightly wrapped Christmas presents.
Some tallied the type and quantity of foodstuffs while others sorted gloves, earmuffs and slippers.
One girl meticulously folded baby clothing.


Awards and a Company's Plan
WHAT to do at the end of December when the glut of awards came in the middle of October?
It's hard to resist joining in the traditional year-end kindness of proclaiming bests but the Connecticut awards fever has dulled the process of due recognition.


A Few Choice Words Worth Repeating
"I think these are the times of the golden calf. We're living in the time of Babel." MICHAEL McDERMOTT Rock musician and songwriter, on the need for religion in rock music. (Jan. 2)


One-Stop Dialing
At many large hotels, guest-room telephones come with small directories, listing what seem like dozens of numbers for hotel services.
But in all North American Westin Hotels, guests can now dial just one number to order up almost anything the hotel offers.
Telephone requests from guests go to a command center, where they are answered, then dispatched to the proper hotel staff member via radio units.


Parallel Worlds Collide in Mt. Kisco
ON a recent morning, a well-dressed woman stood at the counter of Starbucks, an upscale coffee bar here, choosing beans from Latin American countries.
After some deliberation and a steaming cup of cappuccino, she bought a pound of Guatemala Antigua coffee for $9.25.
Two blocks down the same street, a group of men who also represent various Latin American countries stood against a fence, waiting to be picked up by construction and gardening trucks, which passed by looking for day laborers.
On that day, three men -- also from Guatemala -- were chosen to work, at a rate of $6 an hour for an eight-hour day.


Correction
An entry in the Residential Sales listing on Dec. 11 about an apartment at 225 Central Park West that was sold for $400,000 misstated the unit's size and the percentage of the maintenance that is tax-deductible.
The apartment is 1,400 square feet, not 2,000, and the tax-deductible portion of the maintenance is 75 percent, not 55.


Saxophonists Sounded a Revival As a Trumpeter Took Up The Sword
The Young Lions -- The saxophonists Joshua Redman and James Carter got into a slash-and-burn cutting competition at the Iridium in Manhattan in September.
Two completely different conceptions were served up by two players performing at a very high level of improvisation, even if they were young and not completely formed.
It was a sign, written in powerful language, that the jazz renaissance was heating up.


Ann Pluemer and Christopher Barber
ANN PLUEMER, 34, and Christopher Barber, 29, are proof that office romances don't always lead to lawsuits or awkward breakups in which one person wears sunglasses to work to avoid eye contact with the other.
The two met six years ago at Prudential Securities in Manhattan, where they worked as investment bankers.
And against friends' advice -- dating co-workers is frowned upon in many Wall Street offices -- they started seeing each other.


Russia's Army Seen as Failing Chechnya Test
Demoralized and underpaid, the Russian Army is facing in the rebellious Chechnya region its stiffest test of professionalism and morale since the collapse of the Soviet Union, and it is failing the test, Western diplomats and Russian military analysts say.
Its officers are rebelling in the face of an increasingly vicious war against other Russians.
Its soldiers are dispirited and disorganized, badly fed and cold, without any clear idea of why they should be fighting the Chechens.


Connecticut Q&amp;A: Dr. Michael Redler; Quicker Fixes for the Injured Athlete
DR.
MICHAEL REDLER, age 38, a graduate of the University of Connecticut Medical School who went on for advanced training at the University of Virginia, practices orthopedic surgery and sports medicine.
Though sports and their intrinsic mishaps are a human constant, the current exercise craze has made sports medicine an important medical sub-specialty.
It's not just for the professionals, but for everyday athletes involved in anything from tennis to skiing to just plain walking.


Old-Time Religion
Tis the season to enforce the separation of creche and state, to make sure that no religious symbols sneak onto the town square.
Usually, fundamentalist Christians defend such governmental gestures as setting up a nativity scene.
But in San Jose, Calif., recently some came out on the other side, against a statue of a deity -- the Aztec god Quetzalcoatl.
The objectors saw the statue as an embodiment of evil, although scholars say Quetzalcoatl was not propitiated by human sacrifice and was a god of art and intellect.
The city viewed the statue as a tribute to Mexican-American culture.
Six residents filed suit to prevent unveiling of the eight-foot stone sculpture by Robert Graham, which cost $500,000.
But the judge ruled against them and the statue was duly unveiled in Plaza de Cesar Chavez, to small protests, which faded quickly.


Unicef Audit Warns U.N. Of Problems
Auditors for Unicef, the United Nations Children's Fund, warn that development efforts in poor countries may be undermined by a system in which relief agencies pay government officials to carry out programs that the agencies have already paid for.
"In some countries where Unicef cooperates, the productivity of government officials tends to be low because of inadequate salaries, frequent delays or nonpayment of salaries to civil servants, thus making payments of incentives necessary," the auditors said after conducting a routine biennial review of accounts.


Ideas &amp; Trends; In Bosnia, the War That Can't Be Seen
THE Bosnian war is increasingly invisible.
Its most recent crises, at Bihac in western Bosnia and Gorazde in the east, have had enormous repercussions around the world, but the two small towns themselves have remained lost in the fog of second-hand reporting.
Western journalists, almost without exception, have been unable to get there.
The result is troubling, and the reports sometimes baffling.
Serbian forces advance and advance and advance across towns you can drive through in five minutes.
Villages are taken, then retaken by the same army a few days later.
Casualty figures swing wildly, reported by local witnesses who may be hunkered down in their basements or distant from the scene.


Sound Bytes; Pushing Digital PC's Higher
THE ill-fated forays of Digital Equipment into the personal computer business are legendary.
Many in the industry say Digital, which pioneered smaller computers in the era of giant mainframes, should have been a powerful force in PC's.
Instead, it failed to see the potential market and missed out.
But in the last two years Digital has quietly re-established itself in the PC market, rising to No. 12 among top vendors.


Oregon
To the Editor: Your readers who are drawn to the glorious wild places of western Oregon so eloquently described by Denise Firestone in "Haven for Antelope and Hikers" (Aug. 7), but prefer not to be burdened by the responsibilities and uncertainties of traveling on their own, should know about a small Portland-based tour operator, Full Circle Tours, (503) 292-0189.


Ideas &amp; Trends; O-Eeeee-O! Please Ignore This Alarm
AHEM and YO!
Or BLEEP-boop WHAAP-whoop!
Or perhaps, Wa-OOO-Wa-OOO-WEEEEH!
Not to mention, nnGONG-nnGONG!
Better yet, Pssst: The six-tone, 128-decibel Viper Revenger is now programmable so that your anti-theft car alarm can have its own signature shriek.
Maybe the whistles first, then the bells.
Or the tinny honks to precede the siren whoops, followed by those indescribably pernicious squawkings that seem to this alarmed listener -- alarmed by an act of gratuitous noise, not property theft -- to resemble a throng of bleating Munchkins announcing that the sky is falling.


Gap Between Rich and Poor in New York City Grows Wider
Among the nation's counties, the income gap between rich and poor in Manhattan is surpassed only by a group of 70 households near a former leper colony in Hawaii.
Now an analysis of Census results shows that the gap widened in Manhattan in the 1980's, a decade whose extremes of wealth and want inspired Tom Wolfe's "Bonfire of the Vanities."
While the income disparity has historically been large in Manhattan, it widened to a greater degree in the 1980's than in any other county with 50,000 or more people.
That increase drove New York City from 11th in 1980 to fifth in 1990 among cities with the biggest income disparities, and New York State from fifth to third among the states.


Evolution of a Species: Will the Bug Be Better?
IT will look a little like a dinner roll on steroids.
And despite its familiar shape, it will have all sorts of modern safety gizmos and creature comforts that its predecessor didn't have, like dual air bags, anti-lock brakes and air-conditioning.
But will the new incarnation of Volkswagen's ubiquitous Beetle, set to appear worldwide by 2000, come equipped with the most popular feature of the old one: soul?


POSTINGS: The A.I.A. Awards; Conversion of a Warehouse In TriBeCa Wins a Top Prize
Three New York metropolitan area firms were among the 24 recipients of the American Institute of Architects 1995 Honor Awards, which recognize outstanding building design.
A winner in the category of outstanding architecture was V. Polsinelli Architects in Manhattan, which designed the offices of Lovinger Cohn Associates, a television production company, at 172 Duane Street in Manhattan's TriBeCa neighborhood.


Sax, Socks and Xmas
THE AVERAGE AMERICAN HOUSEHOLD gets about two dozen printed greetings each Christmas season.
They bear images that Hallmark's researchers say reflect the sender's own personality if bought by the box and the sender's view of the receiver if bought individually.
Cards from politicians offer a third, obviously straddling, variety.
They promote the sender while flattering the recipient.
They celebrate the past while bidding for future favor.
And they evoke Christmas without mentioning it.
Since barely one in a thousand of us will be so honored, here's a peek at some messages mailed by the mighty.


A Violent Battle of Wills Besieges Hartford
The young men and women of Los Solidos filed into the rented banquet hall cursing and muttering complaints.
Even on this solemn occasion, the anniversary of the day brother Pipe was killed by Latin Kings, the police would not let up.
They were watching, as usual.
About 10 members of the Hartford Police Department stood outside as Solidos gathered in the squat building for a memorial dinner-dance.
And as 350 Solidos marched by in their red and blue colors, officers with camcorders filmed them for future reference.


Fort's Housing May Be Available For Homeless
Fort Totten will lose its military residents over the next 18 months, the United States Army announced.
The move would give priority to homeless shelters to occupy the base's 188 apartments in Bayside.
Army personnel living in 112 apartments will be moved to other bases because Fort Totten's barracks have deteriorated and in some cases lack adequate plumbing and wiring.
The Army estimated that renovations would cost $6 million.


Beauties Unashamed, Expressive and Lustrous
Starry Night -- Nothing this year was more inspiring or more moving than a performance of Olivier Messiaen's "Des Canyons aux Etoiles" ("From the Canyons to the Stars") at Tanglewood's splendid new Seiji Ozawa Hall in August.
This grand banquet of percussive color and pure-toned melody is perhaps the most unashamedly beautiful of Messiaen's large creations.
Reinbert de Leeuw, the Dutch conductor and composer, capped his innovative first season as director of Tanglewood's contemporary music festival with a passionately committed interpretation; Peter Serkin played the piano solos with typical authority.
The final shimmering chord of A major rang out indefinitely into the summer night.


Rev. Joseph Donceel, Former Professor, 88
The Rev.
Joseph Donceel, a scholar of psychology, philosophy and theology at Fordham University, died on Dec. 15 at the Jesuit infirmary on the university's Rose Hill campus.
He was 88.
He suffered a long illness, Fordham said.


Smaller Portions, Please
To the Editor:
Bravo for your Dec. 19 letter advocating smaller restaurant portions.
I recall the advent after World War II of overstuffed sandwiches and restaurant invitations to "all you can eat" for a fixed price.
I don't eat out as often as I used to because I can't cope with the large portions, hate to leave expensive food uneaten and don't enjoy taking doggy bags home, since I don't always go right home from a restaurant.


QUEENS UPDATE
*
GLENDALE A 19-year-old Brooklyn graffiti vandal, Robert Morrissey, believed to have caused more than $1 million in damages by scrawling "DESA" in Glendale, Maspeth and elsewhere, has been sentenced to one to three years in prison.
In October, while on probation for a graffiti-related offense, Robert Morrissey was arrested at the Fresh Pond Road station of the M line.
Later in court, he pleaded guilty to spray painting graffiti.
The sentence is one of the harshest ever for graffiti, said District Attorney Richard A. Brown.


On Sunday; An Inner Child Gives Tiffany's Its Outer Glow
HERE is the day when people swap baubles, try to look inward and further tease the perennial ideal that divinity and attendant angels might enter time and visit the besotted earth.
It seems, therefore, an open-minded-enough day to hear Gene Moore, the 84-year-old designer of the window displays at Tiffany &amp; Company, relate a conversation that he insists he had with Porridge, the favorite teddy bear in his personal collection, on what the motif of his very last windows should be after 39 years of designing Tiffany's windows.
"Porridge sits on a table by my bed," Mr.
Moore said, chain-smoking like Bogart and staring hard at the cigarette as if Porridge had a Maltese Falcon sort of tale to tell.
"And Porridge said, 'Why don't you do teddy bears for Christmas?' "


What If They Started a Road Project and Finished It Early ?


Some Christmas Trimmings Bring Anxiety


Dizzying Sets, Headlong Plunges, And Fresh Visions Of Classics
A Fresh 'Beauty' -- The banquet chairs rattled with ghostly panache as the wicked fairy Carabosse was about to throw her tantrum in the Royal Ballet's new "Sleeping Beauty" at the Metropolitan Opera House in July.
The sheer theatrical gall of Maria Bjornson's dizzying sets summed up Anthony Dowell's debatable but fresh approach to a signature piece and swept away overreverent cobwebs from a classic.
Hate Personified -- Christine Dakin's ferocious personification of hate projected Medea's jealousy through every angular distortion and headlong plunge in "Cave of the Heart." This exceptional performance, in October, was emblematic of the entire Martha Graham Dance Company season, aptly titled "Radical Graham" by the Brooklyn Academy of Music.


An Arrest Stirs Up Spain's Past
The killings of suspected Basque separatists by right-wing death squads in the mid-1980's returned to haunt the Socialist-led Government this week with the arrest of a top official who led anti-terrorist efforts at the time, provoking debate about the tactics that democratic governments can use against terrorism.
The official, Julian Sancristobal, who served as Director of State Security and head of the anti-terrorist unit in the Basque province of Vizcaya, was arrested along with two other high-level police officials.


In a Sad Land, a Modest Feast In the Heart of Famine
If Christmas is a time for surprises, New York Times correspondents have had their share: along with the Japanese Santa and tree-trimming Muscovites there were the Serbian snipers, the bullets in Beirut, the tragic fire in Tennessee.
In writing of their most memorable Christmases away from home, 10 correspondents range around the world; some recall elegant feasts, in a Swabian castle or a Hong Kong hotel; others cannot forget the fruitcake they could not possibly eat in Somalia, the joy radiating from a Saigon cathedral, or the tearful Mass in Sarajevo.
All remember how they counted their blessings.


St. Jerome
To the Editor:
Herbert Muschamp might have been justified in arguing that Piero Della Francesca painted a passionless Passion in "The Flagellation," had Piero indeed depicted that subject.
But he didn't  [ "Alberti, on the Road to Cyberspace," Dec. 4 ] .


Surprising 3d For U.S. Sailor
Steve Pettengill of Middletown, R.I., arrived in Sydney, Australia, on Christmas morning at 10:12 A.M. local time, finishing third in the second leg of the BOC Round the World Challenge.
The American stood an astonishing second over all to Christophe Auguin of France at the midpoint of the race.
Pettengill surprised race officials by beating three other boats that he had trailed only three days before in 7,000-mile leg from Cape Town.


Airlines Enhance Frequent Flier Plans
New reciprocal agreements, discounts and ways to earn points have been introduced for frequent fliers on domestic and international airlines.
Passengers belonging to American Airlines' AAdvantage plan and any of Japan Airlines' four programs can accrue miles and redeem awards on each other's plans starting on Jan. 1.


Dec. 18-24: True Nightmares; A Firebomb Unnerves A City of Subway Riders
It is New York's worst nightmare: a mad bomber roaming the city's subways, where 3.5 million riders squeeze each day in democratic discomfort.
Last week it happened.
A sheet of flame erupted in a crowded No. 4 train at the Fulton Street station, and more than 40 people were injured in the fire and the frenzied rush to escape.
Three were critically burned, including a man accused of being the bomber, Edward J. Leary.
The police said the firebomb apparently went off as he was preparing to leave it on the train; escaping with his trouser legs shredded and burns on his legs, hands and face, he tapped a policeman on the shoulder at the Clark Street station in Brooklyn and politely asked for an ambulance.
The life of this unemployed 49-year-old computer expert, who proclaimed his innocence, was littered with frustration.


Light Can Cure That Winter Depression
To the Editor:
Your Dec. 20 Science Times Q &amp; A answer about winter light, light therapy and seasonal affective disorder serves, I think, to discourage use of light therapy when it might be fully effective.


3 Whose Magic Number Was 50
Portzamparc Takes Paris -- A string quartet is rehearsing in a luminous recital hall at the Cite de la Music, the Paris conservatory designed by Christian de Portzamparc.
The scene lasts only minutes but goes far toward explaining why Mr.
Portzamparc, a 50-year-old Frenchman, received this year's Pritzker Architecture Prize, the first architect of the baby-boom generation to win this prestigious award.
He is not the most innovative architect of his generation, but his ability to synthesize modern and classical forms has enabled him to enrich Paris with buildings that resonate with both the city's historic fabric and its tradition of the new.


Strategy for Athletes Headed for College
INSTEAD of being a happy time, the process of sports recruiting by colleges leaves most of Westchester's high school athletes and their parents feeling overwhelmed and uninformed.
Many miss out on major opportunities because they don't know how to "self-recruit" or promote a young sports star.
"I feel lucky, but it's also one of the worst things I've ever gone through," said Rob Doerr, a highly recruited lacrosse player and senior from Yorktown High School, as he spoke at a recent evening meeting covering sports-recruiting strategies at Chappaqua's Horace Greeley High School.
Mr.
Doerr was just back from a recruiting trip to Syracuse University, and he has also been pursued by Johns Hopkins University and Loyola College, both in Baltimore, among others.


Near Hits From a Near Great
THE ARCHIVES OF musical history are infinite; no one can claim to have heard, sampled or even glanced at more than a fraction of what they hold.
The easiest way to confront the overflow is to confine oneself to the work of selected Great Composers and ignore the rest.
But there is a problem: great composers do not pro duce exclusively great music.
You can listen to Wagner's "Faust" Overture forward, backward, upside down or out on the veranda of the Villa Wahnfried, and it's still a pretty dubious piece.
And there is a corollary: great music is not exclusively produced by great composers.
Think of "Cavalleria Rusticana," "The Planets," Korngold's "Tote Stadt." Or, to go a little further astray, the Serenade for Orchestra by Wilhelm Stenhammar, a Swedish composer who lived from 1871 to 1927.
This is music of effortless grace, sweet and sad in passing moods, spontaneous at every turn.
It borrows some from Sibelius but not too much; it has a subtle, fine-grained Romantic voice very much its own.
At first hearing, it already sounds familiar, like something heard once in childhood and then forgotten.


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
'SPUNK' IN HARTFORD
Some years ago three stories by Zora Neale Hurston were adapted by George C. Wolfe into a theatrical work titled "Spunk," with music by Chic Street Man.
Directed by Reggie Montgomery, a new production opens at the Hartford Stage Company on Jan. 6 and runs through Feb. 4.
Previews begin on Saturday.


Planting Tulips In a Row
Having just planted the last of 130 tulip, daffodil and crocus bulbs, I was contentedly contemplating the dirt under my fingernails when my wife said, "Here's something you ought to read," and handed me "Last Call for Getting In the Spring Bulbs" (Gardening column, Nov. 6).
The article said, "And never, never plant tulips in a single row." I had to laugh out loud.
I had done exactly that, not having encountered this warning either in the bulb book I bought or in the little instruction sheets that come with the bulbs.


True Meaning of Christmas
At Saint Saviour's School in Brooklyn, teachers try to teach students the traditional meaning of Christmas, while many remain focused on getting gifts.
Page 33.


Power Rangers' Mighty Profits Spur More Morphing Heros
If imitation is the sincerest form of flattery, the Power Rangers should feel even mightier than usual.
At least theee other live-action shows featuring karate-kicking, spandex-sporting, weapon-wielding, alien-fighting teen-agers have popped up on the airwaves, apparently inspired by the merchandising riches generated by the Rangers.
Two of these shows already have their own to lines, providing an alternative for those delivering Christmas i.o.u.'s in place of scarce Power Rangers merchandise.
The third will introduce a line of toys this spring.
TODD KRIEGER


Mayan Indians in Guatemala Still Fear the Government
As he came to the very peak of the mountain where his people have lived for more than 2,000 years, his voice went to a whisper, and he pointed to the freshly exhumed mass graves overseen by a tiny chapel of rough planks.
"Here is where my grandmother, mother, brothers, my wife and our children, all my relatives, were brought," said Juan Manuel Geronimo, 49.


An Offbeat Celebration But Not Quite a Holiday
If Christmas is a time for surprises, New York Times correspondents have had their share: along with the Japanese Santa and tree-trimming Muscovites there were the Serbian snipers, the bullets in Beirut, the tragic fire in Tennessee.
In writing of their most memorable Christmases away from home, 10 correspondents range around the world; some recall elegant feasts, in a Swabian castle or a Hong Kong hotel; others cannot forget the fruitcake they could not possibly eat in Somalia, the joy radiating from a Saigon cathedral, or the tearful Mass in Sarajevo.
All remember how they counted their blessings.


Careerists Propose a Center to Lend Support to Women in Westchester
IN a display of sisterhood and solidarity, nearly 70 of the county's most influential women from the fields of government, social services, mental and physical health, education, politics and business met recently at the Mid-Westchester Y.M.-Y.W.H.A. here to discuss establishing a women's center.
It would be supported by the Westchester Jewish Community Services organization, a nonprofit, nonsectarian mental health and social services agency, and would link services for women and provide a forum in which to discuss careers, politics, mental health and education.


One Little Film You Wouldn't Call All That Little
IT HAS BEEN THREE YEARS since Robert Benton's last movie opened, a big movie with big stars called "Billy Bathgate," which dropped with a thud.
Today, he is coming back with another film with big stars, "Nobody's Fool."
And how does he size this one?
"I call it a small movie because I'm nervous about calling it a big movie," said Mr.
Benton, a thoughtful and meticulous speaker.
"It's not, on the surface of things, what many people perceive as a commercial film."


If You're Thinking of Living In/Armonk; Rugged Beauty, Hefty Tax Base
TUCKED away in the upcountry region north of White Plains, Armonk is separated from that city by seven miles of watershed wilderness.
The hamlet of Armonk makes up more than two-thirds of North Castle, a sprawling 26-square-mile town that encompasses two other hamlets, Banksville and North White Plains.
Visitors are often surprised by the unusual array of restaurants, gourmet food stores and take-out establishments filling storefronts along Main Street.
The eating places rely on the sizable office neighborhood hidden in the surrounding hills, including I.B.M.'s corporate headquarters, which has overlooked Armonk for 30 years.


Dec. 18-24; Vanity in a License Plate Is Spelled SOFINE
IN this land of 3.9 million miles of roadways, where one's car defines a person as much as his wardrobe, the vanity plate is the handkerchief in the pocket -- unnecessary but a final touch.
While personalized license plates are neither new (first appearing in Connecticut in 1937) nor abundant (accounting for 2 percent of all registered plates), they are conspicuous, with messages that brag and swagger, posture and pun, declaim and disarm.
A typical tag might declare the driver DEEVORSD in North Carolina, demand to know YRUFAT in Connecticut or quietly announce IMHERE in Washington.


Immigration Agency Pushes To Collect Travelers' Fees
The Immigration and Naturalization Service has won agreements over the last few weeks to collect at least $5.6 million in fees that the agency had not bothered to recover before, for lack of accountants.
That money comes from the $6 fee from each arriving international passenger that airlines collect as part of the ticket price.
The carriers are supposed to turn that money over to the immigration service, which uses it to pay for its inspection programs.
But the Justice Department found earlier this year that the agency was not collecting the fees from 22 airlines and six cruise lines -- a loss of as much as $23 million a year at a time when the agency's obligations were about $60 million greater than its projected income.


At Work: A year-end survey of surveys.; Workaday Visions of Sugar Plums
IT takes a lot to expunge the spirit of generosity American employees tend to feel for their bosses.
Despite another year of oblivion by re-engineering and the long ride on an economy that always seems just about to go flying off the tracks of the roller coaster, employees are more likely to regard their bosses as Santas than Scrooges.
Forty-four percent of respondents to a survey conducted in early December designated their bosses "Santa," compared with 37 percent who said their bosses resembled Ebenezer Scrooge.
Women were more likely than men to view their bosses as Scrooges, either because women are nastier than men (the genetic explanation) or because on average they get paid less than men, often for the same work (the environmental explanation).
Workers may be generous but they won't have the wool pulled over their eyes: more than 8 out of 10 said they agreed with the statement, "The average American business cares more about profits and less about people." Almost half said business cared more about its workers a decade ago, compared with nearly a third who said the opposite.


NEW YORKERS &amp; CO
Spielberg and Katzenberg Eye West 57th Street Spot
A popular Los Angeles restaurant that sells specialty submarine sandwiches and is owned by Steven Spielberg and Jeffrey Katzenberg along with the restaurateurs Mark and Lawrence Levy, will be coming to Manhattan.


Drawbacks to Living In Co-op City
To the Editor:
One of the biggest drawbacks of living in Co-Op City, which you wrote about on Nov. 20, has always been its dismal transportation opportunities.
The fact that the development is bisected by Amtrak's passenger division with almost express service to Penn Station has always puzzled the Northeast Bronx residents who had to travel into Westchester in order to find a railroad station.


Mysterious Abstractions and Otherworldly Photographs
ONE of two current shows at the New Jersey Center for Visual Arts here is "Paintings From New Jersey Collections" -- private collections, that is.
And, as indicated in the catalogue by George Bolge, the director of the center, its chief purpose is to encourage visitors to acquire art.
This is a bold idea and, evidently, one that works, for the show is the second in what promises to be a series of biennials.
Sad to say, the present example is a congested medley, although with four collections each represented by about 15 works, it could hardly have been anything else.
The curators, Ellyn Dennison, Sharon Gill and Perijane Zarembok, give the impression of having been overwhelmed by the collectors, who are Shirley Aidekman, Ellen and Ken Aidekman, Harriet and Donald Rothfeld, Dr.
Steven Shane and Judith Targan.


How to Tell Health Care From Toothpaste; Medicare's Bad Faith
To the Editor:
Re "While Congress Remains Silent, Health Care Transforms Itself" (front page, Dec. 18):


A Moral Code to Live By, to Fight By and to Die By
It is forbidden to speak or brag about "the business." Never use "the product." Drug abuse is not allowed.
If busted, say nothing.
Los Solidos, like all self-respecting gangs, has a written charter, the membership's Bible.
The opening page states that the book is to be handled with care "and never to be touched by hands that are dirty."


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
Memorial Mural
I love painting large," Dan Whedon said. When he decided to create an art work in memory of his grandmother, Aida Whedon, he assumed that finding the right canvas would be a challenge. Because Mr. Whedon not only paints large, he also paints outdoors.


Paris, 1994


A Hatful of Yoo-Hoo's, A Roomful of Vocations
UPTOWN -- "I'm over 70! I'm too old for this!"
On Dec. 18, Shelley Winters, who doesn't appear to be too old for anything, was at the Actors Studio on West 44th Street to watch a revival of "A Hatful of Rain." Ms.
Winters, in sunglasses and a scarf held in place by a baseball cap, played opposite Ben Gazzara in the original 1955 Broadway production of the play, which was the Actors Studio's first commercial success.


Cross-Dressers In the Outback And a Family With Problems
Parker's Pen -- Socialites should think twice before asking their famous guests to behave like performing seals.
When prodded to give a reading at a lawn party, a scowling Dorothy Parker (Jennifer Jason Leigh) reels off her nasty meditation on suicide.
"Guns aren't lawful/ Nooses give/ Gas smells awful/ You might as well live," she intones in a punch-drunk voice that stops the party cold.
Ms.
Leigh's performance was exceptionally brave for being so relentlessly bitter.
Although her portrayal may have been highly mannered, it was a convincing portrait of a lonely alcoholic malcontent with a viper's tongue.
Best Performance in a Dress -- Terence Stamp's portrayal of Bernadette, an aging drag queen, in "The Adventures of Priscilla, Queen of the Desert" had a witty mixed message about sexual identity and role playing.
The oldest of a trio of transvestite entertainers traveling through the Australian outback, Bernadette personified genteel drag-queen hauteur.
Yet Bernadette also shucked off her matronly airs long enough to rescue the trio from imminent peril.
Echoes of Mr.
Stamp as a dashing movie hero in the late 60's filtered through the women's clothing to suggest volumes about yin and yang.


John E. Boswell, 47, Historian Of Medieval Gay Culture, Dies
John Eastburn Boswell, a Yale University historian who upended medieval scholarship by finding not only that homosexuality was tolerated in the Middle Ages but that same-sex unions were celebrated liturgically, died yesterday in the Yale infirmary.
He was 47 and lived in New Haven.
The cause was complications from AIDS, a friend, Jerry Hart, said.


The Chiefs Travel to Los Angeles And Show They Are Still Players
When the Kansas City Chiefs play the Los Angeles Raiders, two things usually happen.
The Chiefs play 'em like they know 'em.
With confidence.
Like they have practiced against them all week.
And, the Chiefs wait for the Raiders to self-destruct.
To make a big mistake.
To turn the game over into the Chiefs' hands.
Both of those things happened here today, and a third thing, too.


Capturing 70 Years of Memories of State Parks on Long Island
THE state parks on Long Island did not just materialize.
The parks and the parkways that link them were carefully planned and laid out.
"In Castles in the Sand," historic photographs, early film footage, architectural and engineering drawings and other artifacts that form the archives of the Long Island State Parks Region were drawn on, in collaboration with the Society for the Preservation of Long Island Antiquities, to form an exhibition that is on view Thursdays through Sundays to the end of April at the Gallery on Main Street and Shore Road in Cold Spring Harbor (941-9444).


Principal Says Corporate Aid Pays Off
Last fall, the principal of Washington Irving High School walked into a meeting called by the 14th Street-Union Square Local Development Corporation.
Though Robert Durkin was invited, he didn't exactly feel welcome.
Local business leaders told him that his students were vandalizing their property, that his students were shoplifting from their stores, that his students were, in short, a menace to society.
Mr.
Durkin, an ex-history teacher who works 12- and 14-hour days, listened, then defended his 2,700 charges: 90 percent of them black and Hispanic, 70 percent of them from families at or below the poverty level, and very few of them from the neighborhood.
"I told them, 'If you got to know them, you'd realize they're a great bunch of kids,' " he recalled.
More importantly, the affable 50-year-old principal said: "I need your help to improve their education."


Pollution Threat to Taj Gains Attention in India
FOR many who visit the Taj Mahal, the journey begins with the predawn awakening necessary to catch the Shatabdi Express train that runs south from New Delhi to Agra, site of the world's most famous shrine to love.
It is perhaps best to begin the trip in the dark, for a visit to the Taj can be an ascent, esthetically as much as literally, into the light.
Out of the blackness of the Delhi night, the train runs into the grays and pinks and oranges of dawn on the north Indian plain.
Approaching Agra, two hours south, the colors change again, with a gray-brown haze of thick smog enveloping the city, especially in the winter months when most tourists visit India.


Tributes, Highlights, Farewells
IT is almost New Year's, so let's look back at some of what 1994 had to offer Connecticut music lovers.
MOST AMBITIOUS PREMIERES: Berlioz's recently found Messe Solennelle was performed for the first time in the state (and only the third time in the United States) by the Farmington Valley Symphony and the Hartt Masterworks Chorale under John Eells, and even though one had to be in Spain to hear it, Sayard Stone led the Connecticut Chamber Orchestra in the world premiere of a newly discovered Mendelssohn Piano Concerto.


WHO WILL HELP THE BLACK MAN?
I suppose you thought you could cover up yet another ghetto-underclass article by propping up a group of successful black males to discuss their personal feelings and opinions about "it and them." The African-American readers of your magazine want to see themselves portrayed fairly and not typecast as drug dealers, drug abusers, unwed mothers, rappers.
There are so many interesting stories out there.
We want to know about people like Joseph Marshall.
I'd like to know what happened to Ken Hamblin in Brooklyn that left him practically shellshocked.


Holiday Travelers Cope With Threat of Chaos
Despite their fears that the grounding of some planes by two airlines would paralyze much of the nation this Christmas holiday, travelers found that the busiest travel period of the year has gotten off to a surprisingly peaceful start, mainly because they had enough notice to find alternatives.
And warmer temperatures on the Eastern seaboard helped.
"For the most part our people are getting where they want to go," said Linda P. Puckett of Travel Agents International in Raleigh, N.C., "but not always via the most convenient route."


Young And Ready To Have A Party
Lincoln Center festivity benefits the School of American Ballet, Dec. 10.


With an Ax and Vodka, Trimming a Holiday Tree
If Christmas is a time for surprises, New York Times correspondents have had their share: along with the Japanese Santa and tree-trimming Muscovites there were the Serbian snipers, the bullets in Beirut, the tragic fire in Tennessee.
In writing of their most memorable Christmases away from home, 10 correspondents range around the world; some recall elegant feasts, in a Swabian castle or a Hong Kong hotel; others cannot forget the fruitcake they could not possibly eat in Somalia, the joy radiating from a Saigon cathedral, or the tearful Mass in Sarajevo.
All remember how they counted their blessings.


IT'S . . . LIAM NEESON!
Surely, Liam Neeson is aware of the irony of posing bare-chested for Dinitia Smith's article "It's . . . Liam Neeson!" (Dec. 4), while complaining about the news media's unwarranted interest in his love life.
Had he thought to don even a bathrobe, I might not have found myself wondering about his lovemaking abilities myself.
DEBORAH MURPHY Huntington, L.I.


This Week's Numbers
Last
Consensus
Period
Estimates
(I.D.E.A. INC.)
Tues.
Existing-home sales, Nov., mils., ann. rate
3.91
3.90
Consumer confidence index, Dec.
110
101.6
Thur.
Leading indicators, Nov., pct. chg.
-0.1
0.1
Weekly jobless claims, thousands
326
325
Import prices, Nov., pct. change
0.7
0.3
Fri.
New-home sales, Nov., thous., ann. rate
726
720
Purchasing managers index, Dec.
67.4
65.0
*4*
Mon.
Holiday
Tues.
Johnson Redbook report released
Fri.
Financial markets close early


Putting Never-Ending Road Work on a Faster Track
Irritated for years by interminable projects like the reconstruction of the Avenue of the Americas and of Hudson Street, many New Yorkers have grown cynical that road work can ever get done on time.
But such projects may be more flexible than people think: with prodding from Mayor Giuliani, the city may be able to finish rebuilding Columbus Avenue by next November, a year ahead of schedule.
Just how to accelerate the work, how fast it can be done and how much extra money can be channeled toward it are the subject of intense negotiations among city departments and the project's two contractors.
The president of one contracting firm, Edward Cruz, said that by adding 10 percent in extra labor costs to the project's $65 million budget, the work could be done far sooner than its deadline of late 1996.


Like Japan, We Too Have School Bullies
To the Editor:
"Suicides by Bullied Students Stir Japanese Furor" (news article, Dec. 18) should remind us to take the log out of our own eye before noting the splinter in our neighbor's.


Jingle Hell
Somewhere along the way, without consulting those of us forced to live with the consequences, the committee of experts responsible for styling the major holidays decreed that Christmas would be Bavarian, and it has been ever since.
The tyranny of the homey, the gemutlich, the relentlessly quaint, cannot, I think, be overestimated.
The images of picturesque domesticity that twinkle at us from cards and ads and store windows are almost exclusively Northern and snowbound.
Happy, whole families gather round the hearth and gingerbread houses nestled amid the evergreens, against hills gently illuminated by the light of the moon.
Mail-order catalogues likewise do their part in projecting these storybook ideals, with pictures of sleek-haired models dressed in velvet robes on Christmas morning, opening exquisitely wrapped packages that contain expensive tokens of love.
Meanwhile, the children, little cherubs costumed in velvet smocks and suits, are absorbed in play with their new dolls and trains. (This was before Nintendo.)
Measured against such rigid, cookie-cutter standards, not many of us qualify for inclusion in the festivities.
Single parents need not apply.
Nor should the bereft, the depressed or the lonely.
If those who find themselves in a warm climate feel as if they're missing the quintessential Christmas experience, it's no wonder: blazing sunshine, sand and palm trees have no place here.
There is no tropical equivalent for the customary trappings -- the one-horse open sleigh, the Yule log, the Tannenbaum, the wreath on the door, the mistletoe.


U.S. Job Losses
To the Editor:
Your article was a cruel joke on the Americans who have had their manufacturing jobs exported overseas.
Stefan H. Robock uses lots of statistics to buttress his view.
But why don't we return instead to using a time-honored American trait: common sense?


A.M.A. States New Policy On Sexuality
The American Medical Association has urged doctors to seek a greater understanding of their homosexual and bisexual patients, saying that health care is enhanced by "the physician's nonjudgmental recognition of sexual orientation and behavior."
In a report adopted this month, the medical association also dropped a 13-year-old policy of encouraging programs to acquaint gay patients with "the possibility of sex preference reversal in selected cases."


Julie F. Rabinowitz, Andrew L. Buck
Julie Fran Rabinowitz, a daughter of Beverly and Robert Rabinowitz of Brooklyn, is to be married this evening to Andrew Lawrence Buck, the son of Marty and Melvin Buck of Houston.
Cantor David Propis is to perform the ceremony at Congregation Beth Shalom in Lawrence, L.I.
The bride, 26, is the development associate at the Jewish Fund for Justice, a philanthropy that supports community projects, in New York.
She graduated from the State University at Albany and is a candidate for a master's degree in contemporary Jewry at the Hebrew University of Jerusalem.


Data Bank/December 25, 1994
Data Bank/December 25, 1994
New Orders for Durable Goods
Nov.
Oct.
Sept.
Monthly percent change
3.4
-0.9
0.5
Personal Income
Monthly percent change
-0.1
1.4
0.6
Merchandise Exports
In billions
$59.7
$60.1
$59.9
Merchandise Imports
In billions
$69.8
$69.4
$69.6
Gross Domestic Product
III Q'94
II Q'94
I Q'94
1987 dollars, in percent
4.0
4.1
3.4
Gold
Dec. 23
Dec. 16
Dec. 9
Friday A.M. London fix, per ounce
$381.55
$379.70
$376.10
3-Month Treasury Bills
Rate in percent
5.51
5.53
5.64
Weekly Jobless Claims
Dec. 16
Dec. 9
Dec. 2
In thousands
326
323
324


Business Diary: December 18-23
INTERNATIONAL The Mexican Miracle, Apparently, Was Not What It Seemed  Ross Perot, trying to head off the North American Free Trade Agreement, warned that if the accord became reality, Mexico would devalue the peso, letting low-price goods flood northward.
He may have been partly right.
Mexico, it seems, tried mightily to prop up the peso, but last week that effort failed -- failed big.
The peso, already weakening, plummeted when Mexico let it go into free-fall against the dollar.
Some costs were quick: banks and other investors lost a bundle.
And some will stick around: an abrupt loss of confidence in the new President, Ernesto Zedillo, and a fear of new economic chaos in a nation seemingly getting its footing.
So how did the Mexican Miracle take such a nasty spill?
Perhaps because that miracle was kept alive more on hope than on basics.
The hope now: a new, solid beginning with the peso at a lower, more stable level.
Listen to the Children  Think of "hand-held electronic organizers" and you naturally think of sleek, solemn, hyped-up executives.
At least American companies think that way; in Japan they had a better idea -- make them for children.
And now they're a big hit with preteen-age girls (the boys are still hooked on Sega and the like), who use them for fortune-telling games, or to create computer-animated virtual pets, or perhaps to "whisper" messages across a room.
Casio, heeding the lesson, has started selling kid-level organizers in the United States.
There's probably a lesson here for Apple Computer and its Newton "personal digital assistant": The children know.
THE ECONOMY Carter Plays Softball  Talk about the sacred and the mundane!
Jimmy Carter, hopping about the globe in a crusade for world peace, last week offered his services in a surprisingly humble dispute -- one in which, though feelings run high, no bloodshed seems likely.
Yes, we're talking baseball, and Mr.
Carter's gesture didn't seem to help.
Players and owners have so far managed to erase a sizable business from the American map, and the owners just declared an impasse and decreed a salary cap -- when, that is, salaries are paid.
Of Owls and 'Welfare Cowboys'  On the environmental front, President Clinton just got his way in one battle and retreated from another.
He put a lot of effort into resolving a dispute about logging in Northwest forests that house the fabled spotted owl, and the Administration came up with a plan allowing harvests at less than a fifth of 80's levels.
And last week a Federal judge approved the plan.
At the same time, Interior Secretary Babbitt backed down from a plan to increase grazing fees for public lands, leaving the issue to the Republicans.
Environmentalists jumped hard on this one, with one lawyer predicting that Congress would "perpetuate subsidies for welfare cowboys."  Open Gift, Insert Foot  The Christmas gift to clients -- it's usually a cliche so tired it's snoring on arrival.
A bottle of Scotch, perhaps -- or maybe a bottle of Scotch.
But now, into this imaginative void, leaps Raoul Felder.
After Mr.
Felder, a Manhattan divorce lawyer, dropped a knife on his foot some years ago, he was flooded with slippers of sympathy -- 150 pairs, which he then had to give away.
Aha! he said, and a furry idea was born.
This year, when gift season descended, he sent out 200 pairs of slippers that have a marked likeness to Mr.
Felder -- hardly surprising, since he'd sent off multiple photographs and sketches to a slipper importer, which in turn got a Chinese factory to do the deed.
With stuff like this, who needs lawyer jokes?
Tax, Spend, Cut, Duck  Robert Byrd hit it on the head last week.
Gazing at the jumble of tax cuts and spending cuts sprouting on both sides of the aisle, Senator Byrd, the West Virginia Democrat, called it all "drag racing" that would end in a "demolition derby." No sooner had President Clinton leaped for the tax-cut wagon than the Republicans yanked it from under him, saying spending cuts would have to come first.
Sure enough, the next day Mr.
Clinton came up with $24 billion in spending cuts, nearly half of it from the Energy Department.
Newt Gingrich had no comment; "we have our own plan," his press secretary said.
All this commotion, and it isn't even Jan. 1 yet.
Tax advice for '95: duck.
Prancer for Vice President?
Perhaps it's part of the migration back to traditional values, perhaps it's just a cyclical quirk, but Santa Claus was hot, hot, hot this time around.
Hallmark reports that the image of the revered Mr.
Claus -- whether on card or gift wrap -- was especially strong, and Coke has splashed a jolly Santa on bottles and cans.
And he's managed to put a pudgy, fur-draped foot squarely in the land of the serious (an episode on A&amp;E's "Biography," putting him in a league with F.D.R.) and the popular (a Better Homes and Gardens cover, in a league with Oprah and Di).
Clearly, he'll be running for President in '96.
COMPANIES A Pentium in Time . . .
It was fun while it lasted -- watching the computer types debate the difference between "perfect" and "99.989 percent perfect" (or was it 99.898?).
But the great Pentium drama seems to be over: last week Intel blinked, saying it would gladly replace those flawed chips.
Andrew Grove, Intel's president, said he regretted a policy that "seemed arrogant and uncaring," and the company ran large ads apologizing.
The impact on Intel: of the five million Pentiums, perhaps a million will be replaced; at $100 a shot, that might cost Intel $100 million.
Pretty minor, investors thought, as the stock shot up.
The impact on you (if your computer has a Pentium): call (800) 628-8686 now, and you'll get a replacement, though it may take two months.
Or wait a decade or two -- the offer's open-ended.
But by then, of course, today's computers will seem like amusing antiques. . . .
Did the Pentium, by the way, make Intel directors and executives nervous?
Perhaps.
In the last couple of months, as the crisis was unfolding, eight insiders sold more than 250,000 shares (roughly $15 million worth); in last year's fourth quarter, they sold none. . . .
Windows a Bit Late  Just half an hour after Intel threw in the chip, Microsoft said the release of its new operating system would be delayed yet again, possibly till August.
It's the successor to Windows 3.1 -- the giant-killer among operating systems -- and when it appears, it could rake in $1 billion in sales in a year.
But so far it's been called Windows 95 -- not, as it turns out, the greatest name.
At last report, no delay is expected in the onset of the new year, so "we may have to rename it," a Microsoft executive said.
But at least it seems determined to get it right before it goes public.
Microsoft's shares took a fast dip.
A Matter of a Few Zeros  When Prudential Securities agreed last week to pay $550,000 for making illegal political donations, it was the largest civil settlement ever for the Federal Election Commission.
But put it in perspective: Prudential has paid more than 1,000 times that -- $700 million -- to settle civil and criminal charges linked to the sale of limited partnerships.  'Liberal Books Don't Sell'  Newt Gingrich once accused House Speaker Jim Wright of fuzzy ethics concerning sales of a book Mr.
Wright had written (and earned $55,000 from).
Soon, farewell Mr.
Wright; five years later, enter Mr.
Gingrich.
And last week came reports that Mr.
Gingrich had signed a $4 million-plus book contract with HarperCollins, a Murdoch publishing house.
Representative David Bonior labeled the deal a "$4 million Christmas gift" from an empire that includes the Fox network, which faces a regulatory battle.
A spokesman for Mr.
Gingrich called Mr.
Bonior "an attack dog." As for Mr.
Gingrich, he said, "Conservative books sell. I can't help it if liberal books don't sell." Quick!
Where's the Perfume?
Guess what, guys: the stores are on to you.
It's a retailing axiom that merchants make half their annual sales during Macy's Gridlock Month (sometimes known as December, though it starts the second that Thanksgiving's over).
But store executives know this bizarre season can be broken into more precise fragments.
Last week, for instance, was the week of the panic shopper -- and "men," a Bloomingdale's manager said with assurance, "are panic shoppers." So if you dashed into a store and grabbed the first gifts you saw, you can be sure those gifts were deliberately placed in your line of sight -- and that just over the next rise of perfumes, clerks nodded knowingly.


Students Everywhere, and Fears of Adding More
In 1895, when the northern channel of the Harlem River was redug, a small chunk of Manhattan was sliced off and attached to the Bronx.
The area, Marble Hill, has remained a special enclave, with Victorian town houses on narrow, winding streets and a peculiar pride in its status as a Manhattan neighborhood.
But since 1972, when the huge, eight-story John F. Kennedy High School was built there for students from both Manhattan and the Bronx, tensions over crowding in the neighborhood have grown.
Built for a student body of 3,509, the school now has 5,118.
Unable to accommodate everybody in its three cafeterias, the school allows some students to leave at lunchtime, leading neighbors to perceive that their streets are crowded with students all day.


Uprising or Coup? Romanians Ask 5 Years Later
Five years after the violent overthrow of Communism here people still ask: Was the turmoil and the execution of the dictator Nicolae Ceausescu a coup or a popular uprising?
The question persists because the faces of power have stayed largely the same in Romania and the faces belong to the Communist past.


Dec. 18-24: Congressional Ethics; A $4 Million Book Deal Makes Gingrich a Target
Newt Gingrich, the Georgia Republican, Democratic nemesis and next House Speaker, signed a $4 million-plus contract last week to produce two books on conservatism.
Democrats were utterly aghast, but it was hard to tell whether they were shocked, jealous, playing hardball politics -- or all three.
The question is whether the deal passes the ethical smell test.
The contract is easily the largest ever for a sitting Federal politician; the White House said that alone makes it suspect.
And Mr.
Gingrich's publisher, HarperCollins, is owned by Rupert Murdoch, the right-leaning media potentate whose Fox television network is embroiled in a nasty Federal regulatory battle.
Republicans in Congress already side with Mr.
Murdoch in that fight, a fact that led a Democratic Representative, David Bonior of Michigan, to brand the Gingrich deal a "Christmas gift" from "the most notorious foreign news corporation in the world." In other words, close to a bribe.


New Year's Bash That Celebrates With Caviar and Pastry
SPENDING New Year's Eve at home offers an occasion to pull out many of the stops.
Break out the caviar, top the pizza with smoked salmon, drench pastries in rum to regale guests toasting yet another turn of the calendar.
All this calls for some baking.
With yeast.
The best blini, a classic underpinning for the caviar, are yeast-raised.
But these feathery mouthfuls are convenient to make for a late supper because they require rising time.
They also hold up well in a warmer.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League  BALTIMORE ORIOLES -- Agreed to terms with Harold Baines, designated hitter, on a one-year contract.
Failed to offer 1995 contracts to Dwight Smith, outfielder; Jim Poole, pitcher, and Jeff Tackett, catcher, making them free agents.


New No-Frills Contender
The latest entry in the growing low-cost, no-frills airline sweepstakes is Vanguard Airlines.
And many of the people behind it, including Vanguard's chief financial officer, Fred DeLeeuw, learned their trade at People Express, the famous budget airline of the '80s.
To avoid going the way of People Express, which went out of business on Jan. 31, 1987, Vanguard is set to expand slowly.


He Heard America Jiving
THE COLLECTED POEMS  OF LANGSTON HUGHES  Edited by Arnold Rampersad and David Roessel. 708 pp.
New York:  Alfred A. Knopf. $30.


Drip, Drip: How a Leak Became a Crusade
GLORIA MOSESSON'S leak may have started in 1968 on the roof of her building, 290 West End Avenue, but as that trickle bored through her ceiling, her soul and her bank account, it has turned into a raging river of bile.
She is angry at her neighbors, her co-op board, the building's management and the courts.
After a quick trip over her legal paper trail, one can assume they are angry, too.
But this is not a trial, just the story of a leak and one woman's quest for three things: "I want justice," Ms.
Mosesson said last week.
"I want retribution. I want a million dollars."
We are standing in her bedroom, 16 floors up.
The corner windows face west over the Hudson and uptown; sunsets and northern light.
Above her bed, however, where the walls meet the ceiling, are gouges exposing crumbly gray rock and rusty wire mesh.


Angel Art and Babar on Film: A Child's Christmas Week in New York
Tired of the tree?
Simply unable to sit through the Radio City Christmas pageant again?
Here is a citywide selection of holiday events that you and the children probably haven't tried before.
"APPELEMANDO'S DREAMS" A new one-act opera about a boy who loves to dream and what happens when his dreams blow into his imaginary Drabtown.
Tomorrow through Saturday, 1 and 3 P.M. at the Vineyard Theater, 309 East 26th Street, Manhattan.
Tickets, $6 for children; $12 for adults. (212) 353-3874.


Krazy Kat and Rabbi Loew
GREAT TOPICS OF THE WORLD  Essays.
By Albert Goldbarth.  193 pp.
Boston:  David R. Godine. $22.95.


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: December 25, 1994
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
15
DISCLOSURE, by Michael Crichton. (Ballantine, $6.99.) An executive who rejected his boss is accused by her of sexual harassment.
2
32
INTERVIEW WITH THE VAMPIRE, by Anne Rice. (Ballantine, $6.99.) The 1976 novel that began "The Vampire Chronicles."
3
5
A DANGEROUS FORTUNE, by Ken Follett. (Island/Dell, $6.99.) A young student's mysterious drowning in Victorian England.
4
8
MR.
MURDER, by Dean Koontz. (Berkley, $6.99.) A mystery writer's happy family life -- and the madman determined to take his place.
5
28
THE SHIPPING NEWS, by E. Annie Proulx. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $12.) A man mourns his adulterous wife in Newfoundland.
6
4
SLOW WALTZ IN CEDAR BEND, by Robert James Waller. (Warner, $4.99.) The romance of a professor and a colleague's wife.
7
13
THE VAMPIRE LESTAT, by Anne Rice. (Ballantine, $6.99.) Eerie carryings-on in a tale ranging from ancient Egypt to the 20th century.
8
6
BAD LOVE, by Jonathan Kellerman. (Bantam, $6.50.) The psychologist-detective Alex Delaware tracks a series of violent deaths.
9
3
MCNALLY'S CAPER, by Lawrence Sanders. (Berkley, $6.50.) Archy McNally on the trail of a malefactor at large in a Palm Beach mansion.
10
13
VANISHED, by Danielle Steel. (Dell, $6.99.) The abduction of their young son creates a crisis for a man and a woman and for her first lover.
11
17
SMILLA'S SENSE OF SNOW, by Peter Hoeg. (Dell, $6.50.) In Copenhagen and Greenland, a woman investigates a child's death.
12
6
YOU BELONG TO ME, by Johanna Lindsey. (Avon, $6.50.) An arranged marriage between two reluctant partners in 19th-century Russia.
13
25
WITHOUT REMORSE, by Tom Clancy. (Berkley, $6.99.) John Kelly tries to rescue prisoners held in North Vietnam.
14
10
THE QUEEN OF THE DAMNED, by Anne Rice. (Ballantine, $6.99.) Continuing the author's chronicle of 6,000 years of vampirism.
15
13
THE DOOR TO DECEMBER, by Dean Koontz. (Signet, $6.99.) A revised edition of a 1985 novel about a young girl's mysterious disappearance.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
NonFiction
1
14
EMBRACED BY THE LIGHT, by Betty J. Eadie with Curtis Taylor. (Bantam, $5.99.) A woman's near-death experience.
2
1
SEINLANGUAGE, by Jerry Seinfeld. (Bantam, $5.99.) Observations on life's pleasures and ordeals by the star of "Seinfeld."
3
50
CARE OF THE SOUL, by Thomas Moore. (Harper Perennial, $12.) A psychotherapist discusses spirituality and everyday life.
4
13
HAVING OUR SAY, by Sarah L. Delany and A. Elizabeth Delany with Amy Hill Hearth. (Dell, $5.99.) Two black sisters, both of them over 100, reflect on their lives.
5
9
WOULDN'T TAKE NOTHING FOR MY JOURNEY NOW, by Maya Angelou. (Bantam, $5.50.) Essays on life and death, good and evil.
6
2
SOUL MATES, by Thomas Moore. (Harper Perennial, $13.) A psychotherapist discusses love and relationships.
7
48
WHERE ANGELS WALK, by Joan Wester Anderson. (Ballantine, $10.) Stories about angelic intervention in human affairs.
8
9
SEE, I TOLD YOU SO, by Rush Limbaugh. (Pocket, $6.99.) More comments on the state of the nation by the talk show host.
9
581
THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott
Peck. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $10.95.) Inspiration.
10
17
A HISTORY OF GOD, by Karen Armstrong. (Ballantine, $14.) The development of monotheism over the past 4,000 years.
11
32
MAMA MAKES UP HER MIND, by Bailey White. (Vintage, $10.) Life in a Georgia town.
12
7
ARMORED CAV, by Tom Clancy. (Berkley, $15.) A "guided tour" of an armored cavalry regiment.
13*
7
A MARRIAGE MADE IN HEAVEN ...
OR TOO TIRED FOR AN AFFAIR, by Erma Bombeck. (Harper Paperbacks, $5.99.) Thoughts on 44 years of marriage.
14
9
FURTHER ALONG THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $12.) A discussion of spiritual growth.
15
13
DAKOTA, by Kathleen Norris. (Houghton Mifflin, $9.95.) A celebration of the changing life and terrain of the Great Plains.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Advice, How-To and Miscellaneous
1
12
HOMICIDAL PSYCHO JUNGLE CAT, by Bill Watterson. (Andrews &amp; McMeel, $12.95.) A collection of "Calvin and Hobbes" cartoons.
2
13
CHICKEN SOUP FOR THE SOUL, compiled by Jack Canfield and Mark Victor Hansen. (Health Communications, $12.) Stories meant to "open the heart and rekindle the spirit."
3
3
ENSUCKLOPEDIA, by Sam Johnson, Chris Marcil, et al. (MTV/Pocket, $10.) Cartoon humor featuring the television characters Beavis and Butt-head.
4
4
THE CURSE OF MADAME "C," by Gary Larson. (Andrews &amp; McMeel, $8.95.) A collection of "Far Side" cartoons.
Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending Dec. 10, at 3,050 bookstores plus wholesalers serving 38,000 other retailers, statistically weighted to represent sales in all such outlets nationwide.
An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.


Smart Genes?
To the Editor:
"The Curse of Living Within One's Genes" (The Week in Review, Dec. 18) elevates the message of Charles Murray's and Richard J. Herrnstein's "Bell Curve" to the same level as the discovery of a specific fat gene in mice.
That discovery is real science, with the description of the gene's existence and mode of action verified by solid experiment.


Sports of The Times; The Sun Will Come Up Next Season
BAY WATCH was a pointless exercise by the end of the first quarter yesterday at Giants Stadium.
Green Bay had a couple of touchdowns on the board at Tampa Bay and was well on its way to the wild card kingdom, even if the Giants would later try to set the communications industry back 50 years.
They posted the Packers' early lead, then didn't bother to flash the score.
Word spread, of course, passed around like a politically incorrect office joke.
Kenyon Rasheed told David Meggett when the Packers went ahead, 21-6.
When someone in the second half asked Dan Reeves if he had heard a score, George Young whispered in Reeves's ear it was 28-6.
Reeves wanted to know what the big secret was.


Prime Specimens of Classic and Sleeper
Even at $139.95 (which included a copy of the Thomas Keneally novel that inspired the movie, a CD of the soundtrack and a book of stills from the film), it was a title one wanted to own.


The Steinberg Diagnosis Adds Sorrow to Jets' Pain
The Jets have rarely been as glum after a loss as they were today, but the defeat in the season's finale against the Oilers was almost overshadowed by the news the players received in the locker room.
"Everything that could have happened to this team has happened," said Boomer Esiason.
"And then to find out about Dick, all the players looked at each other as if to say, 'What happened?' "


Promises, Promises: Ryan Misses
Falcons 10, Cardinals 6
Buddy Ryan's playoff guarantee ended even before his team fell inches short on the last play of yesterday's game.


Corrections
A picture caption last Sunday with the Art column misidentified a work at the Parrish Museum.
The picture, on the right, was George Inness's "Christmas Eve," not Jews praying at the Western Wall.


Should Anyone Care Who the Chancellor Is?
DURING the showdown between the Mayor of New York City and the Chancellor of the country's largest public school system, the parents of the Manhattan School for Children, a small alternative public school on the Upper West Side of Manhattan, met to discuss the important issues of the day.
They debated whether to introduce Chinese or Spanish as a second language.
They discussed whether it was appropriate to hold a candy sale to raise money.
They decided to stop bringing in bottled water after testing showed that the school's drinking water was not contaminated with lead after all.
They got an update on grant applications.


Wall Street; Aviation Anxiety Is Good News for Flightsafety
THE Dec. 13 crash of an American Eagle commuter flight in North Carolina set off a rally in shares of Flightsafety International, the Queens-based provider of training to operators of aircraft, ships, electrical utilities and steam generating plants.
The stock, which closed at $38.75 the day of the crash, had reached $41.50 by Dec. 16.
On Friday, it closed at $40.875.


NEWT'S POTBOILER
Newt Gingrich calls his book "historical science fiction -- a very unique genre" (On Washington: "Newt's Potboiler," by Maureen Dowd, Dec. 4).
Actually, as a novel that considers what the present would be like had the past been different, it belongs to a very popular species of science fiction generally called "alternative futures." One of the best examples came from the pen of the late Philip K. Dick.
"The Man in the High Castle" imagined a United States divided between German and Japanese occupation, after defeat in World War II.
GARY REGER Hartford


FROM MY WIFE'S ROOM
Something told me to find some solitary, undisturbed time to read Robert Kotlowitz's article "From My Wife's Room" (Dec. 4).
Rarely have I felt such compassion and closeness for people I have never met.
At the end, I was exhausted but remarkably uplifted rather than sad.
His essay is a literary and personal tour de force.
GALE P. MASULLO New York


An Ill-Advised Drive, A Missed Game of Billiards
If Christmas is a time for surprises, New York Times correspondents have had their share: along with the Japanese Santa and tree-trimming Muscovites there were the Serbian snipers, the bullets in Beirut, the tragic fire in Tennessee.
In writing of their most memorable Christmases away from home, 10 correspondents range around the world; some recall elegant feasts, in a Swabian castle or a Hong Kong hotel; others cannot forget the fruitcake they could not possibly eat in Somalia, the joy radiating from a Saigon cathedral, or the tearful Mass in Sarajevo.
All remember how they counted their blessings.


An Elder Statesman, Young Turks, A Fallen Hero And a Leap Of Faith
Dylan's Benediction -- At Woodstock '94, the silver-anniversary ritual of rainy communal bonding in August, there were epiphanies for two generations.
Baby boomers rallied to the renascent Bob Dylan, 53, dressed in outlaw black and singing from the heart.
He riveted the throng with songs both apocalyptic and cautionary; then he obliquely blessed the younger crowd with a long-awaited chorus: "Everybody must get stoned."


What's a Newt?
The latest unscientific Sunday poll, designed to put Newt jokes to rest once and for all, posed the question: "What's a newt?" "Nothing," one person replied, "What's a newt with you?" Other answers:
"Like little lizards -- they go in the fish tank." Leonard Wright, 27, New York City.


Playoff Picture Clears, but Giants Aren't in It
The National Football League playoff picture, traditionally a confusing series of "what-ifs," began to take final shape yesterday on the last weekend of the regular season.
Games were played yesterday instead of Sunday to avoid having to play on Christmas Day.
The Giants entered the day with a chance of reaching the post-season, needing to beat the Dallas Cowboys at the Meadowlands and then have Green Bay lose at Tampa Bay.
The Giants did their part with a 15-10 victory, but Green Bay won by 34-19, and the Packers instead of the Giants made the playoffs.


New Terminal Expands The Brussels Airport
With the opening of the new terminal at the Brussels international airport this month, the city's airport capacity has doubled, from 10.5 million to 21 million passengers a year.
The $636 million facility, built in four years alongside the existing terminal, will handle 65 percent of the airport's departures through 23 gates.


No Headline
"I think the important thing about Christmas is sharing, but I just can't help myself. I get anxious about getting stuff." DYLAN ROSE, a first grader from Brooklyn.  [ 33:4. ]


Poor and Derelict, a City Glows in Candlelight
If Christmas is a time for surprises, New York Times correspondents have had their share: along with the Japanese Santa and tree-trimming Muscovites there were the Serbian snipers, the bullets in Beirut, the tragic fire in Tennessee.
In writing of their most memorable Christmases away from home, 10 correspondents range around the world; some recall elegant feasts, in a Swabian castle or a Hong Kong hotel; others cannot forget the fruitcake they could not possibly eat in Somalia, the joy radiating from a Saigon cathedral, or the tearful Mass in Sarajevo.
All remember how they counted their blessings.


CHRISTMAS ON THE ROAD -- GERMANY: R. W. APPLE Jr.; A Country Hotel in Swabia Takes Guests Into the Family
If Christmas is a time for surprises, New York Times correspondents have had their share: along with the Japanese Santa and tree-trimming Muscovites there were the Serbian snipers, the bullets in Beirut, the tragic fire in Tennessee.
In writing of their most memorable Christmases away from home, 10 correspondents range around the world; some recall elegant feasts, in a Swabian castle or a Hong Kong hotel; others cannot forget the fruitcake they could not possibly eat in Somalia, the joy radiating from a Saigon cathedral, or the tearful Mass in Sarajevo.
All remember how they counted their blessings.


Postal Worker Embezzled $3.5 Million
Robert Catallozzi's neighbors here sometimes wondered how he could afford to add a third floor to his home, buy a summer house and drive a Mercedes-Benz, a Jeep and a Winnebago on his salary as a postal employee.
"He had all sorts of big cars," recalled Sam Tregar, 17, who lived across the street.
"He couldn't have made all that money at the post office."


A SENSE OF PLACE
NEWARK, Dec. 25, 2014 -- The executive director of the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey pledged yesterday that Lincoln Tunnel and George Washington Bridge tolls would hold the line for another year without any major price increases.
"The $150 toll is safe until 2016," Stanley Brezenoff 2d announced.
But the director added that in 2016, tolls "will almost certainly rise," to cover an anticipated $400 billion budget shortfall.
A source close to the agency, who spoke on condition of anonymity, said the charge at the tollbooth was likely to rise to $200.


A Serving Of Chippendale For 18, and A Window on Wright's Vision
Luminous Glass -- Frank Lloyd Wright's stained-glass windows, as seen in the spring at the Museum of Modern Art (and at the Metropolitan Museum and the Barry Friedman gallery), provided a remarkable illustration of Wright's impact on modern architectural design.
His glorious vision for the 1912 Avery Coonley Playhouse, in Riverside, Ill., was to open the rooms to the world beyond.
So the building's panes on exhibit were mostly clear glass framed by festive images of flags, confetti and balloons -- luminous reminders of how he reversed the inward focus of medieval stained glass.


Well-Trimmed Trees
Walkers in New York who look ahead in determination or down in self-absorption risk missing the beguiling sights closer to the sky.
The falling away of the leaves often reveals a tree life of random decoration -- not the bells and lights of the Christmas tree, but the clinging and heaving of cassette tapes, shopping bags, balloons, car dealership flags, fish nets, dropcloths, old sneakers and Halloween skeletons.


Technology; At Sybase, a New Urgency for a Higher Profile
IF all goes as planned for Sybase Inc., 1995 will be the year the company surpasses $1 billion in annual sales and becomes the fifth-largest software publisher.
Only Microsoft, Computer Associates, Novell and Oracle would be bigger.
The sales milestone would be a significant accomplishment for Sybase, which did not ship its first product until 1987 and until recently had maintained such a low profile that it remains largely unknown outside the information systems departments of corporate America.


The First Horoscope
"Well, first she ought to fire some of those lawyers around her and get herself a good astrologer."
-- ELEANOR CLIFT ON HILLARY CLINTON


Editorial Notebook; Concord, Revisited
They are here again, on the big screen, just in time for Christmas.
Meg, Jo, Beth and Amy.
In childhood I chose to identify with Jo, but who didn't?
Of all the March girls, she was the most spirited, the most contemporary, the bravest.
Being the terminally domestic Meg was out of the question.
Beth was too good to be true and, besides, she died young.
Amy, of course, was impossibly shallow.
Still, someone who, in third grade, sometimes stuck a pencil through the bridge of her glasses in a bizarre effort to straighten a slight bump on her nose could not afford to scorn someone who wore a clothespin on hers.
Amy's fondness for using big words she could not pronounce was mine, too.
And I would have been just as reluctant to give up my breakfast to the Hummels.
"Little Women" showed up under my Christmas tree, as it did under hundreds of thousands of Christmas trees, soon after I learned how to read.
A lot of other Alcotts came later, and if a few years ago I bought a pair of bronze-colored shoes that I have never yet worn, it is because they reminded me of some I had read about in "Rose in Bloom." The other Alcotts, however, were recognizably fiction.
To me, "Little Women" was fact.
But, then, that's the way it is with all great novels.
Their reality erases the reader's.


Baseball Braces for a Brave New World of Replacements
The idea struck the general manager as absolutely ludicrous.
He was talking about replacement players, with whom major league owners are expected to try to stock their strikebound teams next spring, and he was asked how much clubs would have to pay them.


How to Tell Health Care From Toothpaste
To the Editor:
"While Congress Remains Silent, Health Care Transforms Itself" (front page, Dec. 18) quotes Kenneth S. Abramowitz, a market analyst, who likens health care to products such as "hotel rooms and toothpaste and automobiles." Calling the growth of health maintenance organizations "the corporatization of health care," Mr.
Abramowitz asks, "What's wrong with that?" As his own analogy suggests, a lot.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
GOOD DAYS AND MAD  A Hysterical Tour Behind the Scenes  at Mad Magazine.
By Dick DeBartolo.
Thunder's Mouth, $29.95.


Clients, Then a Company
RICHARD GREENBERG has a marked tendency to take the road less traveled.
And that has made all the difference.
After leaving Fair Lawn High School in Bergen County one course short of graduation, Mr.
Greenberg attended Duke University in Durham, N.C., where he earned a high school graduate equivalency diploma and then a Bachelor of Science degree.
He then went to the University of Southern California in San Diego, where he was awarded a Ph.D. in organic chemistry in 1983.


Speaking Softly, Nailing Jumpers
They call him Hammer, but that may be one of the bigger misnomers in sport's little world.
Armon Gilliam nails jump shots, yet he goes about the rest of his work and life not with abrupt force or a thumping noise, but with a quiet dignity, a search for more sanity than this crazy league can sometimes offer.
"His points are so silent, but so effective," Nets Coach Butch Beard said.
"That's Hammer's game."


End Is Near for the Old Luchow's
At the turn of the century, a three-story brownstone at 112 East 14th Street attracted a celebrity A-list, with the likes of Diamond Jim Brady, H. L. Mencken, Enrico Caruso and Lillian Russell stopping in for a Teutonic feast.
The building was abandoned in 1982, when the legendary Luchow's restaurant moved to midtown.
Now, the building, damaged by a serious fire early this month, is going to be demolished.
And the neighbors couldn't be happier.
"At this point, it's the best thing to do," said Thomas P. Knierim, a local community organizer.
"With the fire, there's nothing worth saving."


Nonpaying Tenants Menace Survival of Rental Housing
To the Editor:
There is a missing footnote to the Dec. 11 article "Tale of a Trashed Apartment and the Elusive Eviction," about landlord Mike Persaud's quest for eviction of a nonpaying tenant.
Mr.
Persaud is one of thousands of owners in the same predicament.


Judging Jackson Heights By Roosevelt Avenue Woes
To the Editor:
I was saddened by the Dec. 18 article "Boundaries Keep Shifting, but Fears Remain the Same." In describing various concerns of a neighboring community, Woodside, the article managed to slander my neighborhood, Jackson Heights, describing our problems as "overcrowding, drugs, noisy social clubs and prostitution."


Bulgaria
To the Editor: I enjoyed reading Susan Spano's Frugal Traveler column, "Exploring Sofia for About $33 a Day" (Nov. 6).
I traveled to Sofia in March 1992 and visited most of the places mentioned in the article.
The National Gallery of Art houses an interesting and impressive collection of Southeast Asian art.
I was not expecting to find such a collection in Bulgaria, and was very surprised when I visited the museum, which I did only to escape a sudden rainstorm.
I also found Sofia pleasantly inexpensive.
However, unlike Ms.
Spano, who found "little joy in the city streets," I found Sofia's wide avenues and varied and gilded architecture, although dusty, resplendent.
Maybe it was because I visited in the spring, but my impression was of a city alive, surviving and blooming quietly after many years of shouldering "the burdens of the recent and distant past." JEANNINE DALY  Mineola, L.I.


Crawfish Fiesta
Matthew's ** (212) 838-4343; 1030 Third Avenue, at 61st Street; $$$; all major credit cards


A Baroque Benefit
A gala for St. Luke's programs, Dec. 7.


Jets Are Hit Hard Even Before Their Loss
Bad news piled on bad play for the Jets today.
The team learned that its beleaguered general manager, Dick Steinberg, apparently has stomach cancer.


Police Say New Evidence Links Suspect to Firebomb
Authorities examining last week's subway train firebombing in lower Manhattan have located new witnesses who saw the badly burned suspect fleeing in the streets and aboard another train, and have found new evidence at his home in New Jersey, including a videotape on bomb making, investigators said yesterday.
The new witnesses and other evidence appeared to solidify an already strong case against Edward J. Leary, a 49-year-old unemployed computer expert, who is charged with attempted mass murder in a firebombing that injured scores of riders aboard a No. 4 train at the Fulton Street station on Wednesday.


The Working Poets Society
To the Editor:
"They're in a Position to Mix Metaphors with Business" (Nov. 27) deals with the recognition of poetry by the world of business, and its importance in the personal lives of many businessmen, a presence too long unheralded.
James Barr, as the new president of the Poetry Society of America, can make a major contribution to both worlds.


The Invalid, Bedridden?
To the Editor:
"Sunset Boulevard," with its swimming pool on stage, has joyously joined other recent musicals  [ "A Glittering 'Sunset' Rises," Nov. 27 ]  in stretching the technical capabilities of the musical theater.
Other examples include "Miss Saigon," with its onstage helicopter, and "Phantom of the Opera," with its falling chandelier.
No small feats, they have been well publicized and accepted with delight by the audience.
Technical accomplishment, in fact, explains much of the popularity of these shows.


New Year's Bash That Celebrates With Caviar and Pastry
SPENDING New Year's Eve at home offers an occasion to pull out many of the stops.
Break out the caviar, top the pizza with smoked salmon, drench pastries in rum to regale guests toasting yet another turn of the calendar.
All this calls for some baking.
With yeast.
The best blini, a classic underpinning for the caviar, are yeast-raised.
But these feathery mouthfuls are convenient to make for a late supper because they require rising time.
They also hold up well in a warmer.


Masako Ogata and Kevin P. Robock
Masako Ogata, a daughter of Keiko and Tsugio Ogata of Tokyo, was married on Friday to Kevin Paul Robock, the son of Kathleen J. and Paul V. Robock of Tokyo and Hopewell Junction, N.Y.
The Rev.
Clement Geysen performed the ceremony at St.
Augustine Roman Catholic Church in Honolulu.
The bride is a student at San Francisco State University.
Her father is the president of Tokyo Graphic Designers Inc. in Tokyo and is the president of the Pearl Country Club in Aiea, Hawaii.


Corrections
A picture caption on page 14 of The Times Magazine today about the 1994 Christmas card sent by Senator Bob Dole and his wife, Elizabeth, misspells her nickname.
It is Liddy, not Libby.


QE2 Is Allowed to Depart, Into Stormy Seas
The troubled cruise of what was to be a stunningly refurbished Queen Elizabeth 2 has moved back to the open seas -- though stormy ones -- after the Coast Guard decreed yesterday that it was safe for the liner to sail.
The most famous passenger ship afloat was given permission to set sail about 1:30 A.M., after the Coast Guard inspected repairs carried out since the ship arrived on Thursday.
Sailing on choppy seas, she was bound for St.
Lucia, in the Caribbean, for the second leg of a 108-day world cruise.


Storms Darken Holiday In Connecticut and on L.I.
A one-two punch of storms from the Carolinas, their winds flirting with hurricane force, pummeled and drenched the New York metropolitan region on Friday night and yesterday.
The severe weather snapped limbs from trees, downed power lines and tore three barges from their moorings in New Haven.
One barge bounded across Long Island Sound, ultimately running aground off Port Jefferson.


World Markets; Italy Awaits Fallout of a Political Crisis
IT was a week when Italians asked themselves whether they should be watching politics or the economy.
This time, the two looked more inextricably linked than they had been in a while.
The ill-starred Government of the tycoon-turned-Prime Minister, Silvio Berlusconi, was pulled down on Thursday by his squabbling coalition partners.
And on the same day that Mr.
Berlusconi handed President Oscar Luigi Scalfaro his resignation, the Governor of the Bank of Italy, Antonio Fazio, warned Mr.
Scalfaro of a worsening financial situation, one marked by signs that inflation was rising again and that interest rates were pressing upward.


Will a Flying Doll . . . Fly?
ON A GRAY AND GUSTY DAY IN JUNE, 35 GIRLS BETWEEN THE ages of 5 and 9 were gathered in a conference room near the San Francisco Airport, looking at prototypes of a toy they'd never seen before.
Lewis Galoob Toys had convened a series of focus groups to watch real live kids interact with a doll being developed for 1995.
The name of the doll was Sky Dancer.
Deborah Rivers, the research consultant who led the groups, would have preferred a less sterile environment to put the girls at their ease, but this windowless room would have to do.
On one wall were pictures of military airplanes.
Directly across was a one-way mirror, so that the precise reactions of the participants could be videotaped and analyzed later.


Count Your Blessings
A different bunch of people were asked: "What's the worst Christmas gift you ever received?"
My brother gave me an electric nose-hair clipper.
I can't explain it.
I don't think they're supposed to be for women.
I didn't ask him why.
Television producer, in her 30's.


Scenes That Turned, Towered and Toppled
Charmed Circle -- No 15 minutes were more magical than the prologue of "Carousel," during which the British designer Bob Crowley set a turntable spinning on the stage of the Vivian Beaumont Theater and with each spin progressively transformed a drab New England mill into a garish traveling carnival alive with penny attractions.
Riveting Medea -- In the spring revival of "Medea," Diana Rigg chose to emphasize the fierce intellect of the title character who slaughters her children in order to drive her faithless husband mad.
Once the forbidden deeds were done, the metal walls of Medea's palace fell to the ground with a crash, leaving her profiled against the racing clouds.
It was the year's most stunning coup de theatre.
And Ms.
Rigg took home a Tony.
Larger Than Life -- Irony of ironies, playing a forgotten movie star, Glenn Close became a bigger star than ever in Andrew Lloyd Webber's "Sunset Boulevard," which came to Broadway from Los Angeles in the fall.
As Norma Desmond, she looks like a demon in a Kabuki play and doesn't sing her songs so much as cast a spell over them.
Her rendition of "As if We Never Said Goodbye," the show's best number, is transfixing.


3 Museum Choices for the Kids
Several museums in the Northeast have offerings to appeal to children who are on vacation this week.
Among them are museums at Colonial Williamsburg in Virginia; the Brandywine River Museum in Chadds Ford, Pa., and museum-houses in Historic Deerfield, Mass.
The annual exhibition at Williamsburg, Christmas at the Abby Aldrich Rockefeller Folk Art Center, is augmented this year with 27 photographs of children with toys, musical instruments or animals.


PHOTOGRAPHER'S JOURNAL


The Remains of the Day
Holiday meals, with their extravagant ingredients, may elicit applause and ovation, but the real heroes of the holiday kitchen are those who are undaunted by what's left over.
It takes a stout heart to open the refrigerator the morning after and be inspired by this and that.
But it's this very transformation that is the essence of cooking.
Leftovers require imagination and improvisation.
They also require an instinct for food in its various incarnations, acknowledging what has been while imagining what can be.


FROM MY WIFE'S ROOM
Like Kolowitz's Billie, my wife, Ellie, died after a six-year battle with cancer (breast).
I know too well the oncologist's reticence, the seemingly endless procedures, the gripping fear and the sense of hopelessness -- the horrid inability to help the one person in life you love the most.


Under Sniper Fire In the Cruelest Month
If Christmas is a time for surprises, New York Times correspondents have had their share: along with the Japanese Santa and tree-trimming Muscovites there were the Serbian snipers, the bullets in Beirut, the tragic fire in Tennessee.
In writing of their most memorable Christmases away from home, 10 correspondents range around the world; some recall elegant feasts, in a Swabian castle or a Hong Kong hotel; others cannot forget the fruitcake they could not possibly eat in Somalia, the joy radiating from a Saigon cathedral, or the tearful Mass in Sarajevo.
All remember how they counted their blessings.


First Night in Freeport
ADOPTING a ritual established 17 years ago in Boston that has spread to 100 cities in the United States, Canada and Australia, Freeport will stage its second First Night Freeport celebration on Saturday.
Last year more than 4,500 people attended the festival.
This year, the director of the event, Mary Westring, said, she expects 9,000 adults and children to attend 95 performances and exhibitions from 2 P.M. to midnight at eight sites in the village.
The nonalcoholic day, which is budgeted at $125,000, ends with a fireworks display by Bay Fireworks at the Guy Lombardo Marina at the end of South Grove Street.


Now, Public Rights In Private Domains
IN ancient Greece, Aristotle argued that the public square should be divided from the market place so that the free exchange of ideas would not be polluted by the crass buying and selling of material goods.
One measure of civilization's progress is that the separatist urge persists more than 2,300 years after Aristotle roamed the agora.
Only now, the public square is an enclosed private mall where controversy is viewed as an impediment to commerce.
New Jersey's highest court ruled last week that owners of regional shopping centers that have supplanted traditional downtowns and that invite the public "to do whatever one would do downtown, including doing very little of anything," cannot then claim that the discreet exercise of free speech -- or, at least, handing out leaflets -- in their sanitized atriums and gallerias is bad for business.


Campus Where Stars Are a Major
STUDENTS at Connecticut College will explore the world of comets, stars and galaxies with a 20-inch reflecting telescope to be installed in the observatory of the college's new F. W. Olin Science Center.
The granite science building, perched high above the Thames River in New London, is at the center of the college's plan to improve its science program.
The gable-roofed building, which has a silver observatory dome and is expected to open in time for January classes, includes laboratories for all physical sciences at the college, a computer laboratory and classrooms.
When construction is finished, the three major parts of the telescope, packed in plywood boxes, will be lowered by crane through the opening in the observatory dome.
The base will go first, then the support arm and telescope tube.
Inside the observatory, the arm will be attached to the base, which is bolted to a concrete pier.
And the tube containing the optics will be attached to the arm.
Dozens of screws and bolts and yards of electrical wiring go into assembling a telescope, said Ron L. Hilliard, president of Optomechanics Research Inc. in Vail, Ariz., the manufacturer of the telescope.
The main parts are assembled in half a day, and by nightfall, the telescope is ready for a first look at the stars, which astronomers refer to as "first light."


Space Age Technology Joins Lyme Tick Fight
IT'S not exactly Star Wars, but the latest weapon in the battle against Lyme disease is stationed 435 miles above Earth and is equipped with an electronic scanner that surveys the landscape.
Working from a correlation between tick populations and patterns of vegetation, scientists are using images from the Landsat satellite to predict the likelihood of Lyme disease in various parts of Westchester.


NEWT'S POTBOILER
Gingrich's choice of World War II as the setting for his novel will generate devastating suspense.
One won't know until the last page whether the Nazis turn out to be the good guys or the bad guys.
GEOFFREY GRINSTEIN Yorktown Heights, N.Y.


Autistic Teen-Ager's Days at Camp Provide Respite for Him and His Mother
For 17 years, she has preserved the routines that define her son's cloistered life: putting him on the school bus each morning, walking him home on an unchanging route, fixing his dinner with gentle music in the background.
But a stretch of misfortune has left Dorothea Y. wondering if normalcy might soon be out of reach.
Mrs.
Y.'s son, Jonathan, suffers from autism, a brain disorder that causes extreme introversion starting in infancy.
He cannot maintain eye contact, talk normally or interact with others, and he depends on rigid routines for a sense of security.


Now Bulls Vs. Knicks Is Egg Nog And Nods
The Knicks-Bulls rivalry, marinated by several seasons of intense playoff matchups, used to conjure up images of everything that was good and bad about the National Basketball Association.
A statuesque Patrick Ewing fall-away from the baseline.
Scottie Pippen dunking, followed by Scottie Pippen pouting.
Elbows -- and sometimes fists -- flying.


Fresh Ways of Looking at the Masters
The Unknown Stella -- As one walked through the Joseph Stella show last summer at the Whitney Museum of American Art, expecting little, the exhibition revealed an artist more compelling, original and plain weird than anyone might have guessed on the basis of his Brooklyn Bridge pictures.
Stella's mix of Madonnas, flowers and Caribbean landscapes were the product of a ripe and iconoclastic imagination that found inspiration in everything from the Sienese Renaissance through Marcel Duchamp.
Altogether, the sleeper of the year.
Another Face of Picasso -- "Picasso and the Weeping Women: The Years of Marie-Therese and Dora Maar," at the Metropolitan Museum of Art over the summer, sounded as if it would be a mess but turned out to be a beautiful, quirky and inspiring near-mess.
Even by Picasso's standards, the work was unusually personal and suggestive (of his gigantic psyche).
Especially striking were the extraordinarily colored paintings from the 30's, which aren't usually thought of as his best years.
Poussin as Poet -- In the last rooms in the Poussin retrospective now at the Grand Palais in Paris, as one was feeling respectful of the brainy 17th-century French master but not passionate about him, something finally clicked.
It happened in front of Virgilian scenes of Arcadia like "Landscape With Diogenes" and awesome tempests like "Landscape With Pyramus and Thisbe" and in front of a touching self-portrait that reveals the artist as poet.
The Great Unveiling -- Michelangelo's "Last Judgment" in the Sistine Chapel in Rome, the cleaning of which was completed last spring, finally revealed itself as a grand, unified composition instead of the patchwork quilt it had seemed before.
Walking into the chapel, one is now struck by an image of brilliant color that sweeps the eye upward from hell to heaven, with the heroic figure of Christ as the anchor at the center.


Holiday Tomorrow
Christmas will be legally observed tomorrow.
Here are the holiday schedules.
NEW YORK  GOVERNMENT OFFICES Closed.


Spa, Not Spartan, Mentality Is Driving The New Breed of Gyms With Frills
For the last week or so, people walking by World Gym at 404 Lafayette Street have been seeing banners that said "Crunch" on the building.
What they may not have realized is that, not only has the owner of Crunch health clubs taken over World Gym's downtown branch, but a whole new concept in fitness clubs has begun.
Gone are the days of the Spartan work-out, to be replaced by fitness clubs with a strong spa flavor and -- in Crunch's case -- heavy retailing.
The new Crunch will have a 1,200-foot retail area (selling everything from Crunch-labeled T-shirts, hats and "body-wear"), a live D.J. and a haircutter.


Debacle on 34th Street
THE PROSECUTION: Your Honor, in the case of the People v.
Santa Claus, we intend to prove beyond a reasonable doubt, based on evidence provided by Clement Clarke Moore in his pretrial deposition "A Visit from St. Nicholas" and the testimony of other reliable witnesses, that the defendant, Santa Claus, a.k.a.
St.
Nicholas, Kris Kringle and Father Christmas, has violated, and each year continues to violate, numerous local, state and national laws.
Mr.
Moore describes being awakened from a deep sleep by noises on the roof that he characterizes in his deposition as "the prancing and pawing of each little hoof." Under New York State law, a person responsible for permitting prancing and pawing loud enough to disturb sleeping citizens is guilty of second-degree criminal nuisance, a misdemeanor.
The People urge you to sentence Santa to the maximum penalties permitted under the law, a $1,000 fine and six months in jail.


Washington at Work; The House Republicans' New Voice On Foreign Policy: Very Soft-Spoken
When the Republicans won control of the House of Representatives last month, a few conservative lawmakers began quietly plotting to deny Benjamin A. Gilman the post he had long cherished: the chairmanship of the House Foreign Affairs Committee.
Their thinking was that Mr.
Gilman, a New Yorker whom some conservatives brand "a Rockefeller Republican," was too old, too moderate, too soft-spoken and, truth be told, too nice.
In short, not enough of a fire-breather.


U.N. Troops Shoot Somalis
United Nations peacekeepers fired into a crowd of Somalis outside the gates of the seaport in Mogadishu today, wounding two men, a United Nations military spokesman said.
The peacekeepers, from Bangladesh, were trying to fire warning shots to disperse a crowd outside the United Nations-controlled port, said the spokesman, Maj.
Zubair Chattha.
The wounded men are being treated at a military hospital.


New Year's Bash That Celebrates With Caviar and Pastry
SPENDING New Year's Eve at home offers an occasion to pull out many of the stops.
Break out the caviar, top the pizza with smoked salmon, drench pastries in rum to regale guests toasting yet another turn of the calendar.
All this calls for some baking.
With yeast.
The best blini, a classic underpinning for the caviar, are yeast-raised.
But these feathery mouthfuls are convenient to make for a late supper because they require rising time.
They also hold up well in a warmer.


WHO WILL HELP THE BLACK MAN?
Your symposium underscored a concern that I've had for some time: I'm scared for my people.


For Many Italians, Holidays Bring a Respite From Scandals
It was the day before Christmas, when the city slowly lowers its shutters and shoppers head home with their packages before settling down to multicourse feasts of pasta and fish and turkey and wine.
This year it was also a time of relief that for a couple of days at least, they would get a respite frompolitical controversy and confusion.


Dickens In the Library
Holidays without 'A Christmas Carol'? Not at the Pierpont Morgan, Dec. 5.


Wall Street; Banks, Brokers and Vintage Whines
TAKING the side of the little guy can be a risky stance among Wall Street's self-regulators -- organizations like the New York Stock Exchange and the National Association of Securities Dealers that are bankrolled by brokerage firms and engage in turf wars with the other financial cops.
Just ask the people who run things at the N.A.S.D.
In what must have been a Yule-inspired bout of goodwill toward investors, the securities dealers' group recently proposed some pretty good ideas to protect Joe Public when he's buying securities while securely ensconsed inside the local bank.


CHRISTMAS 1994


P.D.Q. Bach Goes to Purchase
PETER SCHICKELE, looking as serious as an uncostumed Santa clone can look, was addressing one of his favorite topics: why is a mixture of humor and drama considered natural in literary works but not in music and why do people wear such long faces to classical music concerts?
The white-bearded, round-bellied composer, who has thrived on breaking musical taboos, gazed out his apartment window at the sun setting over the Hudson River.


Residential Resales
In the following reports, the "listed at" price is the asking price when negotiations began that ended in the sale.
Time on market is from most recent listing to contract.
MANHATTAN
GRAMERCY PARK  $325,000
235 East 22d Street  (Gramercy House)  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,300-sq.-ft. prewar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, renovated kitchen, dining area, roof deck, common garden; maintenance $1,363, 52% tax-deductible; listed at $349,000, 2 weeks on market (Brokers: Douglas Elliman; Bellmarc Realty)


Big Foot Never Looked Better; New, Futuristic Snowshoes Are Suddenly Chic for Hiking, Even Jogging. Dancing Next?
This Christmas morning, many of the Who's in the celebrity-stuffed Colorado Who-villes of Aspen and Vail are starting the day with a round of one of the fastest-growing winter sports: snowshoeing.
Snowshoeing?


A Whodunit With a $2 Million Payoff (to Stay Unsolved)
The phone call came in and the caller wouldn't give her name.
The secretary buzzed.
Dr.
Anthony Donn was in with a patient, but he took the phone anyway.
"Hello, how can I help you?" said Dr.
Donn, the chairman of the department of ophthalmology at the Harkness Eye Institute of Columbia Presbyterian Medical Center.


Princeton, 1955


Dominican Restaurants: No Shortage on Broadway
To the Editor:
In the Dec. 11 article "Where Malcolm Fell, a New West End" it was reported that the owners of the West End Gate on Broadway at 114th Street are planning to open another restaurant on 165th Street.
The manager was quoted as saying, "Between here and 165th Street, if you got in your car, you wouldn't find any restaurant on Broadway that you would really want to go to."


Satisfying Fare and Wunderbar Desserts
NO wonder that a North Fork newspaper ad was headlined, "We Are Finally Open!" Hans's Gasthaus, a German restaurant scheduled to start up around Memorial Day, then by the Fourth of July and then by Labor Day, did indeed open in October.
Was it worth the wait?
Neighbors in Aquebogue obviously think so.
The restaurant was packed on each of my visits.
While Hans's Gasthaus might not cause a culinary flutter in most sections of the Island, it is an oasis in the dismal restaurant desert in and around Riverhead.


2 Stage Companies That Hit the Mark
IN avoidance of year-end bests and worsts (the former being infrequent; the latter, irrelevant) a theatergoer turns to remembrances and afterthoughts, unrecorded mentions -- memorable and otherwise -- and kudos in categories of the noncompetitive kind.
These are reflected by the 1994 productions of two of the state's theaters: the New Jersey Shakespeare Festival in the summer and the McCarter in the other seasons.
As a citation to a director for consistently opening up dramatic roles for women who are known as mostly musical performers, consider Emily Mann, artistic director of the McCarter Theater in Princeton.
It all started in 1991 with her first production there -- "The Glass Menagerie," with Judy Kuhn as an incandescent Laura.


How to Tell Health Care From Toothpaste; Doctors Bear All Risks
To the Editor:
"While Congress Remains Silent, Health Care Transforms Itself" (front page, Dec. 18) misses a salient point.
The law holds the physician responsible for decisions made by the managed care company.
My greatest fear as a psychiatrist is that a suicidal patient will come to my office and need more visits than the managed care company allows.
I can petition the decision, but the company may not allow me to see the patient more frequently.


Sports of The Times; It's Not Going to Be A Baseball Christmas
LED by a dancing elf and accompanied by their parents, the kids appeared in twos and threes from the dark tunnel on Macy's eighth floor into the softly lighted woodsy room where Santa Claus was sitting.
"What do you want for Christmas?" Santa would ask.


And a Happy New Year


Spare Public Broadcasting
Americans often hear it said that television is the most powerful method for transmitting ideas since the invention of the written word.
But television in its commercial form is often little more than a conduit for violent melodrama and tabloid sensationalism that puts itself forward as "news." Much of the country's most distinguished news, arts and educational programming is produced not by the networks or their cable cousins, but by the Public Broadcasting System.
The fruit is free to the citizenry, except for a tiny subsidy that Congress gives the Corporation for Public Broadcasting.
It would be foolish, even barbaric, to cripple the C.P.B.
Yet that is precisely what many in the incoming Republican Congress would like to do.
They need to hold their fire.
As the incoming House Speaker, Newt Gingrich, ponders crippling the system, he should bear in mind that more than a million children in his home state of Georgia actually go to school via public television.
So do millions of others all over rural America.


L.I.'s Very Visible 'Tree-less' Tree
THE 80-foot flagpole outside the headquarters of the Long Island Savings Bank in Melville does not attract much attention during the day.
But at night this time of the year the wires suspended from the top and surrounding the pole light up with thousands of tiny white bulbs that form the shape of a Christmas tree.
The tree-less "tree" is visible from the Northern State Parkway, Route 110, Old Country Road and other thoroughfares, and it has become a holiday trademark for the bank and a tourist attraction.
The "tree" consists of 24 strands of wire, each 100 feet long, with bulbs spaced about six inches apart.
The maintenance supervisor for the bank, Mike Konert, said that no one had counted the bulbs, but that after a quick calculation he estimated the number at 4,800.
A rotating ball of red and orange bulbs tops the tree.


CURRENCY
Last
Prior
Year
Week
Week
Ago
Japanese Yen
100.13
100.21
110.60
per Dollar
German Mark
1.5790
1.5730
1.6950
per Dollar
Canadian Dollar
1.3994
1.3918
1.3255
per U.S. Dollar
British Pound
1.5450
1.5504
1.5040
U.S. Dollar per British Pound
Gold
$380.50
$378.80
$386.00
Republic National Bank
Currency: Friday NY Close


It's So Like Sanders To Put the Team First
It was late in the final game of the year against Atlanta.
Barry Sanders, a rookie at the time, needed just 10 yards rushing to earn the National Football League rushing title.
Lions Coach Wayne Fontes wanted to send Sanders back in the game so he could pick up the necessary yards to win the title.
But Sanders refused to go back in, because the Lions were winning.
He has never looked back in regret over his decision.


Now Starring In Operas: Maria Ewing, A Street Scene And a Swan
Stravinsky Straight Up -- "The Rake's Progress," in a production by Graham Vick with scenic design by Richard Hudson at the Chicago Lyric Opera in October, offered clean, flat surfaces and appropriately two-dimensional characters, both of which matched Stravinsky's clever syntheses of 18th-century style.


When the Phone Rings in Room 242
KONFIDENZ  By Ariel Dorfman. 177 pp. New York: Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux. $17.


Book Salad: Sometimes Food Is a Character, Sometimes Just a Fashion Accessory
This was true spiritual kinship.
The recipe, which I copied and promptly made at home, turned out to be a plain but reasonably dainty cracker, at least on Day 1.
By the next morning it had hardened into something you'd take on a three-month backwoods camping trip.
Verdict?
Great book.
Since then, life has become more complicated, certainly on the cookbook shelf. (Don't even ask about the Virginia Woolf shelf. By now a cookbook is the only thing that's missing.) The chosen genre of Cary and Jones -- food and literature -- has blossomed into a small jungle teeming with unlikely hybrids.
Authors nowadays are yoking together art and food, history and food, fame and food, utterly random facts about food, and of course literature and food, all in the name of -- well, that's not clear.


New Year's Bash That Celebrates With Caviar and Pastry
SPENDING New Year's Eve at home offers an occasion to pull out many of the stops.
Break out the caviar, top the pizza with smoked salmon, drench pastries in rum to regale guests toasting yet another turn of the calendar.
All this calls for some baking.
With yeast.
The best blini, a classic underpinning for the caviar, are yeast-raised.
But these feathery mouthfuls are convenient to make for a late supper because they require rising time.
They also hold up well in a warmer.


Au Pair Programs Are Work, Not Study
To the Editor:
Your Dec. 18 news article on proposed Federal wage rules for au pairs, or foreign child-care workers, states that EurAuPair's Bill Gustafson believes the new rules would force his nonprofit organization out of business.
To call a nonprofit a business seems a contradiction.


THE LOG CASTLE
AS THE 20TH CENTURY DRAWS TO A CLOSE, Americans seem more eager than ever to connect with a simpler past.
And what could be simpler than a log cabin, humble but heroic symbol of the pioneer spirit?
The log cabin business is, in fact, booming.
Some half-million people live in them year round, and there's even a fanzine, Log Home Living.
For the status-conscious, the log palace is fast becoming the architectural statement of choice: Ralph Lauren has one; Kurt Russell shares his with Goldie Hawn, and Robert A. M. Stern designed Michael Eisner's.


Signing for Her Supper
One thing Jerry Lewis never had on his telethon was a talking gorilla.
Indeed, you might say that the television appeal by the Gorilla Foundation is the world's first example of interspecies fund raising.
In it, Koko, the gorilla who was taught sign language by Francine Patterson, asks for help to pay for a new home in Maui for the Gorilla Foundation.
Nearby logging is making her California home unlivable.
Koko makes the signs for "sad," "help" and "thank you."


Dec. 18-24; The Weather Outside Is Frightful . . .


Corrections
An article on Nov. 13 about a tour of historic homes referred incorrectly to a visit by the Duke of Windsor to Long Island in 1924.
A reader's letter points out that at the time, he was the Prince of Wales; his future wife, the former Wallis Warfield Simpson, did not accompany him.
He was named Duke of Windsor in 1937.
This correction was delayed by an editing lapse.


After Fire and Flood, Home at Last
If Christmas is a time for surprises, New York Times correspondents have had their share: along with the Japanese Santa and tree-trimming Muscovites there were the Serbian snipers, the bullets in Beirut, the tragic fire in Tennessee.
In writing of their most memorable Christmases away from home, 10 correspondents range around the world; some recall elegant feasts, in a Swabian castle or a Hong Kong hotel; others cannot forget the fruitcake they could not possibly eat in Somalia, the joy radiating from a Saigon cathedral, or the tearful Mass in Sarajevo.
All remember how they counted their blessings.


Fond Departures and Wistful Endings
Grand Finale -- After the final encore of his New York farewell recital, in April, the 70-year-old tenor Carlo Bergonzi stood on the stage of Carnegie Hall and drank in the admiration of a capacity audience that had been stamping and shouting for 50 minutes.
Yet this powerful, touching moment did not overshadow the musical business: an endearingly old-fashioned recital enlivened by an interpretive flexibility and an emotional directness that are, alas, growing rare as singers of his generation leave the stage.


Using Tanks As Artificial Reefs
Re: "Tanks Take On New Role as Artificial Reefs to Attract Fish," Dec. 4:
I am appalled with this waste of one of our natural resources -- iron.
Isn't iron ore also a finite resource?


Dec. 18-24: Mexican Woes; A Few Rebel Indians Help Scare the Peso Down
The Maya Indian uprising in the state of Chiapas that dogged the last Mexican Government is bedeviling not only the three-week-old administration of President Ernesto Zedillo Ponce de Leon, but the Mexican economy as well.
News that the masked rebels might have broken out of army encirclement last week sent the Mexican stock market plunging.
The peso skidded and confidence in the Mexican economic miracle went into a tailspin.
By late Monday President Zedillo's economic team was huddling desperately to save an economy that has been a favorite of American investors for six years.
They emerged attributing the market's instability to the Chiapas rebels and ordering the peso depreciated by 15 percent.


Cake and Tea, And a Taste Of Blood
Family Relations -- Robert Redford's "Quiz Show" probably didn't mean to send out a subliminal suggestion to eat chocolate cake and drink milk, but some people walked out of the movie with an inexplicable craving for comfort food.
In one of the best scenes in one of the year's best films, Ralph Fiennes, as the corrupt quiz-show contestant Charles Van Doren, sits at the family table eating his mother's homemade cake and having a misguided conversaton with his patrician father (Paul Scofield).
Like most movie moments that follow you home, this one captures something essential about the film.
The sympathetic father talks about the difficulty of finishing books; the audience knows that Charles is longing for the simple honor he has lost.
With an eloquence that goes beyond easy symbolism, the scene embodied the sense of lost innocence "Quiz Show" explored so deftly.
Hidden Emotions -- Paul Newman, as the tough-spirited Sully in "Nobody's Fool," sinks into a chair in the parlor of his landlady (Jessica Tandy) and refuses a cup of tea.
"Not now, not ever," he says, in a performance as great as any Mr.
Newman has given.
The elegiac moment -- in one of Ms.
Tandy's last roles -- captures the film's deep, unsentimental emotions.


Irish Restaurant
To the Editor: In addition to the restaurants listed in the article on the Dingle Peninsula in Ireland ("Dingle's Enduring Delights," Oct. 2), we would add Beginish Restaurant, Green Street, Dingle, County Kerry (066-51588).


Habitats/Greenwich, Conn.; An Ordinary Suburban Tract House, Transformed
IT BEGAN life as a box, an ordinary tract house in a subdivision off a winding country road here.
It took a year, but the 2,600-square foot house was ripped apart and put back together again with only two rooms left the same -- and 4,200 square feet added.


U.S. Job Losses
To the Editor:
"Jobs Exported Overseas? It's a Myth," (Viewpoints, Nov. 27) failed to consider jobs lost to foreign companies' exporting to the United States.
Thus jobs associated with the importation of more than two million Toyotas, Hondas and other imports, were conveniently overlooked.
Imports from Sony, Matsutshita, Samsung and other Japanese, Korean, Taiwanese electronics manufacturers as well as direct purchases from foreign-owned factories of clothing, shoes and other products by American importers were ignored, too.


Widespread Support for Female Brokers
To the Editor:
"Brokerages Building Women's Strengths" (Executive Life, Nov. 27) highlighted the growing number of professional support groups being developed at regional brokerage houses for female brokers.
Interestingly, it's not only the regional firms that are supporting the needs of female professionals in a predominantly male industry.


Gov. Weicker Packs His Bags, With No Room for Nostalgia
Winter sun streams through the windows onto the half-empty boxes of awards and mementos that Gov.
Lowell P. Weicker Jr. has begun packing.
His heavy wooden desk sits ready to be cleared and carted off, along with his bound Watergate Committee volumes and lamps made from 105-millimeter shell casings -- all possessions with which he surrounded himself in office.
Most people would be forgiven a little sticky sentimentality just now.
But Mr.
Weicker has never been most people, and in these closing days of his administration, he shows no signs of looking back with even the remotest trace of gauzy haze.
Even posing the question of whether, at 63, he feels nostalgic about his three decades in public life is to invite a typical Weicker jeremiad.
Not only does he feel no nostalgia himself, he thinks no one else should, either.
It's a societal flaw.


A Rescue in the Harbor
Deckhands on the Staten Island ferry rescued a woman spotted floating in New York Harbor yesterday morning, the police said.


New Parks Mix Public and Private, Uneasily
In November, soon after Congress created the largest single expanse of parkland and protected wilderness in the 48 states, a curious Canadian couple pulled into the Mojave Desert outpost of Cima, population 15.
What the visitors saw, about 120 miles south of here in one of the driest places on earth, was a cluster of sun-baked cows, a handwritten sign criticizing the Federal Government and another one advertising beer and soda.
Behind a fence, a few abandoned cars were perched on blocks.


Group's Debut: 2 Pieces With Text on Women
The David Winkler Ensemble, a new loose confederation of composers and performers who specialize in new music, gave its inaugural performance on Wednesday evening at the Clark Theater, the 120-seat performance space on the seventh floor of the Rose Building at Lincoln Center.
The main business of the evening was a pair of quasi-theatrical pieces.
"Woman Without Adornment," a collaboration by Bernadette Speach and Thulani Davis, is a stream of reflective vignettes about a girl growing up after her mother's death.
Based partly on "1959," a novel by Ms.
Davis, the text was full of affecting imagery concisely conveyed.
Ms.
Davis read the excerpts and Ms.
Speach played a light, wistful piano accompaniment that added little to the spoken text.


RUSSIA ANNOUNCES 1,000 REBELS DIED IN DAY OF BATTLE
The Russian Government, on the eve of a meeting to try to resolve the rebellion in Chechnya, said today that "about 1,000" Chechen fighters were killed Saturday night and today in heavy fighting with Russian troops.
The figure could not be confirmed, but such a death toll would be the highest since about 40,000 Russian troops invaded Chechnya on Dec. 11, three years after the mostly Muslim southern republic declared independence from Russia.


Arab Bomber Kills Himself and Wounds 13 in Jerusalem
A Palestinian suicide bomber carrying a pack of explosives blew himself up here near a bus full of Israeli soldiers today, wounding 13 people and killing himself.
The blast ripped through a bus stop, throwing bystanders into the air and showering a main road with twisted metal and shattered glass.
Two of the 13 were seriously wounded in the explosion, near Jerusalem's convention center and central bus station, but most escaped serious injury when the bomb apparently went off prematurely.


James Morris in Concert
The bass James Morris is to sing three songs by Richard Strauss, the Monologue and Death Scene from Mussorgsky's "Boris Godunov," the "Four Songs of Don Quichotte" by Jacques Ibert and a Donizetti bel canto aria in a concert with the Orchestra of St.
Luke's on Jan. 7 at 8 P.M. at Carnegie Hall.
Julius Rudel will conduct the orchestra in Schumann's Konzertstuck in F (Op. 86), the Intermezzo No. 2 from Wolf-Ferrari's "Gioielli della Madonna" and Debussy's Nocturnes.
Tickets, at $13 to $60, are available at the box office or through Carnegie Charge, (212) 247-7800.


Editorial Notebook: A Good Word for Weimar; How the Architect Taut Made Socialism Work
Phrases like "Socialist planning," "Weimar Germany" and "public housing" almost always evoke negative overtones these days.
Yet Socialist planning in Weimar Germany led to the construction of public housing that even today, when the market is king, is popular, frugal and handsome.
The evidence is on open view to any visitor in Berlin who ventures to Horseshoe Settlement or Parrot Village, the latter in the fashionable Zehlendorf district, the former in blue-collar Britz.
These are nicknames for two mass-produced housing estates that are still in excellent condition even though they were built from 1925 to 1932, the year before Hitler grabbed power and inexorably destroyed Weimar democracy.


Bridge
Those who wish to play nonstop between Christmas and New Year's Day can do so this week at the New York Winter Regional Championships beginning today at the Vista Hotel in the World Trade Center.
The schedule is:


Big Airlines Block Safety Reform on Wing Ice
To the Editor:
"Too Slow on Airline Safety" (editorial, Dec. 18) recommends that the Federal Aviation Administration should anticipate safety problems, rather than respond to crises.
Here's a solution to wing deicing that the agency could act on now, one that is less expensive than current methods: Replace the deicing system in which each airline separately contracts to deice wings at the gate.


An Enlarged Head That, Oddly, Is Not a Hangover
Created by Eric Fogel, a graduate of the New York University Film School, Jim wakes up one day to find himself with an unusual problem: his head has grown bigger than the rest of his body.
He wonders, understandably, "What strange twist of fate caused my head to grow to mammoth proportions?" Then, out of the huge zippered cranium pops Roy, who demands, "Take me to your leader," and adds, "You don't know how long I've been waiting to say that."


Big Airlines Block Safety Reform on Wing Ice; Nightmarish Travel
To the Editor:
Air travel to New York City from where I live has in a few years become a nightmare.


Stretching Definition Of Concert
Hans Peter Kuhn, a German composer and theatrical sound designer best known for his collaborations with Robert Wilson, offered a program of electronic works on Tuesday evening at Experimental Intermedia, some carefully shaped and executed by computer, others combining live and electronic sounds.
For "City I" and "City II," Mr.
Kuhn opened a window at the Centre Street loft that is the home of the series, set a microphone on the balcony and captured the mundane noises of traffic.
In "City I," he added to those noises recordings of footsteps and a faint, distant chord progression, then gradually supplanted the traffic sounds with bells, buzzers, barking dogs and crying babies.
The sequel was briefer, but benefited from a chance contribution by a policewoman using a loudspeaker.


Top Rival of India's Premier Resigns From Cabinet Post
The Government of Prime Minister P.V.
Narasimha Rao, weakened by election losses across India and by corruption scandals, has been struck a new and damaging blow by the resignation of a senior Cabinet minister who is considered one of Mr.
Rao's leading rivals within the governing Congress Party.
Arjun Singh, the Human Resources Minister, left little doubt when he resigned on Saturday that he wanted to position himself to succeed Mr.
Rao as Prime Minister.
Many in the party believe that Mr.
Rao's position could become untenable if the party's string of election defeats continues in a new round of state elections in February.


Looking to Scrooge to Make Money
ITT and Cablevision, which are paying mightily to buy Madison Square Garden, are looking to a miser named Scrooge to help foot the bill.
By staging 80 performances of "A Christmas Carol" at its auditorium, called the Paramount, Madison Square Garden has been able to shrink significantly the number of days the place is dark.
The hope is that "A Christmas Carol" will become a profitable holiday-season perennial at the Paramount, a new challenger for the Radio City Music Hall's Christmas show.


Candles for Kwanzaa


Asbury Park Is Facing Referendum
On a raw December day, when the wind off the ocean throws a cold pelting rain against boarded-up windows of pre-1940 brick-and-mortar buildings of this old Jersey Shore resort, it's hard to imagine a sun-splashed history for Asbury Park.
Harder still, for some, to dream of a rosy future.
But recent crackdowns on building code violations, property tax delinquents and drug-infested taverns in this scruffy city of 16,273 have offered glimmerings of hope that the gloom will eventually lift.


Wide Audience for a Small Christmas Tale
Once upon a time, there was an advertising man in Salt Lake City who decided to write a story for his two little daughters.
"I write great radio ads," he said. But he had never written a story.


Volunteering Is Therapy For the Volunteers, Too
Paul Adams spent years struggling with mental illness and learning how to function on his own.
Not long ago, he realized that reaching out to other vulnerable people would have an invaluable effect on his own well-being.
Mr.
Adams participates in Rehabilitation and Education in the Art of Living, a program in the Bronx that helps mentally ill people work toward independence.
As part of his treatment, Mr.
Adams volunteers as a companion for elderly people in the Pelham Parkway section of the Bronx.
His responsibilities include escorting people to doctors' offices, buying groceries, picking up prescriptions and even chatting on the telephone.
In more than one case, the volunteers have helped elderly people to continue living independently rather than enter nursing homes.


London Journal; England's Needy Cathedrals: Time for Tin Cups?
As usual, this season's ambitious schedule of Christmas Masses and carol services at St.
Paul's Cathedral are free to worshipers.
Yet for the tourists who line up for a Yuletide tour under Sir Christopher Wren's famous dome, the charge is the same as the rest of the year: admission at the door is $:3, or about $4.50.
"People see this grand place and think we think we surely must be rich," said Robert Acworth, the registrar and chief administrator for the cathedral, which has dominated London's skyline since the end of the 17th century.
"But in point of fact, we are not well endowed, and the costs of upkeep are very high." The admission fee was first levied in 1991, and tourism, including gift shop sales, now counts for about 60 percent of the cathedral's income.


Why Germany Warns About Scientology
To the Editor:
The so-called Church of Scientology has undertaken a campaign, including full-page ads in your pages (Dec. 19), to publicize its quarrels with the German Government.
German authorities are justifiably concerned by this sect's increased influence, particularly on younger people.
Scientologists use phony psychological tests to entrap victims, to make them work long hours for the organization and to bilk them and their relatives of money.


'Business!' Cried Marley's Ghost. 'Mankind Was My Business!'


The Search for the Next Billy Mills
Donnie Belcourt had no phone, so the message arrived through the tribal police.
A running camp for American Indian athletes would be held at the Olympic Training Center in Colorado Springs.
He had two days to get there.
This was early August.
Belcourt, a Chippewa-Cree, was living with his mother on the Rocky Boy reservation in northern Montana.
He longed to attend the camp, but he had no racing shoes and, more urgently, no car.


Giants Wondering if Building Blocks Will Stay in Place
You win the first three games of the season and it seems you may never lose again.
Then you lose the next seven games and it seems you may never win again.
Then you win the last six games, and what are you supposed to think?
To a man, the Giants are thinking good things.
Their 9-7 record, capped by Saturday's 15-10 upset of the Dallas Cowboys, did not get them into the National Football League playoffs, but it did leave them with pride and optimism.


Pataki's Health Adviser Pushing $1 Billion Reduction in Medicaid
A month before New York State's new Republican administration must propose its first budget, Governor-elect George E. Pataki's chief adviser on health care is proposing to cut more than $1 billion in state spending from Medicaid, the costly and politically sensitive health program for the poor, disabled and elderly.
While Mr.
Pataki complained often during the campaign that the program was too generous, the cuts sought by the aide, Lieut.
Governor-elect Elizabeth P. McCaughey, are large but not radically different in scope from those explored by Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo.


Student Musicians Give Bach Their Holiday All
The annual concerts by the New York String Orchestra have become as tightly woven into the fabric of holiday music making as the many "Messiah" performances offered around the city.
Still, traditions change: the orchestra's Christmas Eve concert at Carnegie Hall, presented at midnight most years, was moved up to 7 P.M. this year at no cost to its festive atmosphere.
A second concert will be presented at Carnegie on Thursday at 8.
The ensemble is a student group, an outgrowth of a seminar that was started by the violinist Alexander Schneider in 1968 and is now a joint project of Carnegie Hall, the concert division of the New School for Social Research and the Department of Cultural Affairs of New York City.
There are 60 participants between the ages of 15 and 22, drawn from high schools, colleges and conservatories across the country (and also, this year, from Munich, Germany, and Montreal).


China-GATT Trade Rift Spurs Debate
In the wake of the collapse of China's bid to join the World Trade Organization, some economists are wondering whether China's top Communist Party leaders gave their trade negotiators the kind of authority and latitude necessary to make tough compromises.
Those compromises might have had an important effect on some of China's most powerful ministries, state-owned enterprises and military industries.


Big Airlines Block Safety Reform on Wing Ice; Kiwi's Voluntary Move
To the Editor:
"Too Slow on Airline Safety" (editorial, Dec. 18) misstates that the Federal Aviation Administration took action against us.
Your Dec. 17 news article reported correctly that Kiwi International Airlines voluntarily suspended service because recordkeeping procedures were not followed completely to F.A.A. liking.


Russian Boys' Voices, No Cuteness Required
Boys' choirs and other performing groups involving children customarily rely on charm to resolve deficits in musical polish.
The Moscow Boys Choir, which made its New York debut at the Miller Theater on Wednesday night, had no need of charm whatsoever.
This was an extraordinarily accomplished group in purely musical terms, a good deal more impressive than the famous Vienna choir that takes over Carnegie Hall once a year.
Victor Popov, the group's conductor, cheats a bit by filling half the roster with grown male singers.
But he achieves a remarkable and near-perfect blend of voices; the children and adults are of one mind in the smooth swells of sound, blaring fortissimos and exhilarating accelerandos characteristic of Russian choral singing.


Blast Victims Said to Face Long Struggle
Some lie in a narcotic haze, waiting until their seared lungs can breathe without help from machines.
Others have already had healthy skin peeled from places that escaped the flames' fury and grafted to their wounds.
Twelve people who were riders on a subway train in lower Manhattan last Wednesday when a firebomb turned their car into a furnace are patients in the burn center at New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center.
Each faces a long, painful struggle, and doctors caution that a few may not survive the fight.


Big Airlines Block Safety Reform on Wing Ice; Pilots Worry
To the Editor:
You quote Prof.
James J. Dixey (news article, Dec. 17) characterizing as "baloney" the concern of American Eagle pilots about cold-weather training and flying into Chicago's O'Hare International Airport.
The suggestion by this faculty member of Purdue University's prestigious aviation technology department that American Eagle management may have perceived pilot safety concerns as "whining" is an excellent example of why the traveling public should be concerned about airline safety.


Oakley Edges Closer To Having Toe Surgery
He removed his dress shoes.
Five of his 10 toes were bandaged, including the one next to his big toe on his right foot, the partly dislocated one that throbs with pain every time he runs up and down a court.
"Yeah, it still hurts bad," Charles Oakley said as the Knicks got ready to meet the Bulls tonight.


Strike Hits Home for Candiotti, Maldonado
Dodger pitcher TOM CANDIOTTI and Indians outfielder CANDY MALDONADO have gone to court trying to cut family-support payments because of the baseball strike.
Candiotti asked to temporarily stop alimony and child support amounting to $960,000 a year, according to Contra Costa County, Calif., court records.
Maldonado wants to cut his child-support payment to the mother of his 3-year-old daughter from $7,500 a month to $1,000.


Economic Calendar
Listed below are the scheduled release dates for major economic indicators this week.
Monday  None  Tuesday  Consumer Confidence . . .
Dec.
Wednesday  None  Thursday  Leading Indicators . . .
Nov.
Weekly Jobless Claims  Friday  New-Home Sales . . .
Nov.
Prices of New Homes . . .
Nov.


Rabin Bolsters Hand by Giving Posts to 2 Defecting Rightists
After struggling almost all year without an assured parliamentary majority, Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin strengthened his Government today by giving senior posts to two lawmakers who switched over from the rightist opposition.
The maneuver still leaves Mr.
Rabin short of a guaranteed majority, for even with the two newcomers he can count on only 58 votes in the 120-member Parliament.


Civil War Battles Return, Now From the Smithsonian
If evidence were needed that the appetite of historians and television producers for the Civil War was merely whetted by Ken Burns, it arrives at 10 P.M. tonight with the opening salvo of another ambitious series, "Smithsonian's Great Battles of the Civil War." The conflict is delivered in weekly, hourlong clashes (Gettysburg does not arrive until Feb. 6); but next Monday, buffs can indulge in the whole thing, reasonably titled "The Great Civil War Marathon," from noon until 3 A.M. the next morning.
Appropriately for the Learning Channel, this 13-part expansion of a home-video version released last year is more textbookish (and considerably less moving) than Mr.
Burns's epic.
It is packed with information about weapons and uniforms, perhaps more than you require, along with detailed play-by-plays of battles big and little, beginning tonight with the firing on Fort Sumter and the first battle of Bull Run.
Figuring in the opening hour are Gen.
T.
J.
Jackson, better known as Stonewall, and Gen.
U.
S.
Grant, sometimes known as Unconditional Surrender.


Sports of The Times; A Celebrity Caller Is King for a Day, or Longer
ELI STRAND first showed up on a professional football roster in 1966, when he was listed as a 23-year-old offensive lineman for the Pittsburgh Steelers.
A year later, Strand showed up on the New Orleans Saints' roster.
After that, he disappeared into the pro football abyss.
On Wednesday at 4 P.M., Strand will show up on WFAN, New York's all-sports radio station, where he has gained celebrity as the loyal opposition, the African-American caller of choice and the caller fans and hosts love to hate.
In a novel step for talk radio, "Eli from Westchester" will be the co-host of a two-hour segment.


Another Christmas Past


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy  The many predictions of a strong holiday shopping season were apparently wishful thinking for many retailers, particularly in apparel.
Early indications are that the season's sales, while better than last year's, have not been what the retailers hoped for.
Many shoppers held off until just before Christmas, forcing merchants to cut prices.
The extent of the markdowns implied a desperation not seen since the low points of the recent recession.  [ Page 1. ]


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-11  RUSSIA CONTINUES ITS ATTACK  Russia continued to attack in a secessionist region, claiming that 1,000 opponents had been killed, a figure that was disputed.
A major meeting was planned for Monday to discuss a new peace initiative. 1  SOVEREIGNTY AT ISSUE  The battle in Russia has focused attention in the United Nations on how inviolate national sovereignty should be and whether self-determination should be limited. 10


Political Memo; Some Republicans See Prospect of Sluggish Economy by 1996 as a Threat
For years the conventional wisdom has held that a sluggish economy hurts the party of whoever resides in the White House.
But with Republicans planning to use their new control of Congress to dominate economic policy-making over the next two years, the conventional wisdom may well prove wrong.
Or at least that's what more and more Republicans are beginning to worry about.


Egos and Charity Both Get a Lift In Role Auctions
It was only supposed to be a walk-on part.
Or a ride-on, if you like.
A quick turn on the "Carousel" carousel and a bow later -- a moment in the footlights, glorious but anonymous.


INSIDE
13 Wounded in Jerusalem By Islamic Suicide Bomber
An Islamic suicide bomber killed himself and wounded 13 people at a Jerusalem bus stop, an act that seemed likely to reinforce Israeli concerns about self-rule.
Page 3.
Drug Sweep Is Postponed
Mayor Giuliani has shelved a New York Police Department proposal for an ambitious sweep against drug dealers in Queens.
Page 41.
The Peso's U.S.
Bill
The plunge of the Mexican peso has resulted in a potential loss of $8 to $10 billion for American investors, Wall Street experts say.
Page 55.


Cornhuskers' Two-Edged Sword
The only time Tommie Frazier stopped watching the Nebraska Cornhuskers this season was when he had no choice, when the quarterback was in a hospital bed in Lincoln, Neb., the game against Oklahoma State was not on television, and the news from the radio was not good.
It was Oct. 8, two days after he had undergone surgery on a vein in his right leg after the recurrence of blood clots.
Brook Berringer, his replacement and Nebraska's only other scholarship quarterback, had been forced out of the game that day when he suffered a collapsed lung for a second consecutive week.


Storms' Effects Linger


Rough Seas? No, Roughness On the Sea
If the America's Cup race course were an amusement park, the favorite ride unquestionably would be bumper cars.
Several collisions during practice races off San Diego the past two weeks has left the 75-foot racing boats bashed and battered.
But there haven't been any injuries, and few of the sailors seem all that concerned.
"We're practice racing, and that in itself lets the aggression come out," said Hartwell Jordan, of San Francisco, a sail trimmer on the Japanese team.
"We're battling away, but it's all in good spirit." The first formal races among cup yachts are scheduled to begin Jan. 12.


Nov. 8 Is Long Gone, but the California Election Lingers On, and On and On
Six weeks have passed since Californians trooped to the polls to vote on everybody and everything from governor to a way to slow illegal immigration.
Yet Nov. 8 is anything but history.
The election's aftershocks are still being felt.


Lilly Acquisition Harms Drug Consumers
To the Editor:
Eli Lilly and Company says that acquisition of PCS Health Systems is "good for our customers and good for America" (advertisement, Dec. 19).
What may be good for Lilly will harm competition and consumers.


Holiday Today
Christmas is legally observed today.
Here are holiday schedules.
NEW YORK GOVERNMENT OFFICES: Closed.
POST OFFICE: Express Mail and special delivery only; main post office, at 33d Street and Eighth Avenue, open.
BANKS: Closed.
PARKING: Sunday rules in effect.
SANITATION: No pickups, street cleanings or recycling.
SCHOOLS: Closed.
FINANCIAL MARKETS: Closed.
TRANSPORTATION: Subways and buses onholiday schedule.
Long Island Rail Road on normal weekday schedule.
Metro-North Railroad on Saturday schedule.
NEW JERSEY GOVERNMENT OFFICES: Closed.
POST OFFICES: Closed.
BANKS: Closed.
SCHOOLS: Closed.
TRANSPORTATION: Rail service on holidayschedule; no service on the Boonton, Montclair, Port Jervis and Pascack Valley lines.
Buses on Saturday schedule.
CONNECTICUT GOVERNMENT OFFICES: Closed.
POST OFFICES: Closed.
BANKS: Closed.
SCHOOLS: Closed.
TRANSPORTATION: Metro-North on Saturday schedule.


Joshua L. Goldberg, Jewish Chaplain, 98
Rabbi Joshua L. Goldberg, once the highest ranking Jewish chaplain in the United States Navy and a rabbi emeritus of the Astoria Center of Israel in Queens, died on Saturday at his home in West Palm Beach, Fla.
He was 98 years old.
Rabbi Goldberg was born in Belarus, the son of a lumber merchant in Bobriusk.
He came to the United States during World War I, after deserting the Russian army when he was 18 and making his way to Japan.
He served with the United States Army in artillery units in Europe during World War I.


Anti-Drug Campaign Hits Resistance in Colombia
"The anti-narcotics policeman is a patriot," reads a sign over the entrance to the barracks of the anti-drug police at one end of this southwestern town.
He "defends democracy, insures your security and helps you to eradicate the plague of drug trafficking."


Gephardt's Star Rises in '96 Scenarios
In the latest manifestation of unease among Democrats, some are quietly talking up the Presidential prospects of a man who lost his party's nomination in 1988 and is about to become the leader of the most discredited group of politicians in town these days: House Democrats.
He is Richard A. Gephardt, a Congressman from St.
Louis who was elected by his colleagues to be the House minority leader in the next Congress.


Hartford Becomes Test Case In Fighting Menace of Gangs
Iran Nazario roams the crack alleys of the Charter Oak Terrace projects, scouting figures in the shadows.
When he finds them, he faces the hard part of his job: steering street toughs to this after-school program, to that basketball league, away from drugs and the gang life.
At least he needs no introduction.
In the projects, everyone knows him as Smurf, a member of Los Solidos, Hartford's biggest gang.


Moderate Republicans Seek An Identity for Gingrich Era
Representative Sherwood Boehlert, who represents Utica in upstate New York in the new and deeply conservative House of Representatives, is firmly on the left fringe of the Republican Party.
He sides with Democrats on many social issues.
There are years when the American Civil Liberties Union and the A.F.L.-C.I.O. rate his legislative stands more favorably than does the American Conservative Union.
But when the House convenes next week, Mr.
Boehlert says he will be marching to the conservative tune of Representative Newt Gingrich of Georgia, the new House Speaker.
So will his friends.


Five Jockeys Are Hurt in Miami Races
Five jockeys were injured this weekend during spills at Calder Race Course in Miami.
In the ninth race yesterday, ABDIEL TORIBIO of Panama broke his left clavicle, the track physician ORLON CARR said.


CHRONICLE
When LESLIE UGGAMS rises to present an award to MITCH MILLER at the Congress of Racial Equality tribute to Martin Luther King Jr., on Jan. 16, she will have more than the routine connection of presenter to recipient.
"He discovered me," Ms.
Uggams said the other day.
"He saw me when I was a contestant on 'Name That Tune' and called my mother saying that he wanted me to do some demos."


The Central Division Moves to Top in N.F.C.
A couple of years ago the National Football Conference Central Division was one of the worst in football.
Now, the division has become the first in the league to ever send four teams to the playoffs.
Minnesota, Green Bay, Detroit and Chicago are in, with the Vikings having a shot at clinching the division in the last game of the regular season against San Francisco on Monday night.
The first-round matchups for these four teams aren't settled.
In fact, the N.F.L. will not release its first-round schedule until Monday morning.


New Political Landscape May Alter Highway Plan
WHILE New Yorkers weren't looking last week, workers completed the four-year, $70 million renovation of part of the West Side Highway and gave motorists a newly smooth ride between 57th and 72d Streets.
Now the city can get ready for the next phase of renovation: tearing down the renovated road and building a new one.
Talk about planned obsolescence!
But the refurbished road will indeed come down if Donald Trump and partners go ahead as planned with the Riverside South housing development on the Hudson River.


Parks Agency Is in Step With Downsizing Trend
To the Editor:
The New York State Office of Parks, Recreation and Historic Preservation respects Governor-elect George E. Pataki's call to freeze new positions; The Times's remarks to the contrary are mistaken ("Reckless Hiring in Albany," editorial, Dec. 21).


Some Roses Brighten UpCourt Date For a Wife
Christmas was much like any other day in the arraignment section of Criminal Court in Manhattan.
Except for the man with the roses and the large number of shoplifting cases.
Usually, there is little variety in the transgressions that come before the bench -- from disorderly conduct to murder -- or in the proceedings.
But this year appeared to be a little different.
First, there was the husband who brought two dozen roses for his wife, who was being arraigned on a charge of misdemeanor drug possession.


Magazines
EVER conscious that sex sells and trendiness titillates, magazines do not usually go out of their way to put aging men on their covers.
But this month, it was a race for the face of the man New York magazine called "The Sexiest (70-Year-Old) Man Alive."


The Unwelcome Mat
To the Editor:
Andrew R. Funk and Thomas N. Beck (letters, Dec. 21) can't understand why smokers are unhappy about a smoking ban in New York City restaurants.
Mr.
Beck wants to know if we're so addicted that we can't go 45 minutes without lighting up.
Sure, we can go that long without lighting up, just as he could no doubt spend 45 minutes in a restaurant not laughing or talking if forced to.


Retailers' Christmas Wishes Didn't Come True This Year
The predictions of a strong holiday shopping season were apparently wishful thinking for many retailers, particularly in apparel.
While the numbers will not begin to come out until tomorrow, the early indications are that the season's sales, while above last year's, have not been what retailers hoped for or stocked for.
"It's not been a happy season," said Edward Johnson, the retailing analyst who compiles the Johnson Redbook Service, which tracks sales.


U.S. Losses In Mexico Assessed
The steep decline in the value of the Mexican peso has resulted in a potential loss of roughly $8 to $10 billion for American investors in Mexican stocks and bonds, according to estimates by Wall Street investment experts.
American owners of Mexican stocks took the biggest hit, suffering not only from the peso's devaluation but also from falling stock prices.
Their holdings were worth roughly $20 billion on Dec. 1 and $13.5 billion on Friday, the experts estimated.
In addition, the $12 billion to $15 billion in peso notes and bonds held by Americans shed $3 billion or so as a result of last week's devaluation.


What Is a Nation?
The war in the breakaway Russian republic of Chechnya is crystalizing two issues that have been debated only sporadically here despite the rise of ethnic separatism around the world: How inviolate is national sovereignty?
And what should the limits of self-determination be?
Those questions have been raised at the United Nations since mid-1992, when Secretary General Boutros Boutros-Ghali published "Agenda for Peace," a report written for the Security Council at a time when hopes were still high and horizons still seemed broadened because of the cold war's end.


Officer Commits Suicide In Times Square Restaurant
A police officer on a meal break with a fellow officer in a Times Square restaurant early yesterday morning became suddenly distraught, drew his .38-caliber service revolver and killed himself at the table with a single shot to the head, the police said yesterday.
The officer, Timothy J. Torres, 26, of East Northport, L.I., was working a midnight-to-8 A.M. shift and had just finished breakfast when he shot himself at 4:30 A.M. in a booth at Smith's Bar and Restaurant on Eighth Avenue at 44th Street, the police said.
Two other officers who were in the restaurant called an ambulance, and Officer Torres was pronounced dead at 5 A.M. at Bellevue Hospital Center, the police said.


The Owl and the President Win
For environmentalists, the week before Christmas produced one piece of good news and one tactical retreat.
The good news was U.S.
District Judge William L. Dwyer's decision in Seattle to uphold the Clinton Administration's plan for managing forests to protect fish and wildlife in the Pacific Northwest.
The tactical retreat was Secretary of the Interior Bruce Babbitt's decision to forgo higher grazing fees in an effort to save more important parts of his plan to protect the nation's public range lands from further degradation.
Judge Dwyer's decision represented a rare victory for the Administration in what has otherwise been a tough year for environmental initiatives.
President Clinton promised during his campaign to find a negotiated solution to a vitriolic battle between loggers and conservationists over the old-growth forests in the Pacific Northwest, where years of ferocious logging had threatened the habitat for the northern spotted owl -- the little bird that provoked the whole controversy -- and other species, including salmon.
With Judge Dwyer's help, at least one of Mr.
Clinton's campaign pledges has borne fruit.


Dividend Meetings
Following is a partial list of dividend meetings this week:  TUESDAY  Nipsco Inds Inc WEDNESDAY  Washington Gas Lt Co


Abroad at Home; A Political Mugging
Over the last two months there has been a series of savage right-wing attacks on a prospective nominee to be a Federal judge, Peter Edelman.
It has the look of an organized campaign, and a curious one: an attempt not to contest the choice in the Senate but to scare President Clinton out of making the nomination.
I have known Mr.
Edelman for years.
Ordinarily that would keep me from writing on the subject.
But the attackers describe a Peter Edelman so unlike the real person that I think comment is appropriate -- with due notice of my connection.


Charles Shirley; Arranger, 74
Charles Shirley, an arranger for big bands and a respected counselor on alcoholism, died on Friday at his home in Osprey, Fla.
He was 74.
The cause was a heart attack, said his wife, Kay.
Mr.
Shirley wrote many arrangements and original scores for the big bands of Ray Anthony, Les Elgart, Stan Kenton and others, and for television series including "The Arthur Godfrey Show" and "The Ted Mack Family Hour." He also arranged and conducted several all-star jazz sessions for RCA Victor Records.


Another White House Incident


What's in a Book Title? Some Narrow Escapes
NOW ALL WE NEED IS A TITLE Famous Book Titles and How They Got That Way  By Andre Bernard  Illustrated. 127 pages.
W.
W.
Norton &amp; Company. $15.95.
One unsurprising thing you learn from Andre Bernard's entertaining little book "Now All We Need Is a Title: Famous Book Titles and How They Got That Way" is that titles tend not to come to authors so easily.


HIJACKED AIRLINER FORCED TO FRANCE
Islamic militant gunmen early today forced the French and Algerian Governments to allow a hijacked French airliner to fly from Algiers to France shortly after the extremists killed a French embassy employee who was among about 170 passengers and crew members on board the plane.
The plane, a wide-bodied Airbus A300 aircraft, landed at Marseilles at 3:15 A.M. local time, 40 hours after the gunmen seized control of Air France's Flight 8969 at Algiers airport on Saturday just as it was about to take off on a scheduled flight to Paris.


The Drama Before Language Intervenes
A play without words?
Mime, of course.
Well, no.
In mime, gestures replace words and, in the end, little is left unsaid.
Peter Handke's idea is different.
He looks around and sees myriad brief encounters that never reach the stage of words.
So he has written a play before words.
It is not hard to imagine.
In the hurried solitude of urban life, individuals send out "here-I-am" messages through their appearance and body language.
Without a word being uttered, they set off responses of fear, respect, curiosity, arousal, indifference, disapproval.
Then the moment passes and the crowd moves on.


Patents
WHEN the Jetsons, the 21st-century cartoon family, were ready to sit down to dinner, Jane Jetson merely announced her menu to a machine that transformed her instructions into space-age delicacies, which were transported by conveyor belt to the family dining room, where Rosie, the robot maid, served the meal.
Three decades later, Ellis D. Gordon, a health-care consultant in Washington, has patented an invention that seems to operate an awful lot like the Jetsons' automatic meal-making machine.


Complaint, Injunction And Then Play Ball?
The quickest way to get the real major league baseball players back on the field may be through a double play -- complaint and injunction.
If the National Labor Relations Board issues a complaint against the club owners, then seeks and is granted an injunction in Federal court, players most likely would end their strike and return to work.


Mexican Shock, but Latin Optimism
In 1982, Mexico failed to honor its foreign debt payments, setting off a traumatic series of Latin American defaults that caused the 1980's to be called the region's "lost decade."
Last week, investors asked if Mexico's peso devaluation, which exceeded 28 percent before the currency rebounded slightly on Friday, would lead to a damaging series of devaluations throughout Latin America, now the world's second-fastest-growing regional economy after Asia.


U.S. Acts to Halt Bribes for Alien Work Cards
Trying to reduce the temptation for employees to take bribes, the Immigration and Naturalization Service has decided to stop issuing work cards in district offices.
Instead, starting next spring, the cards will be mailed to immigrants from one or two central offices.
Work cards are given to aliens awaiting hearings on their immigration status.
With the cards, they are free to look for work.
But the cards are also prized because in some states they can be used to obtain driver's licenses, Social Security cards and other documents that are often used to demonstrate citizenship.
As a result, the work cards can be a valuable item on the black market, costing illegal immigrants $500 or more.


Ghana Acts Against Broadcaster, Showing Fear of Free Media
When Charles Wereko Brobby applied to the Government in May for a frequency needed to start his own radio station, the businessman, an expert in electronic communications who has dabbled in journalism and government, seemed to have the profile of a broadcaster.
So when months passed without any official response to his petition, Mr.
Brobby, backed by a group of ready investors, decided to invoke his constitutional right to freedom of expression and simply go on the air.


Japan Posts 1994 Gains For Electronics Output
Japan's electronics industry, creeping back from a long slump, has registered an increase in production for 1994 for the first time in three years, according to the Electronic Industries Association of Japan.
The gain resulted from a slight improvement in demand for electronics products in Japan, but came mainly from strong shipments to the United States and Asia of microprocessors and flat-panel displays to be installed in personal computers and other products.


Postal Rate Increases
Here are some of the new postal rates that will take effect Jan. 1.


Drug Sweep Into Queens Is Postponed
Facing a persistent budget gap, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani has shelved at least temporarily a Police Department proposal to mount an ambitious sweep against mid-level drug dealers in Queens.
Instead, his aides say the administration is looking to reinforce existing anti-drug efforts with more modest initiatives.
Mr.
Giuliani's shelving of a plan that officials have said for weeks could make a major impact on drug dealing underscored the strains on the city's budget.
Until recently, the Police Department had escaped the cutbacks that had trimmed social programs in other agencies; when cuts were imposed, they were limited to its civilian work force and did not affect uniformed officers or enforcement programs.


Mislabeling Teen-Ager Autistic Prompts Fear
To the Editor:
The diagnosis of Michael Holmes, the 17-year-old accused of throwing his infant nephew to his death from a fifth-floor window, as autistic furthers misunderstandings about psychiatric disorders (news articles, Dec. 18, 19, and 20).
Cavalier use of the psychiatric diagnosis of autism confuses, frightens and alienates the public about people with disabilities.
It also equates mental disorders and violence.


Zail Singh, 78, First Sikh To Hold India's Presidency
Zail Singh, who was born to a poor peasant family but rose to become the first Sikh to win India's largely ceremonial office of President in 1982, died yesterday in the northern city of Chandigarh after suffering injuries in a car crash last month, an official communique said.
He was 78.
Before his five-year presidential term, Mr.
Singh held powerful positions in the central Government and in his native state of Punjab.


And Let Us Say (With Utmost Respect), Amen
Someone threw in the towel to the heavyweight champion of the world today.
George Foreman said "thank you" as he took the green face towel from a woman and wiped the perspiration from his shaved head.
His blue shirt collar was open, the knot in the paisley tie was pulled down a few inches, and Foreman was now in full bloom.
He had been preaching for 30 minutes at his church with the pink walls and the burgundy seats, The Church of the Lord Jesus Christ.


CHRONICLE
Entertainment Weekly magazine has named TOM HANKS entertainer of the year.
"It's an embarrassment of riches," Mr.
Hanks said in the magazine's Dec. 30 issue, recalling a year that included an Oscar for his role in "Philadelphia" and widespread acclaim for his performance in "Forrest Gump."


A Washington Journalist Strays From the Pack
James Warren arrived as the Washington bureau chief of The Chicago Tribune just a year ago.
But Mr.
Warren, who is 41, is already getting quite a name for himself.
For example, "I don't call that serious journalism" was the evaluation of Mr.
Warren's weekly column by the columnist Robert Novak, one of dozens of prominent journalists regularly skewered by Mr.
Warren in The Tribune.


He Had the Honor of the First Dance
The way BILLY (White Shoes) JOHNSON remembers it, his end zone dance began as an impromptu expression of exuberance, the exclamation point after a touchdown.
Johnson was a Houston Oiler rookie in 1974 when he danced in the end zone for the first time after a 70-yard end-around run against Pittsburgh.


No Headline
"Sure, it's frustrating. But what's the alternative? The real deterrent to violence in gangs must include gang members, just as the solution to alcoholism must involve the alcoholic and so on." I. MARTIN BORRERO, creator of a group in Hartford that counsels gangs.  [ 45:2 ]


METRO DIGEST
HARTFORD: A LAB FOR COMBATING GANGS
Like any city where gangs have run rampant, Hartford has taken a beating in the last few years.
In response, Connecticut's capital has become a virtual laboratory for methods of quelling gang violence.
Its efforts include a joint Federal, state and local task force, a beefed-up gang prosecution unit and many police officers working lots of overtime.
It is emphasizing after-school and recreational programs and has an institute to mediate gang disputes.
In one experiment, a member of the city's largest gang, Los Solidos, makes $25,000 a year as youth coordinator for the Hartford Housing Authority.
His job is to steer street toughs to after-school programs and away from drugs and the gang life.
Page 1.


Restlessly Seeking Entertainment; Need for a Holiday From Christmas Brings Out the Crowds
Maybe it was the weather, unexpectedly clear and warm, that beckoned people out of the house.
Or maybe it had to do with the fact that the local pro football teams had finished their seasons on Saturday, freeing fans from their usual Sunday seats in front of the television.
Or maybe it had to do with Christmas itself, which, for all of the warm images of hearth and home it evokes, can also be an occasion to be elsewhere, foraging for entertainment.
And yesterday, even though the streets were unusually passable and people didn't seem to be on their way to as many places as usual, the crowds that gathered at certain locations -- bowling alleys and bookstores, Broadway theaters, pool halls and, of course, the movies -- testified to a kind of restlessness afoot in the area.


Sports of The Times; A Sudden Decision For Jets
ON the phone, Dick Steinberg sounded upbeat but realistic.
"Millions of people have survived this," the Jets' general manager was saying yesterday from his Long Island home, referring to what the club announced on Saturday as a presumptive diagnosis of treatable stomach cancer.
"I'm not worried. I'm not scared."


Astros' Swindell May Cross That Line
Houston Astros pitcher GREG SWINDELL is considering breaking ranks with other major leaguers if the baseball strike isn't resolved before spring training.
"I have very few friends in baseball right now that I'm close and personal with, anyway," Swindell told a television station, KRIV in Houston.
"If the time comes and things happen, they can think what they want."


Evaluations in Store Following Jets' Flop
Dick Steinberg said today that he was "mad and disappointed," which is about as much emotion as he generates.
And the emotion had nothing to do with the stunning news that the Jets' general manager is suffering from stomach cancer.
Instead, Steinberg was talking about the Jets' final game on Saturday, the desultory performance in a 24-10 loss to the lowly Houston Oilers, a game that he watched from his Long Island home.


Note to Readers
The Op-Ed page welcomes unsolicited manuscripts.
Because of the volume of submissions, however, we regret that we cannot acknowledge an article or return it unless it is accompanied by a self-addressed, stamped envelope.
If manuscripts are accepted for publication, authors will be notified within two weeks.


Essay; The Kennedy Tapes
"I want you to be careful about your profanity," President John F. Kennedy told Dave Powers, a confidant, in the Oval Office one day in 1962, "because I don't want to hear your bad words coming back at me."
That puzzled Powers.
According to a J.F.K.
Library oral historian, he then went to Kenneth O'Donnell, J.F.K.'s most intimate political aide, and said, "Kenny, what the hell is he talking about?" O'Donnell replied: "Well, he's got this taping system installed in there."


Dolphins Win Division By Holding Off Lions
With their first-quarter demons finally extricated, the Miami Dolphins tonight put together their most impressive first half of the season.
They needed it.
Miami held off the Detroit Lions, 27-20, at Joe Robbie Stadium, giving it the American Conference East championship with a 10-6 record and a first-round home game this weekend against the Kansas City Chiefs, who lost to Miami here in mid-December, 45-28.


The Clintons' Christmas Spirit


Free Speech in the Mall
New Jersey's Supreme Court ruled on Tuesday that a large commercial shopping mall is the modern counterpart of the village green.
It is a place where people can congregate and communicate, the court suggested, and therefore the mall's operators must honor some right of free speech on their nominally private property.
The ruling, based on the State Constitution, is correct.
Though denounced as "social engineering" by a losing lawyer, the decision merely recognizes modern reality.
Like a company town where the company sets the rules, commercial enclaves are in effect small governments; they must allow reasonable communicative acts by customers and visitors, while retaining the right to set fair terms that govern when and where the right of speech may be exercised.


Knicks Push, Shove, Get Reprieve, but Fall to .500
When he emerged from the locker room tonight, the 'do was still combed straight back, coiffed and stylish, just like the old days.
But the sheen is fading, the rules are changing and Pat Riley's team keeps struggling.
Scottie Pippen did the most damage as the Knicks continued their journey into the abyss tonight, a streak that has reached five straight losses for the first time during Riley's coaching career.


Concerned About Pollution From Proposed Mine, Wisconsin Tribe Takes On a Giant
At its most basic level, a fight over a proposal by the Exxon Corporation to build an immense copper and zinc mine near the Sokaogon Chippewa reservation here seems like a mismatch between the world's largest energy corporation and Wisconsin's smallest Indian tribe.
But Exxon's plan to put a mine on 865 acres of Wisconsin's North Woods, a region of dense forests and clear rivers, has turned into one of the country's fiercest grass-roots environmental face-offs.
Not only does the tribe view it as a life-and-death struggle but it also has enough money and outside support to make a fight of it.


Most Markets Are Closed
All banks and financial markets in the United States are closed today in observance of Christmas.
European and Latin American markets are also closed.
The Tokyo stock market will be open.


Most Markets Were Closed
All banks and financial markets in the United States were closed yesterday, as were those in Canada and most of Europe.
Among the markets open were those in Japan, Mexico and France.
News of the markets appears on page D8.


One Couple, One Coat and a Gaggle of Geese


Tennessee Contract
Tennessee Coach PHILLIP FULMER, whose team went 7-4 to earn a Gator Bowl berth against Virginia Tech on Friday, had his contract extended by a year yesterday, through the 1999 season.
"He and his staff did outstanding work in bringing the team back during the 1994 season, and they recruited a group that was ranked as one of the best incoming classes in the nation," said Tennessee's athletic director, DOUG DICKEY.


CHRONICLE
The rock star JON BON JOVI gave a benefit concert earlier this month to help save Manna House, a shelter for the homeless in Aberdeen, N.J.
Just a few weeks ago, the shelter, which houses 10 women and 25 children, was desperate for $37,000 to cover operating expenses through the end of the year.
But a last-minute rally by businesses, churches and schoolchildren, helped by Mr.
Bon Jovi's $10,000 gift, closed the financial gap, A.P. reported.


Why My Right to Own a Gun Must Endure
To the Editor:
How can a fellow who writes so many big thick books and who is a professor emeritus of history to boot like William Manchester indulge in such crude rhetoric and fuzzy logic as he does in his Dec. 20 letter identifying the "true assassins" who slaughter mothers and leave tiny corpses on the playground?


At Year's End, Revisiting Five Towns Left in Limbo
AT year's end, time to update some 1994 Our Towns columns:
In March, Our Towns chronicled the story of Mariko Westbrook of Newark, who boarded a bus after a post-Christmas downtown shopping trip, but never made it home.
She had suggested to a woman with a little girl seated near her that the child looked uncomfortably bundled.
The woman beat Mrs.
Westbrook about the face and kicked her off the bus with such force that she landed on her head, lapsed into a coma and died four days later.


Even in Her Own Words, A Woman of Convictions
In the 30 years since Vanessa Redgrave first dazzled Americans as the loopy rich girl ditching an impossible, hammer-and-sickle obsessed husband in "Morgan!," this English actress often seemed to be living at cross-purposes.
She would win raves for her performances, then lose jobs with her support for unpopular causes.
In the late 1980's, she became a shadow in newspapers and magazines by demanding that reporters wanting to interview her about acting agree not to ask her about politics, as if there were two Vanessa Redgraves whose passions remained strangers, perhaps enemies.
But in her recent "Vanessa Redgrave: An Autobiography" (Random House), Ms.
Redgrave says she has come to see her commitments as a river that does not so much divide as nourish her.
"I thought long ago that life was more categorized, more compartmentalized, and that was wrong," she said in a recent interview that began over lunch and continued at her dressing room in the Union Square Theater, where she is appearing with Eileen Atkins in "Vita and Virginia." She speaks quietly, her head dropped forward as if sculpturing sentences in a private workshop, auburn hair falling in a half-curtain over her face.


CHRONICLE
The Suffolk County Executive, ROBERT J. GAFFNEY, may be the ultimate parent on New Year's Eve: he is giving a party for more than 1,000 young people.
"This is going to make my daughter's Sweet 16 party look like a walk in the park," he said the other day, sounding every bit the harried father as he talked about persuading companies to donate food and beverages for the occasion.


Bullets Are Hurting, but It Takes Orlando Overtime to Put Them Out of Their Misery
Magic 128, Bullets 121
Nick Anderson scored a season-high 35 points, including 11 in the fourth quarter and 4 in overtime, to lead visiting Orlando past injured Washington, 128-121, last night.
Anfernee Hardaway scored 29 and Shaquille O'Neal had 28 for the Magic before fouling out with 1 minute 4 seconds left in regulation.
Orlando won its fourth straight and improved its league-best record to 21-5.


Israel Offers a Good Alternative to Orphanages; Children's Village
To the Editor:
In "Orphanages Aren't Welfare Reform" (Op-Ed, Dec. 20), Douglas J. Besharov of the American Enterprise Institute states that orphanages are not a solution to the welfare crisis largely because of their cost, which he puts at $36,000 a child each year.
Such expense is simply unnecessary.
After World War II, private philanthropy in Austria created Children's Village for displaced war orphans.
Children's Villages were then built all over the world.


Miscellany
Product View Interactive Inc., Cambridge, Mass., has teamed up with Foote, Cone &amp; Belding, Chicago, to offer Product View's on-line interactive product information to the agency's clients. *
Castle Harlan Inc., a merchant bank in New York, sold two outdoor advertising companies, Revere National Corp. and Stait Outdoor Advertising, both of Baltimore, to an investment fund managed by Merrill Lynch Capital Partners.
The purchase price was $69.3 million.


New York Might Adopt Lethal Injection, a Lawmaker Says
The New York State Senate's chief advocate of capital punishment said yesterday that the Legislature was likely to adopt lethal injection in a widely expected move to restore the death penalty next year because it is regarded as more humane than the electric chair and might appease critics and deflect court challenges.
But a chief opponent of the measure said there would be a court battle anyway.
State Senator Dale M. Volker, an Erie County Republican who has sponsored death penalty bills nullified by gubernatorial vetoes every year since 1977, said Governor-elect George E. Pataki's transition team, of which he is a member, and many lawmakers were leaning toward lethal injection as the method of execution.


Montana vs. Marino Offers a Wild Ride
Now this is what the National Football League had in mind.
New offensive rules.
More scoring.
More parity.
More protection for quarterbacks.
Shift and shake.
Simmer.
Let settle.
The Kansas City Chiefs versus the Miami Dolphins.


A Quest for the Origin of Languages
Was there a time, before the Tower of Babel came tumbling down, when all the world's peoples spoke the same language?
That's the intriguing question behind "In Search of the First Language," tonight's inquiry into things etymological.
With 5,000 living languages to explore, word sleuths have plenty to occupy them.
Their theories and methods are on show in this offering from "Nova," which is incidentally notable for its success in turning an unphotogenic subject into a treat for the eyes.
The camera makes a row of books glow, and words and letters are treated like works of art.


Wall Street, No Longer Financial Epicenter, Struggles to Cling to Cachet
Perhaps more than any other street in America, Wall Street has come to represent a concept beyond itself.
As a synonym for big business, it has lent its name to movies, television shows and a national newspaper.
But these days, the large brokerage houses that once lined Wall Street and its cavernous side streets have spread far and wide in Manhattan, a reflection of how the area south of Chambers Street is no longer the dominant financial services center it once was.
With aging buildings that cannot accommodate huge computers, and a declining need for financial companies to be near each other, The Street and its neighborhood are mere reminders of what they once were.


Power Failures Put a Crimp in Christmas
There was a big pile of wood stacked neatly today in front of Mary Ann and Sheldon Lewis's home that had not been there when the holiday weekend began.
It was the remains of the huge maple branch that came crashing down on a power line in their front yard early Saturday morning, with the result that they -- like thousands of others lashed by the weekend's northeaster -- celebrated Christmas Eve and Christmas morning the old-fashioned way, without electricity.


ITT to Sell A Unit for $4 Billion
A week after paying about $1.7 billion to become a major player in the gambling industry, the ITT Corporation yesterday agreed to sell its commercial finance unit for about $4 billion in cash to the American subsidiary of Deutsche Bank of Germany.
ITT Commercial Finance, a division of the ITT Financial Corporation, will be sold to Deutsche Bank North America, a subsidiary of the Frankfurt-based Deutsche Bank A.G., one of the world's 10 largest banks.


In the Shadow of Stealth Bombers, a Missouri Hamlet Booms
Most towns with military installations are bracing for next year's large round of base closings and the economic calamity that they fear will follow.
But not this tiny town, home to Whiteman Air Force Base.
Formerly a Minuteman missile base in the middle of west-central Missouri soybean fields, Whiteman is now home to the Air Force's growing fleet of radar-evading B-2 bombers.
Four of the black, bat-winged planes, which cost $2.2 billion each, are flying at Whiteman, and 16 more are on the way.


Rules of The Game Of Life In the 50's
HOW to Be Perfect, a CD-ROM from Great Bear Technology of Moraga, Calif., is a game full of clips from those black-and-white educational films of the 1950's.
There are "Dating Dos and Don'ts," "How to Say No," and others.
If you were not around during the Eisenhower Administration, they will seem incredibly corny.
If you were around then, they will still seem incredibly corny although embarrassingly familiar.
Depending on your age and tastes, you may also find them very funny.
On the other hand, they may be timely again in a year when some say the 50's are about to return.


Battle Over a Baby's Future Raises Hard Ethical Issues
Ryan Nguyen was born on Oct. 27, six weeks before his due date, asphyxiated and with barely a heartbeat.
His doctors at Sacred Heart Medical Center in Spokane, Wash., revived him after heroic efforts.
But a few weeks later, they decided that aggressive medical care would only prolong his suffering and that he would never survive infancy.
They suggested that his life support be withdrawn.
His parents refused, setting off an emotional battle over the baby's medical care.
In the two months since his birth, Ryan Nguyen (pronounced win) has become a cause celebre in the Pacific Northwest.


From a Tiny Flaw, a Major Lesson
WHEN Macintosh users count their blessings for 1994, many will rejoice that they are counting them on a Power PC microprocessor instead of a Pentium chip.
Sorry.
The original intent of this year-end column was to celebrate a few of the more interesting Macintosh products of 1994, including the Power PC microprocessor, not to dwell upon the Intel Corporation's much publicized problem with its flagship chip.


Put Muscle Behind Motor-Voter
The federal "motor-voter" law, a common-sense measure designed to make it easier for all Americans to participate in the democratic process, had to hurdle partisan obstacles on its way to enactment last year.
The law requires states to let people register when they apply for a driver's license or for social services, and to permit registration by mail.
Republicans feared the political impact of all those new voters and scrambled for reasons to oppose the bill.
Among other things, they complained that the program would be too expensive, even though the projected price tag was relatively small and no money was actually provided to help states implement the new rules.
Most Republicans were too busy voting against the bill to propose an amendment providing the funds.
Chances are the Democrats would have gone along.


Executive Changes
TIME PUBLISHING VENTURES, New York, a unit of Time Inc., named Eric Schrier president and chief executive of the health publishing group.
TYCO INTERNATIONAL LTD., Exeter, N.H., appointed Richard A. Gilleland senior vice president in addition to his duties as president of Kendall International Inc.


Assessing Cuomo: Five Views
Garry Wills Author and adjunct professor of history at Northwestern University.
"What will history have to say about Mario Cuomo? Not much, I'm afraid. Wit, intelligence, eloquence, principle - these are fine things. But history records accomplishment. Good or evil doesn't matter, so long as it accomplished . . .


Communists In Germany Seek to Oust Hard-Liners
Leaders of the reformed Communist Party that ruled East Germany for 40 years will seek to oust hard-liners at a convention in January in the hope of breaking into the German political mainstream.
Reformers hold most top party posts, but their efforts to remake the party have been hindered by militants who warn that it is too soon to give up on Communism.


Italian Coalition Didn't Fight Corruption
To the Editor:
Your Dec. 22 front-page article on the resignation of Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi of Italy had a misleading subheading: "Fall of a Coalition Formed to Fight Corruption."


Review/Fashion; A Glimpse of Sumemr Styles
If it's winter in New York, it must be summer on Seventh Avenue.
Designers are now showing next summer's styles from their lower-price, secondary lines and preparing to show their major collections next month.
These are the warm-weather clothes that will be in stores in May and June, and they give an idea of what designers have in mind for next fall.


Finally, One Day to Shop for the Sheer Trhill of It
Michael Munize paced the windy sidewalks of the Fulton Shopping Mall in Brooklyn early yesterday morning waiting for the stores, any store, to open so that he could resume shopping for things, anything, now that this weird off-day for shoppers called Christmas was out of the way.
"I'm thinking cologne," said Mr.
Munize, a music-group manager, fresh from a 4:30 A.M. recording session with his hot new R &amp; B group, Straif, and looking for something to buy.
"And jackets, a nice new jacket. Once I have money in my pocket, I have to get rid of it, make myself feel good, look good."


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-7  MIXED SIGNALS IN MOSCOW  President Boris Yeltsin of Russia said he was prepared to initiate peace talks with secessionists, but an aide spoke of intensifying the assault and others had mixed reports of the conflict.
A1


METRO DIGEST
CUOMO STILL AN ENIGMA AFTER 12 YEARS
When Governor Cuomo steps down after 12 years on Saturday, he will bring to an end one of the lengthiest and most celebrated governorships in recent history.
Almost as soon as he was elected, Mr.
Cuomo was a national figure.
He was twice a shadow candidate for President and was regarded by many as the most inspiring speaker in contemporary politics.
Yet despite these achievements, there hovers about Mr.
Cuomo the sense, predicted so long ago in his diary, that he has disappointed many.
A1.
A DAY TO SHOP FOR THE SHEER THRILL OF IT
As much as yesterday might have been proclaimed a holiday of rest, throngs of happily incorrigible people paid tribute to it as the first shopping day of the rest of their lives.
And retailers across the region awaited them with relief, for the early business measurements were that the pre-Christmas buying season this year was weaker than anticipated.
A1.
NEW YORK CITY


PC Sales Over Holidays Rose 33% From '93 Level
Consumers bought a record number of personal computers this holiday shopping season, despite a shortage of some popular systems.
Sales of personal computers from mid-November through Christmas were up 33 to 35 percent over the similar period last year, said David M. Goldstein, president of the Channel Marketing Corporation, an electronics consulting and market research company in Dallas, which tracks holiday retail sales through daily surveys of stores.
Thirty to 35 percent of personal computers for home use were purchased in the fourth quarter of the year, he said.


For Knicks, It's Life Without Oakley
The surgery that Charles Oakley tried his best to avoid became unavoidable.
After playing in pain for weeks, the Knicks' starting power forward will finally have surgery Tuesday on a partly dislocated toe, a procedure that is expected to sideline Oakley for six to eight weeks.
Oakley could be gone even longer, depending upon his recovery and what is found during surgery.
His condition has been diagnosed as a congenital malformation of his right foot that led to the dislocation of his toe.
A more definitive timetable for Oakley's recovery will be given following the operation, which will be performed by Dr.
Bill Hamilton, a foot specialist who has monitored Oakley's condition.


Mayor Denies Postponing Sweep Against Queens Drug Dealers
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani denied yesterday that he had postponed a planned police initiative against drug dealers in Queens, disputing a report that he had deemed the program too costly.
"No decision has been made," the Mayor said of the program, which, as proposed by Police Commissioner William J. Bratton, would flood sections of Queens with 600 undercover and uniformed narcotics police beginning around Jan. 15.


Music Returns to Haiti With the Spirit of Hope
For two months now, ever since President Jean-Bertrand Aristide returned from exile, one particular song has been playing everywhere in Haiti: on the radio, in the dance clubs, on the streets, in the fields.
Called "Reconciliation," it has become a symbol of the mood of hopefulness that now prevails here.
But until this week, the Phantoms, the group that wrote and sang this infectious anthem of the new, democratic Haiti, could not themselves be found anywhere in their homeland.
Like the president they admire, they had been forced into exile in the United States, and recorded "Reconciliation" there during the summer, hoping that their vision of peace would actually come to pass.


John Osborne, British Playwright, Dies at 65
John Osborne, the playwright whose 1956 drama "Look Back in Anger" changed the course of British theater and earned him a reputation as one of the most forceful voices among a new generation of rebellious postwar dramatists, died on Saturday in a hospital in Shropshire, England.
He was 65.
Mr. Osborne had diabetes and had recently complained of being in poor health.


Erickson Walks Out
Miami Coach DENNIS ERICKSON walked out of an interview after practice yesterday when asked about the Seattle Seahawks coaching job.
Erickson, preparing the No. 3 Hurricanes for Sunday's Orange Bowl against No. 1 Nebraska, has been mentioned in connection with National Football League coaching jobs in Seattle, Denver and expansion Carolina.
When asked about TOM FLORES's likely ouster as the Seahawk coach, Erickson walked away from reporters without a word.
Flores, coming off a 6-10 season, is to have his future in Seattle determined this week when he meets with the team's owner, KEN BEHRING.


By Design; Sparkle Aplenty
New Year's Eve is the time to shine.
That usually means wearing a fabric like satin, lame or sequins.
But even velvet can sparkle with the addition of glittery jewelry, which can be less of an investment than a new dress.
Jay Strongwater's seven-strand necklace of clear crystals ($225) would be the perfect complement to a stark black dress.
R.
J.
Graziano is in the holiday spirit with a six-strand choker of chunky fake rubies ($170); a long necklace of fine silver strands with a large emerald-cut rhinestone pendant ($70); a multi-strand silver necklace with small hanging rhinestones ($105) and silver hoop earrings with rhinestone drops ($35).


TV Listings
Television and radio news, listings and advertising appear today on pages D9-10.


CHRONICLE
It was a quiet Christmas in Venezuela for RICK and KAREN DOBBERTIN, a New York State couple journeying around the world in a homemade amphibious vehicle.
The Dobbertins, of Cazenovia, N.Y., 18 miles southeast of Syracuse, spent Sunday in Puerto La Cruz, Venezuela, where they had planned a holiday break.
What they did not expect was to be waiting for spare parts for their vehicle, the Surface Orbiter.
So they expect to be stuck in Venezuela through New Year's, The Associated Press reported.


For N.H.L., Time Is Fleeting
It's been three weeks since Gary Bettman and Bob Goodenow sat across from each other in a collective bargaining session.
That separation could end this week if the leaders of the opposing sides try again to end the National Hockey League lockout, which is in its 88th day.
Goodenow, executive director of the N.H.L.
Players Association, said last night that he might call Bettman, commissioner of the league, today to set up another session.
"It's entirely possible," Goodenow said.


Legal Aid Meets City Hall
Just two months ago, Mayor Rudolph Giuliani and the Legal Aid Society, which provides lawyers for criminal defendants who cannot afford attorneys, were engaged in poisonous public combat.
Lawyers who worked for the society then went out on strike, creating momentary chaos in the city's high-volume criminal justice system.
The Mayor promptly clobbered the society, threatening to cancel its contract with the city and fire its lawyers.
That forced the attorneys back to work.
Now the society, under new management, is seeking a new, long-term contract.
In these behind-the-scenes negotiations, City Hall seeks sharp cost reductions, tighter accountability and safeguards against another service rupture.


Effective Foreign Aid
To the Editor:
If the United States is going to take a cost-cutting approach to foreign aid (news article, Dec. 21), we should put at least as much emphasis on effectiveness as on costs.


Diversifying Into Peace Is None Too Tranquil
When Alliant Techsystems Inc., one of the Pentagon's biggest suppliers of munitions, signed a contract with Ukraine last year, the company believed it was on the fast track to making money out of the end of the cold war.
Transforming large quantities of unwanted conventional weapons for civilian uses looked like the wave of the future for Alliant, which is based in Hopkins, Minn., and until four years ago was a part of Honeywell Inc.
Alliant makes weapons ranging from torpedoes to cluster bombs, but like other American military contractors, it faces declining orders.


KFC Tries for a Turnaround in Chile
When a KFC restaurant opened recently at the Plaza Este shopping mall here, Maria Toranzo, a 23-year-old nursing student, could not resist the new big value.
She bought one-quarter of a fried chicken with french fries and a Pepsi-Cola for $3.50.
"When did they change the menu?" Mrs.
Toranzo said.
"I've always loved Kentucky chicken, but it was so expensive and the portions so small that I only ate it on special occasions." The larger portions at lower prices were an attempt to lure customers after big losses in the chain's first three years here.


U.S. and Japan to Negotiate On Automotive Trade Today
American and Japanese negotiators are to meet today in London for hastily arranged discussions on various trade issues between the two countries, including automobiles, auto parts and activity in emerging markets.
Jeffrey E. Garten, Under Secretary of Commerce for International Trade, said yesterday as he was departing for London that the meeting had been requested by Japanese officials.


No Headline
"This is a day for serious, competitive shoppers who wait all year for it. The strategy is to work the mall clockwise through the three anchor stores and then come back for the rest of them." -- BARBARA SACKS, a day-after-Christmas shopper at Livingston Mall in New Jersey.  [ A1:4 ]


Senate Would Bar Longer House Term
To the Editor:
Peter H. Kaskell sensibly suggests a constitutional amendment extending the term of House members to four years (letter, Dec. 18).
President Lyndon B. Johnson tried to implement such a plan, but ran into the same opposition likely to scuttle any four-year House term today.


Nets Fall in Underachievers' Special
Armon Gilliam may have had the best take on the Nets' loss to the Milwaukee Bucks tonight when he was asked whether the Bucks were underrated.
"They have a lot more talent than their record shows," Gilliam said, before adding, "We're one of those teams as well."


Takin' It to the Streets in the Sun


For Lack of a Coffin, a Gift Is Born
"I went around to a whole bunch of undertakers, and I said, 'I want a coffin that will hold about 2,000 books and about 10,000 pieces of paper, probably more,' " said Matthew J. Bruccoli, the Jefferies Professor of English at the University of South Carolina.
But he said he couldn't get a coffin that would hold him as well as the books and the papers that constitute what he calls the most comprehensive F. Scott Fitzgerald archive in the world, a collection now appraised at $2 million.
So much for his notion of someday being buried with the material he has spent his adult life acquiring.
Instead, his employer in Columbia, S.C., will be the beneficiary.


INSIDE
New Deal for ITT
Deutsche Bank of Germany agreed to pay $4 billion for the manufacturing finance arm of the ITT Corporation.
Page D1.
A Trove of Stone Age Art
An important gallery of prehistoric art has been found in Portugal, but it may soon be lost under the water from a dam.
Science Times, page C1.
TV Listings
Television and radio news, listings and advertising appear today on pages D9-10.


Are U.S. Forces Ready to Fight?
Republicans in Congress are taking dead aim at the Clinton Administration's defense budget.
One target sure to draw their fire is military "readiness." The Republicans believe that the Pentagon has provided too little money to get the troops in combat trim.
Just how ready are the armed forces and how much more needs to be done?
As it happens, the answers are not as simple or as bleak as the Republicans would have it.


Bomber Shifted to Hamas To Atone for Clash in Gaza
A Palestinian suicide bomber who wounded 13 people here on Sunday was a policeman in Gaza who joined the militant Islamic group Hamas out of remorse for his role in deadly clashes between the police and Palestinian demonstrators last month, his brother said in remarks published today.
A spokesman for the Palestinian Authority in Gaza confirmed that the bomber, 21-year-old Ayman Radi, had been a traffic policeman, adding that he had been sought by the authority after he disappeared on Tuesday.


A Boy Dies Playing Basketball
A 12-year-old boy collapsed while playing basketball in a holiday tournament in Brooklyn yesterday and died later at Coney Island Hospital.
The boy was identified as Steven Riley of Flushing, Queens.
He was playing for the St.
Nicholas of Tolentine parish team against Blessed Sacrament of Staten Island in the gymnasium of the Church of the Most Precious Blood on Coney Island when he fell to the floor near the end of the game's first quarter.


Q&amp;A
Fit to Eat?
Q.
I freeze raw meat to use for cat food.
Does freezing kill salmonella or other noxious bacteria in food?


Astronomers Debate Conflicting Answers for the Age of the Universe
THE axis between polar extremes in one of the most critical and fervently contested battles in science today could be said to run along the second-floor corridor of the Carnegie Observatories building here on Santa Barbara Street, one of astronomy's intellectual addresses.
The dispute is over a seemingly simple number, the long-sought value for the Hubble constant, that would establish the expansion rate of the universe and enable cosmologists to calculate the billions of years that have elapsed since the beginning of space and time.
Depending on the outcome, important theories may totter and require revision.
But when reputable scientists doing excellent research find themselves getting dramatically different but defensible answers, no one can be sure who is right.


14 Firefighters and 2 Others Hurt in Blast
Fourteen firefighters and two residents of a five-story building at 138 East 34th Street were injured last night after an explosion ripped through the basement, the Fire Department said.
A department spokesman, George Semidey, said five of the injured firefighters were taken to the burn unit at New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center for treatment of first-, second- and third-degree burns.
He said nine were treated at the scene, most for smoke inhalation and exhaustion.


OPEC Rivals Curb Cartel's Impact
The oil production of non-OPEC nations, declining since 1988, has begun an unexpected revival this year that will continue into the next century, tempering price increases and limiting the world's dependence on the oil cartel.
Already, higher supplies from oilfields beyond OPEC's domain have helped to keep prices low despite booming demand and OPEC production quotas.


Iran Prohibits Satellite Dishes To Bar U.S. TV
The Iranian Parliament, clamping down on the influence of foreign television programs, has banned the use of satellite dishes, ordering that they be dismantled and warning of trials for those who sell or distribute them.
The ban was ratified on Sunday despite warnings by some lawmakers that if people refused to comply with the ban, the forceable removal of the satellite dishes would invade their privacy and could lead to serious political repercussions for the Islamic Government.


Yeltsin Reappears as Discord Grows on Chechnya
As the chaos surrounding the Kremlin deepened, President Boris N. Yeltsin, appearing in public for the first time in more than two weeks, told his National Security Council today that he was prepared to initiate peace talks with Chechnya.
At the same time one of his most influential deputies insisted publicly that, if anything, the military assault on Grozny, the Chechen capital, must intensify.
After making the overture on peace talks, Mr.
Yeltsin then said that the integrity of Russia was at stake and that the fighting in the region would continue as long as it took to subdue the gangsters he said were running Chechnya.
He also appointed a new Chechen leader in Moscow.


Criminals For Freedom
From concentration camps come few dispatches, not even when a whole nation is imprisoned.
Silence is as real as barbed wire.
For the captors, it is at least as effective.
So, when occasionally I write about the captivity of Tibet, readers sometimes ask why I care so much.


John Osborne Is Dead


Irish Tailback Is Hurt
Crippled by injuries at tailback all season, Notre Dame was stung again yesterday when the sophomore RANDY KINDER, the team's leading rusher, was declared out of Monday's Fiesta Bowl game against Colorado because of an injured right knee.
Kinder, who started five games and led the Irish with 702 yards, was hurt in the final minutes of practice in Tempe, Ariz. (AP)


Corrections
An article on Dec. 18 about GOPAC, the political action committee headed by Representative Newt Gingrich, misidentified the Owen Roberts who contributed $324,513 to the organization.
He is a Florida investment adviser, not the Foreign Service officer of the same name who served as Ambassador to Togo in the Reagan Administration.


Cape Coast Journal; On Slavery, Africans Say the Guilt Is Theirs, Too
By the time she reached the top of the cobblestone ramp leading out of the dungeon that was a door of no return for her ancestors, Doris Jenkins had to prop herself up against the whitewashed walls of this town's old slaving fort to collect herself.
It was the same for scores of other black visitors from America and from Europe as for Ms.
Jenkins, a 51-year-old teacher from Boston.
The pilgrimage to the place known as the Castle, one of 60 or so European slave-trading centers strung along Ghana's 270-mile coastline, turned into the central event in a weeklong festival of African culture put on by the Ghanaian Government.


Bailey Is Wondering Where He'll Be in '95
Linebacker Carlton Bailey, like a lot of Giants, wondered today about the immediate future.
"I don't think I'll be back," he said, "because I'm not sure they want me back. I think you may see my name on that expansion list."
The list Bailey referred to is the one on which each National Football League team must expose six players for February's N.F.L. expansion draft.
Nearly all players are eligible for the list except unrestricted free agents.
Teams can't list more than one player who was on the injured- reserve list this past season; more than one player who has been in the league for 10 years, or any kickers or punters.


Chess
The upset of a world champion in an individual game always causes a stir, even though it does not bring about the loss of his title.
It takes an official match of 24 games to do that.
But it is a galling experience for the champion and a heartening one for the underdog.
Doubtless such a thing can have repercussions, though without a crystal ball, we cannot tell what they will be.
It may be a bit of early evidence of the champion's decline and the elevation of his opponent.
On the other hand, it may just provoke the champion into a fit of creative rage the next time they sit down to play.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
ITT agreed to sell its commercial finance unit for $4 billion in cash to the American subsidiary of Deutsche Bank.
The deal reflects the continuing transformation of ITT, a onetime sprawling conglomerate that has been selling units in an effort to emphasize its growing entertainment and gambling business.  [ Page D1. ]


Turcotte's Other Battle
FOR Christmas, Ron Turcotte, the Hall of Fame jockey who made history by riding the great Secretariat to the Triple Crown in 1973, received from his wife and four daughters such gifts as shirts, sweaters, a cellular telephone, a radio and a grabber.
"A grabber is really just an aluminum extension of my arm, so I can pick up things that I can't normally reach," explained Turcotte from his home in Grand Falls, New Brunswick, and from his wheelchair.
Turcotte has been in a wheelchair since he crushed "to powder," as he says, the fourth and fifth vertebrae of his back and smashed the third and sixth.
It occurred on a sunny Thursday afternoon, July 13, 1978, in the eighth race at Belmont, just nine days before his 37th birthday.
He was riding a filly named Flag of Leyte Gulf in the featured one-mile, $25,000 handicap.


Disaster Leaves Imprint on Town
In a few moments of unforgettable terror, a tornado roared into Lancaster one night last April, killing three people, destroying 280 houses and damaging many more.
It literally tore out the heart of the town, transforming the quaint, 19th-century Town Square into mounds of brick and glass and dirt.
Eight months later, Lancaster is finding that recovery is slow.


Money-Savers and Risks Mix In Plan to Privatize Agencies
The Democrats have spent 60 years increasing the size and the power of the Federal Government, but as President Clinton looks for ways to pay for his middle-class tax cuts, he is turning to a tactic drawn from the Republican playbook: selling off some Government properties and functions and turning a number of agencies into private corporations.
The strategy would gladden the hearts of politicians with whom Mr.
Clinton shares little ideological kinship, including Ronald Reagan, who tried privatization and largely failed, and Margaret Thatcher, who as British Prime Minister was far more successful at turning Government agencies into private enterprises.


Market Place; Battered Best Buy investors may need to brace for more bad news.
THE stock of the Best Buy Company, a fast-growing consumer electronics retailer, has already fallen more than 25 percent this month after the company disclosed earnings and sales would be less than Wall Street expectations.
And there's a broad view that more bad news is on the way for the company's investors.
Even at its current $29.875 a share, investors are paying 20 times estimated fiscal 1995 earnings for Best Buy.
The price-earnings ratio is 12.9 at Circuit City Stores Inc.; 12.5 at the Tandy Corporation, which owns Radio Shack and Incredible Universe stores, and 11 at the Good Guys Inc.


To Save More Lives, Doctors Urge Making Even Cheaper Defibrillators
MOST people who go into cardiac arrest can be saved only with a quick jolt of electricity to jump-start their faltering hearts.
But because ambulances with the necessary equipment generally arrive too late to have much effect, health experts are looking at ways to get the shock devices to patients more quickly, including making them available in public places so ordinary bystanders can use them.
Sudden cardiac arrest is a condition set off by abnormal electrical signals that throw off the normal beating of the heart, causing the heart's main pumping chamber, the left ventricle, to fibrillate, or go into spasmodic contractions.
Given in time, an electric shock can jolt the heart and return the normal electrical signals that induce regular heartbeat to their proper rhythm.


Carroll, Esiason Get Votes Of Support
There will be no immediate Jets shake-up, at least at the most prominent positions.
The team's ailing general manager, Dick Steinberg, said today that he wanted to retain Coach Pete Carroll, who said he wanted to retain quarterback Boomer Esiason.
But while Steinberg spoke authoritatively, he is uncertain of his own future with the team for two major reasons.
First, because treatment for his recently diagnosed stomach cancer will require him to turn many duties over to Dick Haley, the director of personnel.
And second, Steinberg is to meet soon with the club owner, Leon Hess, bringing with him the baggage of a 32-48 record in his five years as general manager.


Alexandria, and in Just One Volume
OUT OF EGYPT A Memoir  By Andre Aciman  340 pages. Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux. $20.
In his masterpiece "The Alexandria Quartet," Lawrence Durrell memorialized that mysterious Egyptian city as "the capital of memory," "the great wine press of love," a city of tempura colors and "light filtered through the essence of lemons," a city of kaleidoscopic passions, aching beauty and elusive but persistent ghosts.


Vast Stone Age Art Gallery Is Found but Dam May Flood It
Along the banks of the Coa River in northern Portugal, in a spot where only shepherds' paths tell of the presence of humans, a prehistoric art gallery has been discovered on the rock face, setting off excitement, nervousness and accusations of a cover-up in the world of archeology.
The images form an alluring parade of more than 60 animals, like bison, horses, ibexes and deer, and archeologists estimate that they were chiseled into the rock face with sharp stone tools 20,000 years ago.


Accounts
*
L.
D.
Brinkman &amp; Co., Irving, Tex., to Puskar Gibbon Chapin, Dallas, as the first agency to handle the carpet and floor covering distributor's strategic marketing account for its Pro Flooring Center brand.
Clark Ashmoore Advertising, Sacramento, Calif., continues to handle broadcast creative advertising.
Billings were not disclosed. *
Roots Inc., New Haven, to Seiter &amp; Miller Advertising, New York, as the first agency to handle advertising for the manufacturer of additives that stimulate root growth in plants and lawns.
Billings were not disclosed.


Messages With Contributions Speak of the Duty of Caring
At age 6, Damien Lazar cannot afford to be too magnanimous.
But when his mother told him about The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund, Damien offered $5 of his savings.
"I would like to help a child who doesn't have all they need," he wrote in scrupulous script.


Vikings Win a Title And Face Bears Next
The Minnesota Vikings rested just one of their offensive stars -- quarterback Warren Moon.
The San Francisco 49ers took out a whole constellation, and it showed.
With Steve Young and Jerry Rice on the sideline for most of tonight's game, the 49ers couldn't muster much pop and weren't up to the task of holding off a hard-charging Viking defense.
Taking advantage of four turnovers, one that was returned for a touchdown, the Vikings defeated the 49ers, 21-14.


Pro Bono Accounts
* New Jersey Special Olympics, Piscataway, N.J., to Luca Stephan Partners, New York.


Treasury to Hold Bills' Sale
The Treasury's schedule of financings this week is confined to today's auction of three- and six-month bills.
By the close of the New York cash market on Friday, traders said, the rate on the outstanding three-month bill was 5.51 percent and a six-month bill was at 6.20 percent.


Israel Offers a Good Alternative to Orphanages
To the Editor:
The debate sparked by Representative Newt Gingrich between foster care and orphanages assumes that these severely flawed choices are our only ones.
Foster care is less expensive and closer to real family life, but subject to corruption and the abuse of the children.
Institutional care offers greater control, but sacrifices an intimate family environment and is more expensive.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; A fledgling agency starts from scratch to give the American Stock Exchange a voice that beckons.
FOR a while, the advertising of the American Stock Exchange resembled a nightmare reversal of the old E. F. Hutton ads: when the American Stock Exchange talked, nobody listened.
Now, under a new chairman and marketing chief and helped by some of the same people behind a striking American Express campaign, the American Stock Exchange is at last getting a fighting chance to be heard.
The exchange needs it.
As the third-largest national stock exchange in a field of three, the American Stock Exchange has had trouble defining its mission and explaining itself to its ad agency and to its audience, the thousands of companies that sell or are about to sell stock to the public.


They Fight City Hall on Taxes And They're Winning Refunds
Larry G. Willinger and Lionel Markusfeld are, as Mr.
Willinger likes to put it, "just two guys using their heads."
They are seasoned real estate brokers who realized around 1990 that housing prices were dropping but that the property assessments used to calculate the taxes had not been adjusted accordingly.
In such fluctuations they saw opportunity: a business that would help homeowners cut their taxes by challenging the assessments, all for a contingency fee.


3 Empowerment Areas Must Create a Wish List
Having been selected as one the nation's first Federal Empowerment Zones, with $300 million in public money available for a broad spectrum of new projects and services over the next 10 years, Harlem, Washington Heights and a part of the South Bronx must now agree on a shopping list.
And it may not be easy.
"Now comes the really hard part," said Representative Charles B. Rangel, the Democrat from Harlem who was one of the chief Congressional architects of the empowerment zone program.


Patterns
Waiting for Mugler
If there has seemed to be a certain docility to Paris fashion for the last two years, it is due in part to the absence of Thierry Mugler's vampy Valkyrian fashion on the runway.


Science Times E-Mail
Science Times has an electronic mail address for comments from readers about published articles and suggested areas of coverage:
scitimes@nytimes.com.


The Legends of the Fall Pack It In


Rangers' Zubov Injured
Ranger defenseman SERGEI ZUBOV was injured last night when he was sprayed with Chemical Mace during a confrontation with a group of teen-agers in Brooklyn, the police said.
Zubov, the Rangers' leading scorer last season, was walking with his wife and child at about 7:30 P.M. when they encountered the teens along Brighton Beach Avenue, a police spokesman said.


The Militant Group Behind the Hijacking
The Armed Islamic Group, which took responsibility for the plane hijacking that ended with the deaths of four armed militants at Marseilles airport today, has frequently turned its guns on foreign targets as part of its strategy of overthrowing Algeria's military Government.
The group, thought to number about 2,500 guerrillas, lacks the political weight of the Islamic Salvation Front, which was poised to take power in Algeria before parliamentary elections were canceled three years ago.
But the Armed Islamic Group makes up for this weakness through violence.


U.S. Official Heads for North Korea to Seek Release of Copter Pilot
The United States has sent a senior diplomat to North Korea in hopes of speeding the release of a captured American helicopter pilot, the State Department said Monday in Washington.
The trip, being arranged in response to an request received in Washington early Monday from North Korea, raises the prospects that Chief Warrant Officer Bobby Hall, whose helicopter crossed into North Korean territory on Dec. 17, would soon be freed.


Spurs Sign Rivers
DOC RIVERS, the 12-year veteran guard waived earlier this month by the Knicks, signed yesterday with San Antonio, saying the Spurs represented his best shot at playing on a championship team.
Rivers, 33, had been contacted by a half-dozen teams after being released Dec. 15 by the Knicks, whose backcourt was overcrowded.
But the 6-foot-4-inch point guard viewed the Spurs, third in the Midwest Division and riding a six-game winning streak, as the most likely contender for a title among teams that had a strong interest in him.


China Moves Ahead on Huge But Disputed Dam
After decades of engineering studies and political challenges, China has started construction on the Three Gorges Dam, the largest hydroelectric project in the world, which is to tame the storied floodwaters of the Yangtze River valley.
Although excavation began this month, project engineers acknowledge that uncertainties still abound over the mammoth undertaking, which will become the largest single drain on China's capital budget for more than a decade.
The dam is scheduled to be completed in 2009.


French Storm Jetliner, Free Hostages, Kill 4 Gunmen
French paramilitary commandos stormed a hijacked airliner tonight at Marseilles airport, freeing some 170 hostages and killing the four Islamic militant gunmen who had seized the plane at Algiers airport 54 hours earlier.
Government officials said 13 passengers, 3 crew members and 9 policemen were wounded or injured in the attack, which came as night fell in Marseilles.
Prime Minister Edouard Balladur said the operation had been carried out with "exemplary courage and efficiency."


New Israeli Law Limits Area Of Palestinian Authority
Moving to prevent Palestinians from gaining a political foothold in Jerusalem, the Israeli Parliament passed a bill today barring the Palestinian Authority from operating in Israel and authorizing the Government to ban activities here by the Palestine Liberation Organization.
The bill, which passed by a vote of 56 to 6, seeks to limit the authority to the Palestinian self-rule zones of the Gaza Strip and the West Bank district of Jericho, and to block what the bill described as "political or governmental activity" in Jerusalem by the authority or the P.L.O.


Shelter the Homeless In Empty Alexander's
To the Editor:
In the spirit of the holiday season, I write to ask why we are wasting the empty Alexander's department store building at Lexington Avenue and 58th Street.


Week's Equity Offering
The following equity and convertible debt offering is expected this week:
Cusac Industries, Vancouver, British Columbia, 800,000 units, each representing convertible preferred shares and warrants.
Paulson Investment Co.
Source: MCM CorporateWatch.


Casualty of the Peso: Investor Confidence
As the dust settles from Mexico's worst economic breakdown in more than a decade, it is becoming clear that the Government's desperate actions last week in floating the peso may have devalued investor confidence even more than they devalued the currency, making the recovery of trust essential to Mexico's rebuilding.
More than any other emerging nation, Mexico has depended on the confidence of foreign investors to finance much of its economic activity.
Foreigners, particularly those from the United States, buy nearly 40 percent of Mexican treasury notes and account for almost 30 percent of the stock market's capitalization.


John T. Dugan, 74, Writer and Professor
John T. Dugan, a freelance writer for the motion-picture and television industry in Los Angeles and former professor of drama, died on Saturday at his home in Encino, Calif.
He was 74.
The cause was pancreatic cancer, his family said.


Honors
*
MacLaren Lintas, Toronto, was named Agency of the Year for the second consecutive year by Strategy, the Canadian advertising trade publication. *
J.
Walter Thompson Hong Kong was named 1994 Asian Agency of the Year by Media magazine.


The Good, Bad and In-Between In a Year of Surprises on Film
Flukes set the standard for 1994 on screen.
While big films ("Wyatt Earp") and even big seasons (Christmas) fizzled, the triumphs came out of extreme left field.
Foreign films were in serious decline, but American independent cinema experienced a burst of creative fervor.
And, of course, Gump happened.
More about that in a moment.
While 1994 was short on major fireworks, it brought so many solid successes that this year's 10-best list includes a dozen entries.
Arithmetic should never matter more than merit.


D. L. Ryan Forms A New Division
The D. L. Ryan Companies in Westport, Conn., has formed a field marketing division, Ryan Partnership Field Marketing, with five regional offices around the country.
The new division, which will incorporate Ryan's Grass Roots Agency in Westport, opens with 26 employees and billings estimated at $15 million from accounts like Budget Gourmet, Ocean Spray and Sprint.


Harold Krensky, 82, Director Of Federated Chain of Stores
Harold Krensky, a retired president and director of Federated Department Stores, the parent of Abraham &amp; Straus and Bloomingdale's, died Sunday at Cabrini Hospital.
He was 82 and lived on the Upper East Side of Manhattan.
He had suffered a lengthy illness, according to an announcement from Federated headquarters in Cincinnati.


The Red Storm Is Rising, but So Is Manhattan
Chris Weiller, Madison Square Garden's public relations director, is calling it the "Battle for New York." And with the way the Knicks are playing these days, it might well be.
St.
John's versus Manhattan at 9 o'clock tonight in the first round of the Chemical Bank ECAC Holiday Festival features the intrigue that adds spice to any college basketball matchup.
Two unbeaten city teams will be playing in an ancient holiday tournament at the world's most famous arena.
And it's the Garden debut of the St.
John's freshman sensation Felipe Lopez.


New Theory Would Reconcile Rival Views on Dinosaurs' Demise
IN the last decade or so two main schools of thought have clashed furiously over the question of what did in the dinosaurs.
One school holds that a massive object from outer space slammed into the Earth, kicking up a worldwide pall of dust that blotted out the Sun and killed off many plants and animals.
The other school prefers to seek the cause of the global mayhem in natural processes like big volcanic eruptions.
Each side has accumulated a lot of evidence to support its case, though lately the advocates of an asteroid collision seem to have had the upper hand.
Now, however, an elegant theory has been proposed that neatly combines both conflicting ideas into a single mechanism.


FX Ends Work With Livingston
FX, the cable television network operated by Fox Inc., is ending its yearlong relationship with the Venice, Calif., office of Livingston &amp; Company on its consumer and trade account.
Billings were estimated at $5 million to $10 million.
"We've come to the end of our contractual agreement," Eleo Hensleigh, vice president for on-air promotions and creative director at FX in Los Angeles, said last week, "and it's a very good time to take our creative in-house for a period and evaluate our needs."


Diluted Baseball Fare Raises Costly Issues
Imagine if major entertainers went on strike, leaving films, TV programs and other shows to field replacement actors.
Tim Allen pickets ABC, so Jerry Mathers takes over "Home Improvement." Arnold Schwarzenegger won't star in "True Lies 2," but Mark Gastineau will.
Ted Koppel walks out on ABC's "Nightline," but Bernie Smilovitz subs for him.
Barbra Streisand cancels her concert tour, but Pia Zadora fills in.
Would the subs' ratings or box office approach one-third, one-half or one-tenth of what the stars would generate?
Baseball will be in a similar bind come April if the owners field teams composed of replacement players while striking union players picket North America's 28 major league stadiums.
Will fans pay to watch a diminished, overpriced product presented as major league baseball?
Will they watch these games on television, and would TV outlets have to show them?


Nurses' Strike Leaves a Town in Need of Healing; Relatives Aren't Speaking, Hospital Workers Are Taunted and Patients Go Elsewhere
Ever since Jeanne Simmons and more than 60 other registered nurses went on strike at the lone hospital in this tiny city, Ms.
Simmons and her sister-in-law Carol, a medical records assistant, have been unable to make eye contact, let alone have a conversation.
Life has been no less awkward for Joyce Wyka, another nurse on strike, who has continued to teach Sunday school at Deer Park Reform Church even though one of her students is the granddaughter of a hospital administrator who is also a church member.
"I don't want to make the church our battleground," Mrs.
Wyka said.


Sports of The Times; Team Man, From Head To Toe
IT is strangely ironic that Charles Oakley was in the operating room at Beth Israel Hospital yesterday because he couldn't pull off a Mark Messier-like power play back in October, couldn't put himself before his team.
He couldn't stay home, safe and sound.
He had to go Pat Riley's Charleston, S.C., boot camp, get hurt, and, quite possibly, ruin the Knicks' season.


Pentium and Our Crisis of Faith
During the Middle Ages, the world held its breath while theologians argued over how many angels occupied the heads of pins.
Today, the pinheads are made of silicon, and humanity was made to hold what little breath it has left while the articles of faith were rewritten by a computer chip that has a tough time with 16-digit division.
Our tethers to the infinite have become flimsy webs indeed.
With the discovery of the arithmetic disaster inside Intel's Pentium computer processor, those tethers are apparently flapping in a stiff wind.
Yet we will continue to believe.
During the Pentium Crisis, Intel declared there was only one option: more faith.


Coleman Still Hurting, And So Are the Nets
The 12 stitches came off Derrick Coleman's left hand tonight, but the Nets' power forward still did not touch a basketball.
He sat on the bench in his double-breasted suit and watched his teammates succumb to the Knicks.
"It was nasty cut, but it feels much better," Coleman said after watching the Nets suffer a 99-91 loss to the Knicks at Byrne Meadowlands Arena on a night when Kenny Anderson was benched for the last 15 minutes.


Better Prospects for Children
There is encouraging news, at last, from the United Nations Children's Fund, which annually assesses the state of the world's children.
More young children are being kept alive and healthy.
Developing countries have succeeded in raising immunization levels of children to about 80 percent.
Less progress has been made against pneumonia and diarrheal disease, but damage from iodine deficiency, measles and polio has been substantially reduced.


CHRONICLE
The high price of separation: the PRINCE and PRINCESS OF WALES are paying one more penalty for their marital split.
They both wanted to join the Mar-a-Lago Club in Palm Beach, Fla., which is owned by DONALD TRUMP, so each had to pay the $50,000 initiation fee.
Ordinarily, a single membership covers the member's spouse and children as well.
"I handled the applications myself," Mr.
Trump said yesterday.
"More than 250 memberships have been sold, even before the start of the campaign."


Metropolitan Diary
DEAR DIARY:
I first saw Grand Central Terminal 60 or so years ago, and since then I've been in and out of that landmark too many times to count.


Woman in the News; A Disciplinarian to Shepherd Pataki's Budget: Patricia Ann Woodworth
When Patricia A. Woodworth was recruited as Michigan's budget director in 1991, she inherited a deficit equal to nearly 25 percent of the state budget as well as a history of Federal mandates and state court decisions that left little leeway to reduce spending.
She immediately took aim at Michigan's welfare program and aggressively lobbied the Legislature to scrap relief for employable single adults -- a goal that skeptics figured she could not accomplish.
"We just eliminated it," Ms.
Woodworth recalled yesterday.
"Not in the first year, but we got it done in the second. At that point, one house of the Legislature was Democratic, but the Democrats went along. Public sympathy was for cutting taxes and reducing government spending and they read the writing on the wall."


Asian Workers Lift Themselves by Bootstraps; A Job for Labor
To the Editor:
Hats off to Bob Herbert for "Terror in Toyland" (column, Dec. 21), an overdue and salutary reminder of the dependence of American manufacturers on the dark underbelly of exploitation in East Asia.


I.R.S. Wants to Charge $43 For Installment Payments
The Internal Revenue Service proposed today to make it just a little bit harder on millions of financially struggling taxpayers by charging them $43 for the privilege of paying in installments.
The new user fee, which would be in addition to interest and penalties for delinquency, is intended to reimburse the agency for what it costs to evaluate, establish and monitor agreements for people who acknowledge their tax liability but say they cannot immediately pay.


People
*
Dan Krumwiede was named executive vice president and chief creative officer at Miller Meester Advertising, Minneapolis, succeeding Doug Engel, who was named to the new position of executive vice president and management supervisor for food and consumer accounts.
Mr.
Krumwiede previously headed his own agency, Krumwiede &amp; Associates, Minneapolis, which is closing. *
Terri Burke and Alan M. Reisberg were named to the new positions of executive vice presidents and account directors at Trahan, Burden &amp; Charles, Baltimore.
Ms.
Burke was previously a senior vice president and account director at Mullen Advertising, Wenham, Mass., and Mr.
Reisberg was previously marketing communications director at Dell Computer Corp., Austin, Tex.


Nevada Medical Board Approves Holyfield
The two-time heavyweight champion EVANDER HOLYFIELD will get to fight in Nevada again if the state athletic commission accepts the recommendation of its medical advisory board.
Holyfield's license to fight in Nevada was suspended after he was found to have a minor heart problem.


U.S. Warning North Koreans On Atom Deal
The United States has warned North Korea that its failure to release a captured American pilot could jeopardize the recently negotiated nuclear agreement between the two countries, senior Administration officials said today.
The warning coincided with predictions by key lawmakers of both parties that Congress will oppose carrying out the agreement if the pilot, Chief Warrant Officer Bobby Hall, is not freed.


The Fine Art of Words That Echo and Re-Echo
"YO, oy," we said in greeting and lamentation, hoping to impress Jon Agee, the palindromist, whom we were meeting for the first time at lunch.
"Nice to meet you," the 34-year-old illustrator replied in a manner that struck us as unexpectedly and disappointingly straightforward.
We had, after all, carefully read Mr.
Agee's works and had been led by them to wonder whether they and we were coming or going.
There was his original book, "Go Hang a Salami! I'm a Lasagna Hog!" and the new one, "So Many Dynamos."


COMPANY BRIEFS
ALLIED SIGNAL INC., Morristown, N.J., said a unit, Allied Signal Technical Services, was awarded a $31.6 million contract by Taiwan's space agency to develop and install the ground system for its satellite program.


Krumrie Becomes Bengal Line Coach
The Cincinnati Bengals added TIM KRUMRIE to the coaching staff yesterday as a defensive line assistant, hoping that the enthusiasm he showed during his 12-year career as a nose tackle will rub off on the rest of the team. (AP)


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.50
8.50
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
4.75
4.75
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
5.68
5.31
3.27
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.56
5.51
3.22
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
6.24
6.20
3.38
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.75
7.82
6.71
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.76
7.83
7.40
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.65
8.72
8.40
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.90
6.94
6.40
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Mexico Fund
Shares of the Mexico Fund, a closed-end mutual fund that invests in Mexican securities, fell for the eighth consecutive session yesterday.
It set a 52-week low of $19.625, before closing at $20.
The fund began tumbling just before the Dec. 20 devaluation of the peso.


Clubs and Players Quiet As Arenas Are Quieter
On the 88th day of the hockey lockout, the two sides couldn't even agree on why they weren't negotiating.
A National Hockey League executive, speaking on the condition of anonymity, said a meeting had been tentatively scheduled for yesterday, but that it was canceled this past Friday by the N.H.L.
Players Association after the union insisted that it would resume discussions only if management made no renewed demands for a payroll tax or for additional arbitration concessions.


O'Neal Helps Magic Preserve Home Mark
Magic 103, Heat 83
Shaquille O'Neal scored 28 points and grabbed 11 rebounds last night as the Orlando Magic remained unbeaten at home this season with a 103-83 victory over the Miami Heat.


Players and Owners File Complaints With Labor Board
Unable to settle their duel over baseball's economic system at the bargaining table, striking players and owners filed dual unfair-labor-practice charges with the National Labor Relations Board yesterday.
The exchange of charges is the first volley in a new phase of the four-and-a-half-month-old strike that will now continue more in legal briefs and evidentiary documents than at the bargaining table.
Congress, which has indicated that it will look at baseball's antitrust exemption, and the courts are expected to join the N.L.R.B. as new playing fields before the dispute is resolved.


Families Deserve Nursing-Home Option; Support Group
To the Editor:
I was one of the caregivers discussed in your article on caring for aging relatives (Dec. 19).
I agreed to be interviewed, and to allow a photographer to take pictures inside my apartment, because I felt it would help the only support group that has really helped me through the trials of these years.
You did not even mention that group, although you did mention others.
I want people to know about the Well Spouse Foundation, a national organization, because there are so many others who could benefit from it.


Merchants Fear Fewer Sales Ahead
Even as retailers take final markdowns as they prepare to bring in new merchandise, they worry that 1995 is shaping up as a difficult year.
The holiday selling season, which ended with a whimper on Saturday, was softer than many anticipated.
And many merchants expect shoppers to suffer holiday hangovers nonetheless, when they begin receiving credit card bills next month.


Prices Rise For Bonds in Thin Trading
The prices of Treasury securities rose yesterday, and the yield on the 30-year bond fell to a three-month low in thin holiday trading.
The price of the 30-year bond rose 25/32 , to 971/32 , for a yield of 7.76 percent, down from 7.83 percent on Friday.
The rates on the shorter-maturity bills were steady, and at the Treasury's weekly auction of three- and six-month bills, the discount rate declined for the third consecutive week.


A Banner Year for One Farmer
After long days of doctoring the soil and fighting weeds and insects, after the machinery is parked for the winter and the harvest stored or sold, a year on David Rothermel's farm comes down to this: a bewildering stack of computer printouts and accounting reports on the family-room table.
Like many large farms, Mr.
Rothermel's 2,900-acre enterprise is a patchwork of his own fields and land owned by relatives or outside investors.
This year's crops included soybeans and three types of corn: one for seed companies, another for food processors like Frito-Lay to turn into corn chips or other food, and so-called commercial corn that will end up as animal feed or ethanol fuel.


ITT Moves To Shed More Units
The ITT Corporation said yesterday that it had sold one of its consumer finance companies to the Norwest Corporation and that it was close to selling three more financial services subsidiaries to an unidentified buyer.
The two deals are the latest in a blizzard of transactions intended to raise cash for ITT's entrance into the gambling and entertainment businesses.


Eating in 1994: The Year Beef Came Back
Fat is up, but so is low fat.
Organic foods are growing; pretzels are, too.
When it comes to vegetables, iceberg lettuce is still a favorite.


Apartheid's Gone, and Anything Goes
After growing up an exile in Europe and America, Dali Tambo returned to South Africa in 1990 to discover that apartheid was only part of the story.
Along with white political supremacy came an official code of sexual behavior rooted in conservative Afrikaner Christianity.
"I found it primitive, Calvinist and Victorian, a spiteful, angry, intolerant culture," recalled Mr.
Tambo, now the host of an eclectic television variety show.
"And totally hypocritical. I mean, how could a country that was slaughtering the children of the nation presume to moralize about the dangers of erotica or the indecency of gays?"


It's Official: Texans Outnumber New Yorkers
Population estimates for 1994 issued by the Census Bureau today showed that Texas has surpassed New York as the second-most-populous state as a result of fewer people moving to the Empire State from other parts of the country.
"New York is a study in contrasts," said Edwin Byerly, a Census Bureau statistician and demographer who worked on the annual report that constitutes the official estimates of the nation's population changes.
"On the one hand, New York has the second-highest rate of international migration, but it's last in terms of the rate of domestic migration, people moving there from other states."


RESULTS PLUS
COLLEGE FOOTBALL Utah Just Wriggles Past Arizona
In Anaheim, Calif., Mike McCoy, struggling through his worst performance of the season, tossed a 5-yard touchdown pass to Kevin Dyson with 3 minutes 34 seconds remaining to lift No. 15 Utah over No. 14 Arizona, 16-13, in the Freedom Bowl last night.


Hard Time for Hard Youths: A Battle Producing Few Winners
When Shahid S. was strutting around Newark with an automatic pistol jammed into his waistband, stealing cars, selling drugs and mugging people, he would sometimes hear older boys talking about the prison where New Jersey sends its most incorrigible teen-agers.
But Shahid, who stole cars for money and excitement and said he felt no pangs of conscience over shooting someone that he thought "deserved it," didn't imagine the prison here as some kind of hellhole to be avoided at all costs.
It seemed more like a testing ground, where he could see how he measured up against the worst of the worst.


Going Mad Without Being a Sore Loser
All the world's a stage for King George III, the royally irrepressible ruler who holds sway throughout "The Madness of King George." While there's much to admire in Nicholas Hytner's splendid screen adaptation of Alan Bennett's neo-Shakespearean play ("The Madness of George III"), this exuberant tragicomedy is first and foremost a superb showcase.
The monarch is a corker, and he commands almost all the attention.
Grandly played by Nigel Hawthorne, who repeats his stage role with a stunningly mercurial display of wit, pathos and fiery emotion, this wily King is a figure to be reckoned with even when his powers decline.
It was under the stormy reign of George III (1760-1810) that England's monarchy lost a substantial degree of its authority to Parliament, while England itself lost the United States (or "the place we mustn't mention," as it's called in the film).
As for George himself, he began losing his reason periodically in 1788, when the film takes place, and was deemed quite mad during the last 10 years of his monarchy.


FEDERATED SELLING TWO STORES TO SEARS
Federated Department Stores Inc. said yesterday that it was selling the leases to two New York metropolitan area stores -- one Abraham &amp; Straus outlet and one Stern's outlet -- to Sears, Roebuck &amp; Company.
Federated, which operates Bloomingdale's, Macy's, Stern's, Abraham &amp; Straus and six other chains, said it was selling Sears its Stern's in the Sunrise mall in Massapequa, L.I., effective April 1; Sears will assume possession of the A &amp; S store in Woodbridge, N.J., on Feb. 28.
Sears expects to open its two new stores in about six months, after extensive remodeling.
Federated also said it would convert the A &amp; S store in the Sunrise mall to a Stern's to replace the one sold to Sears.


Asian Workers Lift Themselves by Bootstraps; Meanwhile at Mattel
To the Editor:
Let's see if I understand the economic situation at Mattel Inc. that led to its announcement to terminate 1,000 employees (Business Day, Dec. 20).
The toy company made record profits this year, acquired major competitors, saw its stock price climb 19 percent, and announced a stock split and dividend increase to benefit shareholders.
Revenues and profits have increase steadily for six years.
Yet Mattel decides to dismiss 4.5 percent of its work force to pursue "efficiencies" and is lauded for this by corporate analysts.


Some Progress Is Seen From Japan Trade Talks
Negotiators from the United States and Japan appeared to make progress today toward resolving a deadlock over the sale of American automobiles and auto parts in Japan, one of the most contentious issues in the strained trade relations between the nations.
After a meeting here between Jeffrey E. Garten, Under Secretary of Commerce for International Trade, and Sozaburo Okamatsu, his Japanese counterpart, the officials issued a statement saying they had hopes that negotiations on automotive trade could resume in January.


Miscellany
*
Fotouhi Alonso Advertising and Marketing, Century City, Calif., has been renamed Fotouhi Alonso Agnew Advertising and Marketing, to reflect the contributions of Jim Agnew, partner and president. *
Ken Williams and David Landau have opened Multiverse Networks, New York and Los Angeles, a national advertising sales representation and affiliate relations management company for the radio industry.
Mr.
Williams, former vice president and managing director at Media America Inc., Los Angeles, becomes chairman, based in the Los Angeles office.
Mr.
Landau, former senior vice president at Global Marketing, New York, becomes president and chief executive in the New York office.


World Court Could Outlaw Nuclear Threat
To the Editor:
Perhaps the most newsworthy event last week was not reported by you.
The United Nations General Assembly approved by 78 to 43 a resolution requesting a legal opinion from the International Court of Justice on whether or not the use or threat of use of nuclear weapons violates international law.


MEXICAN CURRENCY RESUMES ITS FALL, OFFICIALS SILENT
Mexico's economic crisis took a new turn for the worse today as investors dumped more of their holdings in pesos, driving the value of the Mexican currency down by nearly 10 percent more against the dollar.
Despite a brief rally late in the trading day, the peso closed at 5.70 to the dollar, or about 40 percent less than it was worth when the crisis broke out a week ago.


Uncovered Short Sales Decline as Nasdaq Prices Fall
As the stocks of smaller companies have tumbled of late, so have traders' bets that shares will fall further.
The uncovered short sales of Nasdaq stocks fell by 3.1 percent in the month that ended on Dec. 8, the National Association of Securities Dealers said yesterday.
In the same period, the composite index of Nasdaq stock prices dropped 6.3 percent.


Zurich Insurance Will Control Home Holdings
Home Holdings, an American insurer plagued by losses and declining ratings, will be transferred by its Swedish parent to the control of the Zurich Insurance Group, the three companies announced yesterday.
As part of the transfer, holders of Home shares that were publicly sold a year ago for $17 will be offered $10 a share, before the stock is delisted from the New York Stock Exchange.
Afterward, subsidiaries of the Zurich insurance company -- one of the world's 10 largest insurance groups -- will acquire most of the remaining Home shares held by Trygg-Hansa, a Swedish insurer that bought control of Home in 1990 and currently owns 65 percent of the company.


A Rare Mix of Tenants; Working Residents Create a New Model for Welfare Hotels
In the ornate lobby of the former Times Square Hotel, a remarkable cross-section of people come and go.
There's the model who used to appear in J. Crew catalogues but now suffers from AIDS-related Kaposi's sarcoma.
There's the actress who scrimps by as an extra on television shows like "Law and Order" and "One Life to Live," waiting to make it big.
And there's the Vietnam veteran who has coped with depression and post-traumatic stress syndrome since the war.


Public Broadcasting Doesn't Need Fixing; Fighting Words
To the Editor:
Newt Gingrich underestimates the importance of public broadcasting and National Public Radio programs in the American cultural landscape.


Rabin Visits Oman, Taking Step To Widen Link to Gulf Region
After flying secretly to Oman on Monday, Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin returned publicly to Israel today, saying he hoped his visit, the first known trip by an Israeli leader to the Persian Gulf, would lead to wider ties with Arab and Muslim countries.
No agreements were announced, but officials said the trip was another sign that progress in Middle East peace efforts this year was breaking taboos on contact with Israel throughout the Arab world.


Doctors Call Oakley's Surgery a Success
The surgery performed on Charles Oakley's dislocated right toe today was termed a success by his physicians, meaning that the Knicks' power forward is expected to return to action in around eight weeks.
The procedure, known as a soft tissue anthroplasty, was conducted by Dr.
William Hamilton, a foot specialist, and assisted by Dr.
Norman Scott, the Knicks' team physician.
During the procedure, the doctors created a new soft tissue joint in Oakley's right toe.
He is expected to be in a cast for about four weeks, followed by rehabilitation and running.


Wine for the Heart: Over All, Risks May Outweigh Benefits
ALCOHOL consumption rises precipitously in this holiday season, but before you raise yet another glass to everyone's health, take heed of these new findings based on data from 21 affluent countries: while wine and other forms of alcohol may protect your heart, when consumed in large amounts alcohol does nothing to prolong your life.
The analysis, by Dr.
Michael H. Criqui and Brenda L. Ringel of the University of California, San Diego, School of Medicine in La Jolla, indicated that although heavy alcohol consumption was associated with a very low risk of death from coronary heart disease, it raised overall death rates and the rates of death from other causes, especially cirrhosis of the liver.


In America; The Sweatshop Lives
A form of industrial exploitation that had been concealed from most Americans literally burst into the open with the 1911 Triangle Shirtwaist Company fire in lower Manhattan, which killed 146 workers, mostly young women and girls.
More than a third of the victims died after leaping from the top floors of the eight-story building.
Fire Department nets shredded beneath the weight of the falling bodies.
The remaining victims either suffocated or burned to death.


Wine Talk
AMERICANS, we are told, drink Champagne only on holidays and special occasions, while Europeans drink it all year long.
Perhaps the Europeans are just better at dreaming up special occasions.
There is a fellow in England who never invites a friend into his wine cellar without bringing along a bottle of Krug.
I know another chap in France who would not think of visiting his father's grave, which he does often, without taking along a bottle of Pol Roger.
Certainly the custom of opening a bottle of Champagne when guests arrive, expected or otherwise, is far more prevalent in the Old World than it is here.


NATO -- Expand or Die?
What should be Europe's and NATO's relationship with Russia?
The question must be answered soon, and decisively, if the United States' historic commitment to Europe is to remain intact.
It is axiomatic that America's security and Europe's are linked.
But that means both sides must define what constitutes Europe and what is the security perimeter of NATO.
And it means that the relationship between Europe, Russia and America should encourage the emergence of a Russia that is both benign and democratic -- a prospect that is by no means certain, as the bloody struggle over independence for Chechenya demonstrates.


Drug Accusations Swirl After Killing of Minister
The Baltimore County Police said today that they were investigating whether the killing of a minister here on Christmas Eve involved a robbery, drug use by the victim and suspect or both.
The Rev.
Samuel Nathaniel Booth Jr., 55, pastor at the fundamentalist Christian Faith Tabernacle Church in this community, just east of Baltimore, was found stabbed to death on Saturday evening in his trailer behind the church after he did not turn up for Christmas Eve services.


Public-TV Offshoot Finds That the Fringe Is a Risky Place to Be
In the next two months, about 150 television stations across America plan to broadcast the offbeat film series "TV Families." This seven-part series is filled with surprises.
Todd Haynes's "Dottie Gets Spanked" presents the protosexual fantasies of a 6-year-old boy obsessed with a sitcom actress.
The anarchic Japanese family in Jon Moritsugu's "Terminal U.S.A." moves into territory well beyond Al Bundy.
In Tamara Jenkins's "Family Remains," a young woman opens her front door and discovers that her long-lost father has been delivered in a coffin.
If the stories and images in "TV Families" are unusual, so is the source: the national public television system.
The series was commissioned by the Independent Television Service, a little-known offshoot of public television that was authorized by Congress in 1988 and incorporated in 1989 to do a job that, critics complained, the Public Broadcasting Service was leaving undone.


Debating the Extra Year: One Child's Stepping Stone Is Another's Stigma
Among many teachers and parents active in programs that give children an extra year to prepare for first grade, there is the belief that the programs greatly benefit the children later in life.
The advocates feel they have given such children a chance to grow up a little at their own pace.
But the programs appear to be in decline, with critics attacking them as ineffective and emotionally damaging.


Pauline Kael, Loving and Loathing
FOR KEEPS By Pauline Kael 1,291 pages. A William Abrahams Book/Dutton. $34.95.
Critics are always looking for good or great works of art; readers have the right to look for good and great critics with the same avidity.
Along with the willingness to risk looking like a fool from time to time.


Unlocking Oil in Canada's Tar Sands
For millions of years, crude oil has been locked within the tar sands that abound along the Athabasca River, 300 miles north of Edmonton, but until recently it looked doubtful that the estimated 300 billion barrels could be recovered economically.
Now a couple of companies representing a broad array of Canadian, American and Japanese interests have shown that such unconventional fuels can not only make money but also augment Canada's output of domestic conventional crude, which has declined over the last 20 years by 500,000 barrels a day.


Police Say Hijackers Planned to Blow Up Jet Over Paris
The French Government said today that it ordered paramilitary commandos to storm a hijacked Air France airliner at Marseilles airport Monday after learning that the Islamic militant gunmen who took over the plane in Algiers were planning to blow it up over Paris.
The French police said that, after the four hijackers were killed and 171 hostages were freed, 20 sticks of dynamite were found on board the Airbus A300.
"Their objective was a suicide operation over Paris with the plane," Interior Minister Charles Pasqua said, "so we couldn't let it leave."


Brazilian Way With Mornings After
EVER since Plato asked the question "How can we drink with least injury to ourselves?" nearly every culture has devised its own answers.
In Brazil, a popular answer is Engov (pronounced en-GOV-ee), an over-the-counter medication recommended for headache and allergy relief.
Manufactured by Newlab Industria Farmaceutica in Sao Paolo, Engov is sold in tablet form.


A Palestinian-Settler Duel: Olive Trees vs. Bulldozers
The Palestinians planted tiny olive trees; the Israeli soldiers dug them up.
The Palestinians lay down in the road to block a bulldozer; the Israelis carted them off to police vans.
The Palestinians attacked the soldiers; the Israeli troops fought back.
The object of the dispute is a barren, rocky hilltop 15 miles south of Jerusalem, between the Jewish settlement of Efrat and the Palestinian town of Al Khader.


21 Hurt in Fires
Twenty-one people were hurt in two fires in Manhattan, including 16 firefighters injured in a gas explosion at a restaurant where they had fought a kitchen blaze, officials said.
Article, page B3.


More Youths in U.S. End Up Behind Bars
While many experts say prisonlike juvenile institutions do more harm than good, the number of teen-agers sent to them nationwide rose to more than 90,000 in 1991, from 70,000 in 1979.
The numbers are likely to rise even faster in the next few years, as calls for tougher punishment grow, new prisons are built and states continue to send youths involved in serious crimes to adult courts and prisons.
A special report, When Trouble Starts Young, turns today to questions of punishment and deterrence.
Article, page A12.


Allie Reynolds, Star Pitcher For Yankees, Is Dead at 79
Allie Reynolds, a pitcher Manager Casey Stengel once called "two ways great" because of his skills as a starter and a reliever for six New York Yankee World Series champions from 1947 through 1953, died yesterday in Oklahoma City.
He was 79.
The cause of death was complications of lymphoma and diabetes, a grandson, David Reynolds, said.


Families Deserve Nursing-Home Option
To the Editor:
Your report on people who are burning out caring for sick and aging relatives at home (news article, Dec. 19) addresses a steadily growing problem that is a result of the phenomenon of extreme longevity despite chronic impairments.
As a society we are confronting the issues of quality of life in old age as well as quality of dying.


He Disarmed A Gunman But Insists He's No Hero
The rifle was pointed inches from Jason McEnaney's chest and he knew he had to act.
For two and a half hours earlier this month, the gunman -- a fellow student at the State University here who was holding Mr.
McEnaney and 34 other classmates hostage -- had been taunting Mr.
McEnaney ceaselessly, singling him out for being too fidgety and moving him around the lecture hall like a chess piece.


INSIDE
Enigma of an Official's Fall
After Webster Hubbell pleaded guilty to embezzling, friends and colleagues wondered how the No. 3 man at the Justice Department could have fooled them so badly.
Page A10.
Lone Star Eclipses Empire
The Census Bureau estimated that Texas surpassed New York as the second largest state, largely because fewer people moved to New York from other states.
Page A8.
Pass the Butter, Please
Despite the emphasis on nutrition, 1994 was the year beef came back, vegetables remained anathema, and Snackwell's filled the cookie jar.
The Living Section, page C1.
Allie Reynolds Is Dead
The right-hander, who pitched two no-hitters in 1951 and helped the Yankees win five straight World Series as a starter and a reliever, was 79.
Page D18.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  Japan League
CHIBA LOTTE MARINES -- Signed Pete Incaviglia, outfielder, Julio Franco, infielder, and Eric Hillman, pitcher.


The Jets: Still Looking for Winning Formula
All anyone will remember about the 1994 Jets was that they blew it again.
There they were, the last Sunday in November, 22 seconds from tying for first place in the division, but then losing to the Dolphins.
They finished with five straight losses and a 6-10 season.
So their 6-5 start was overshadowed. Now comes the hard choices.


Whipping Post: Struggling Knicks Bully the Nets
It was not a masterpiece, but the Knicks recaptured the art of winning tonight.
Ending a five-game losing streak after building a 24-point third-quarter lead, New York outlasted the Nets, 99-91, before 20,049 at Byrne Meadowlands Arena.


Karl Schiller, 83, Ex-Minister Of Economics in West Germany
Karl Schiller, a former government minister who dominated West German economic and financial policy in the late 1960's and early 70's, died in a hospital in Hamburg on Monday.
He was 83.
The cause was vascular collapse, his doctor said.


Even With Guilty Plea, Justice Official's Crimes and Motives Remain Enigma
Early last month, Webster L. Hubbell traveled to Arkansas to tell a few old friends that the embezzlement charges he had denied so vehemently for so long were actually true.
But even now, three weeks after the former Associate Attorney General stood up in court to plead guilty to stealing hundreds of thousands of dollars from his former law firm, friends and former colleagues here and in Little Rock, Ark., are still wrestling with some mysteries.
Why did he steal?
Where did the money go?
And how can they square the man they knew -- a Presidential confidant, whom even opponents called a man of integrity -- with the sloppy, almost brazen thefts he has admitted?


A Magic Mushroom Or a Toxic Fad?
IN cupboards and closets across the country, Kombucha mushrooms are floating in bowls of sugared tea and saturating a growing number of homes with the smell of vinegar and the hope for restored vigor.
Kombucha, a white, gelatinous blob about 12 inches in diameter that propagates quickly, has spread like a new-age chain letter in recent months.
Its cultivators estimate that more than three million Americans are now growing the fungi.


Market Place; A small specialty foods company moves to revitalize some longtime brands.
REMEMBER the slogan, "You don't have to be Jewish to love Levy's"?
Well, you don't have to be kosher to go for a company whose ticker symbol is NOSH.
But whether the company, Hain Food Group, will be as nourishing for investors as it is for food-loving noshers depends on whether new management can revitalize some stale brands.


Miscalculation in Chechnya
President Boris Yeltsin was justified in using force against the breakaway Russian republic of Chechnya, but as a political exercise and military operation the attack has been inept.
That is now a problem for him and for Washington.
The indiscriminate bombing of Grozny, Chechnya's capital, was a mistake, one Mr.
Yeltsin acknowledged yesterday in a nationally televised speech in which he announced a suspension of such attacks.
No strategy was more certain to revive century-old resentments of the Chechens and unite them against Moscow, or more likely to galvanize opposition in Moscow to any effort to crush the Chechen rebellion.


METRO DIGEST
BUDGET POST GOES TO MICHIGAN OFFICIAL
Five days before his inauguration, Governor-elect George E. Pataki reached beyond his small circle of confidants and named as budget director Patricia A. Woodworth, the chief fiscal officer in Michigan, a state that national Republicans consider at the forefront of their effort to rein in government.
A1.


To Get Instant Flavor, Add Herbes de Provence
YEARS ago, when Julia Child began to teach Americans about French cooking, serious cooks learned about a mixture of herbs called herbes de Provence -- the herbs used often in the cooking of the Provence region of France that include rosemary, bay leaf and thyme.
Now that fresh herbs are easy to find in this country, dried herbes de Provence are less popular.
But they are a good standby for adding a lot of flavor very quickly.
In today's menu, they are sprinkled on brussels sprouts before steaming.


Corrections
An article in Business Day yesterday, about the sale of the ITT Corporation's commercial finance unit to the Deutsche Bank of Germany, misstated the financial terms of the deal.
ITT said yesterday that the total purchase price was about $2.3 billion but that the company had agreed to assume about $1.4 billion of the subsidiary's debt payments, lowering the net gain for ITT to approximately $900 million.
A related article appears on page D1.


Paying Tribute to Those Who Taught the Meaning of Giving
They escaped to the United States from Nazi Germany, and afterward, Ruth Marton and her sister, Gerd Muehsam, always felt grateful for their comfortable life here.
So when Mrs.
Muehsam died in 1979, Mrs.
Marton started donating $100 a year to The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund in her memory.
This month, she added $15 to her contribution -- a dollar for every year since Mrs.
Muehsam's death.


Vancouver Journal; Planet Earth's Preacher, With Canada His Pulpit
He recycles like mad to cut his family's garbage down to one bag a month, uses refillable fountain pens, cloth handkerchiefs and reusable chopsticks, and gets around on buses, bikes and skates.
David Suzuki is the first to concede the triviality of such individual pursuits to conserve the planet's resources.
But Mr.
Suzuki, Canada's best-known advocate of environmental causes, says it is important to start somewhere to conserve a world threatened by unbridled economic growth -- and to live by one's beliefs.


Chaos Presides in New York Housing Courts
On Johnny L. Baynes's first day as a tenants' lawyer in Brooklyn housing court in 1984, he thought he would lose his mind.
The halls were jammed with people clutching eviction notices and the volume was headache-inducing: babies wailing, court officers yelling out cases, and landlords' lawyers and tenants negotiating rents in full cry in the stairwells.
No court could possibly be worse, thought Mr.
Baynes, until he began representing the city in housing cases in the Bronx.
Pregnant women and the elderly slumped against walls of a grimy, windowless basement, with shredding insulation and broken ceiling tiles.
One courtroom was so tiny it scarcely accommodated six bodies.


Erickson Finally Answers Question: He's Staying
This is no time for clouds, not at the Orange Bowl, where the University of Miami will have an opportunity to re-establish a reputation as a force that seemed lost a year ago.
The meeting with Nebraska on Sunday night may hold little realistic hope of a national championship, but its impact on the future still makes it one of the most important moments in Dennis Erickson's coaching career.
So this time, he did not walk away from the question about his future.
A day after Erickson abruptly and uncharacteristically left a news conference when he was asked about the possibility of leaving to coach the Seattle Seahawks, the coach of the Hurricanes said that he was not interested in the job.


Book Notes
Small and Selective
What is probably the smallest book club in existence has just about quadrupled its membership in the first year of operation.
It's the Collectors Book Club.
Since it was announced in the fall of 1993, when it amassed about half a dozen enrollees, the club has swelled to 24 members.


The Bears, Ahem, Are Very Tough
Since taking over as Vikings coach, Dennis Green has never lost to the Bears.
The Vikings are 6-0 against Chicago, including two victories this season in which they outscored the Bears by 75-41.
So, after the Vikings' 21-14 victory over San Francisco on Monday night, which earned Minnesota the division title and a first-round wild-card playoff game at home against the Bears on Sunday, Green and his players did their best to mask any signs of glee.


Local Group Makes Offer for Buccaneers
A local group made an offer to buy the Tampa Bay Buccaneers that is valid until Jan. 9, a trustee for the team said yesterday.
The offer came from the Tampa developer TOMMY SHANNON, the Outback Steakhouse executives CHRIS SULLIVAN and BOB BASHAM and others.
A session Monday "was our third face-to-face meeting regarding their interest in the purchase of the Buccaneers," said STEVE STORY, spokesman for a three-member trust overseeing the estate of the late Buccaneers owner, Hugh Culverhouse.


Milton Pitts, 82, Favorite Barber Of Four Presidents
Milton Pitts, the barber who prompted President Richard M. Nixon to set up a White House barbershop and who cut the hair of three other Republican presidents as well as other celebrities, died on Sunday at Georgetown University Hospital.
He was 82 and lived in Bethesda, Md.
The cause was heart failure, said his daughter, Barbara.


No Headline
"I think that cutting taxes is very doable in New York." -- PATRICIA A. WOODWORTH, the state's new budget director.  [ B4:5. ]


Ryan Plans Changes for the Cardinals
BUDDY RYAN shed some light yesterday on how he intends to improve his team's offense.
The Arizona Cardinals finished 8-8 Saturday with a 10-6 loss to Atlanta, leaving the offense ranked 25th over all and 27th in scoring.


CHRONICLE
JEFFREY ARCHER, the best-selling novelist, was injured with his wife when their car plummeted down a highway embankment near London yesterday, The Associated Press reported.
The 54-year-old author of "Kane and Abel" and other books was taken to a hospital with cuts and bruises.
His wife, MARY, 50, suffered scratches and a small cut on her face.
Their two sons were not hurt.


Name Changes Rose In 1994, Survey Says
The number of corporate name changes rose again in 1994, according to an annual survey, primarily because of corporate revamping and marketplace competition.
The 25th annual name-change survey by Anspach Grossman Portugal, a corporate identity consulting company in New York, found 1,114 name changes this year, up 11 percent from 1,004 in 1993.
The president and chief executive of Anspach, Jim Johnson, said mergers and acquisitions were the main reason for 56 percent of new corporate names, while changes like sales of assets and spinoffs ranked second.


Cordial Visit to Mansion And Some Mixed Feelings
Setting in motion Albany's first changing of the guard in 12 years, Matilda Raffa Cuomo gave Libby R. Pataki her first tour of the Executive Mansion today, and Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo bade farewell to a Capitol press corps that he had alternately charmed and chided during his years in office.
Ever since Election Day, Mr.
Cuomo joked with the reporters, he had been looking for a chance to turn a famous quote of Richard M. Nixon's on its head: "Well guys," he said today, "I lost. Now I won't have you to kick around anymore."


Prostitutes Defy Killer by Working
On a side street of the commercial strip known as the Tamiami Trail, business was brisk for three prostitutes on a recent late night, even under new rules: the two women and the male transvestite would work only in parked cars within screaming distance of the others.
"Most of the girls he killed were by themselves," explained a 31-year-old woman known on the streets as Jennifer.
"He's looking for somebody to be by themselves."


Yeltsin Limits Air Raids on the Chechen Capital
Facing growing public opposition to the war in secessionist Chechnya, President Boris N. Yeltsin said on television tonight that he intended to press forward to seize the rebel capital but that he had ordered a halt to the bombing of civilians there.
It was the first time Mr.
Yeltsin, who sent tanks and thousands of troops to Chechnya on Dec. 11, spoke up publicly to justify his actions.
It was also the first time the Russian Government has admitted attacking civilians in the secessionist republic.


Man Indicted In Bombing On Subway
Edward J. Leary was indicted yesterday on charges of carrying the firebomb that injured more than 40 people on a crowded subway on Dec. 21 as part of an extortion plot to hold the city's subways ransom.
The terse, two-page grand jury indictment handed up at the close of court business last night listed one count each of attempted murder in the second degree, first-degree assault, attempted grand larceny and possession of a weapon against Mr.
Leary, a 49-year-old unemployed computer expert.


Public Broadcasting Doesn't Need Fixing
To the Editor:
I find a few problems with Leonard Garment's reasoning in "How Not to Fix Public Broadcasting" (Op-Ed, Dec. 21).
He says a "problem with public broadcasting is bias -- programming that does not disseminate a common culture but imposes a partisan attitude."


With Bosnia Quiet, U.N. Pushes for More Lasting Cease-Fire
Fighting in Bosnia and Herzegovina has all but stopped after a seven-day cease-fire negotiated last week by former President Jimmy Carter.
Seeking to extend the break in fighting, United Nations mediators have begun an intensive effort to negotiate a new accord that would commit the warring parties to stop fighting for four months.
Mediators hope to reach such an accord by Saturday, when the cease-fire expires.


As Toll Rises in Algeria's War, a Dearth of News
The world's press has been largely shut out of the Algerian civil war, which has claimed 600 to 1,000 victims each month since this summer.
Islamic militants fighting for more than two years to establish a Muslim theocracy in the Iranian mold have declared Algerian and foreign journalists to be prime targets


Of Epic Hangovers And Hairs of Dogs
A CHILI pepper, a hunk of bread, some bacon fat, a shot of brandy.
This may not be a standard breakfast menu, but if it's midafternoon on the day after the big night and the ceiling above the bed looks like a jumbled jigsaw puzzle, it might be just what's in order.
Some people will take almost anything to temper the dreadful symptoms of a hangover.
Patrons and tenders at almost any decent bar are quick to dish out advice, not all of it palatable.


Greening New York's Waste Lands
New York City is dotted with waste lands that are homes to nothing but generations of garbage and generations of rats.
The city itself owns nearly 20,000 such vacant lots, acquired after their owners defaulted on taxes.
The city would love to sell them, but they are hardly hot properties at the moment -- except, the Giuliani administration hopes, to companies looking for a literally grass-roots way to promote their products.
In exchange for cleaning up and converting some lots into parks and playgrounds -- one in each of the city's 55 community districts in 1995 -- corporate sponsors could use the space for advertising just about anything short of tobacco and alcohol.
Should the program be successful it would be expanded to take in hundreds of other lots.


No Problems for Penn in Spotlight
The University of Pennsylvania has the highest winning percentage among Division I basketball programs over the past two seasons (.855).
The Quakers had back every significant player, minus one, from last season's squad, which made the second round of the National Collegiate Athletic Association tournament.
They nearly upset a Florida team that would eventually advance to the Final Four.


Who Will Clean Up The Ticket Scandal?
To the Editor:
G.
Oliver Koppell, the New York State Attorney General, has done an admirable job of investigating the scandalous ticket-distribution situation that threatens to destroy the New York entertainment industry (news article, Dec. 22).
It's a shame he won't have the opportunity to clean up the mess.


Hawkeyes and Settles Stun the Blue Devils
Iowa 81, Duke 71
In Honolulu, Jess Settles returned from a three-game absence because of a back injury to score 28 points and grab 8 rebounds last night, leading Iowa to an 81-71 victory over No. 7 Duke in the Rainbow Classic.


Corrections
A Critic's Notebook article yesterday about the best films of 1994 misstated the medium for which "The Last Seduction" was produced.
It was made for theatrical release, but the broadcast rights were acquired by Home Box Office, which showed it on cable television starting in July.
Its United States theatrical premiere was in October.


MICHIGAN OFFICIAL NAMED BY PATAKI AS BUDGET CHIEF
Five days before his inauguration, Governor-elect George E. Pataki reached beyond his small circle of confidants yesterday and named as budget director the chief fiscal officer in Michigan, a state that national Republicans consider at the forefront of their effort to rein in government.
By naming Patricia A. Woodworth to one of his administration's top posts, Mr.
Pataki was sending a clear signal, aides said, that his bottom line will be cutting taxes and reducing state spending.


Food Notes
Salmon That Bites Back
The latest in smoked salmon is spiced.
And the competition is fierce.
In fact, David Burke, the chef and an owner of Park Avenue Cafe, 100 East 63d Street, has trademarked the name Pastrami Salmon for his.
This salmon, the most forcefully seasoned and least smoky of a number of similar products, undergoes an elaborate curing process.
It comes in a log weighing about a pound with a dark crust of crushed pepper and spices.
At the restaurant it is $29.50 a pound, and at Caviarteria, 502 Park Avenue (59th Street), it is $28 for the log and $15 for eight ounces of slices.


21 Injured in 2 Separate Manhattan Fires
Twenty-one people were hurt in two fires in Manhattan early yesterday, including 16 firefighters injured when a gas explosion sent a fireball surging through a restaurant where they had finished fighting a kitchen blaze, officials said.
Most of the injured firefighters were caught unawares while packing their gear outside the Mexican Express restaurant, at 138 East 34th Street, at Lexington Avenue, and were showered by glass from a window blown out in the explosion.


Neighborhood Confrontation Is Captured By St. John's
A sellout crowd.
Two unbeaten city teams.
Felipe Lopez making his Madison Square Garden debut.
There was little more the Chemical Bank ECAC Holiday Festival could expect for an opening-round matchup.
But it got more: a thrilling basketball game that was played just the way you'd expect two unbeaten teams fighting over the neighborhood turf to play.
It took all the muscle and poise that 25th-ranked St.
John's could come up with to turn back a gritty Manhattan team, 81-70, before 19,524.
Big East conference or not, there will be few games the remainder of the season in which the Red Storm will have to play as hard as it did last night.


Corrections
An article on Dec. 22 about a legal decision supporting President Clinton's timber-cutting program for the Northwest misstated the year Mr.
Clinton led a public meeting in an effort to resolve the differences between conservationists and loggers.
It was 1993.


Head-On Collision Kills 4 Teen-Agers and an Adult
The parking lot at Brewster High School was almost full today, despite the vacation, as more than 100 students gathered to comfort each other and receive counseling after four of their friends and a former Sunday school teacher were killed in a head-on collision here on Monday.
As tearful students hugged each other, the school board president, A. Gerald Schramek, said, "These were good young people who just passed away too soon."


The Giants: A Good Finish May Bode Well for Next Season
This was one of the strangest seasons the Giants have seen in recent years.
They won three straight games, lost seven straight, then finished with six consecutive victories.
There were quarterback benchings, rumors that Coach Dan Reeves might leave, as well as public squabbles between Reeves and General Manager George Young.
"Just your normal N.F.L. season," said a smiling Mike Sherrard, the Giants' wide receiver.


Changing a City Where Driving Seems Competitive
No one knows exactly when, but sometime in the last several years defensive driving took on new meaning in this hub of frantic Fairfield County commuting.
Cautious drivers on High Ridge Road began running red lights because they could sense cars behind them accelerating to get through.
A traffic light turning green on Bedford Street began to mean "wait" -- for cars running the opposite light to zoom by.


Russia's New Budget Raises Doubt on a Stable Economy
After 13 votes over three days last week, the Russian Parliament finally approved the first reading of a tight 1995 budget.
But the real battle over spending limits is still to take place, the Russian military action in Chechnya could bust the budget and the Government has brought Western aid into question by reneging on promises to remove controls on domestic energy prices.
The decision on energy was particularly worrisome, senior Western officials said, because it marked a significant loss for economic reformers inside the Cabinet after the sudden intervention of Gen.
Aleksandr V. Korzhakov, President Boris N. Yeltsin's security chief.


Federal Prosecutors Win Court Supervision of Union Once Controlled by Mob
The Federal Government yesterday succeeded in gaining tight control of a New York City union representing construction laborers, a union that prosecutors contended was dominated and repeatedly plundered by organized crime.
Mary Jo White, the United States Attorney in Manhattan, said the union, the Mason Tenders District Council of Greater New York, had entered a consent decree under which a court-appointed investigator and monitor would control new elections and the $270 million union benefits fund.


Man in the News; Turning Loss Into Victory: Daniel Robert Glickman
Representative Dan Glickman of Kansas, President Clinton's choice to become Secretary of Agriculture, may yet prove that it is possible to win by losing.
Mr.
Glickman had sought the post two years ago but lost out to Representative Mike Espy of Mississippi, a junior member of the Agriculture Committee.
Now, after an even more stunning defeat seven weeks ago in his home district of Wichita, the 50-year-old Congressman is to be nominated at last to the office he coveted.


Notes of Nuttiness Instrumental to P. D. Q. Bach
As a musical stylist, P. D. Q. Bach may have been all over the place (or nowhere at all, depending on one's perspective), yet at the end of his "Short-Tempered Clavier," which Peter Schickele unveiled on Monday evening at Carnegie Hall, something suspiciously like a stylistic hallmark peeked through the clutter.
The work's finale is a tribute to P. D. Q.'s purported father, Johann Sebastian Bach, and therefore used the dark, chromatic four-note motif that J. S. used as a musical signature.
Who else but P. D. Q. Bach would introduce a rambunctious version of "He's a Jolly Good Fellow" as a counter theme?
Mr.
Schickele probably would, but until musicologists prove otherwise, listeners must accept his claim to be merely the discoverer of this and other P. D. Q. Bach works, not its author.
Musicologists will most likely steer clear of Mr.
Schickele, though.
For the last 29 years he has been sending them up royally in his annual seminars on P. D. Q. Bach, supposedly the last and least of J. S. Bach's musical offspring.


Advanced Placement Exams Suffering an Erosion in Value
For more than 40 years, Advanced Placement tests have been a standard fixture in high school for America's ablest students.
While they attended high school, the students earned college credit by taking demanding classes from art and Latin to calculus and physics.
But as the number of Advanced Placement courses -- and students taking them -- has proliferated, more and more colleges and universities are tightening the number of credits they will award to students.
Some institutions have increased the minimum test score they will accept.
Others are refusing to accept the credits as substitutes for college work, saying that as they have redesigned curriculums, the tests have become outdated.


Sheffer Breathes Life Into Huskies
Connecticut won again tonight, bringing its record to 6-0, by playing the kind of pressing defense so pleasing to Coach Jim Calhoun.
The opponent was Illinois, a respectable Big 10 team that remained tenacious until midway in the second half, when an 11-0 run by the Huskies gave them a 59-47 lead en route to a 71-56 victory.


Personal Health
BY the age of 3, virtually every American child has had at least one respiratory infection caused by a virus that few people have heard of and fewer still take seriously.
It is respiratory syncytial virus, or R.S.V., which was first discovered in chimpanzees in 1956 but was soon recognized as a nearly universal cause of a cold-like illness in people.
Regardless of its relative obscurity and usually benign nature, R.S.V. is not an organism to be taken lightly.
An R.S.V. infection can result in serious, even fatal, respiratory illness when it infects very young infants or any children with medical conditions like congenital heart or lung disease or respiratory damage after premature birth.


Asian Workers Lift Themselves by Bootstraps
To the Editor:
Bob Herbert's use of a tragic fire in a Thailand toy factory to attack Asian "sweatshops" (column, Dec. 21) shows an almost willful ignorance of global economics.


With Each Fall in Peso, Tourism Bargains Rise
While the devaluation of the peso has caused an exodus of investment dollars from Mexico, travel agents say American tourists will be going in the opposite direction, heading to Mexico, where the dollar will now buy much more.
According to early estimates, that could make a big loser out of the Caribbean, which has been waging a vigorous advertising and marketing campaign to woo more American tourists.


Salmon and Stuffed Eggs: A Light Duo
THIS menu is deliberately light.
The holiday parties and feasts of December provide so much opportunity to indulge that I find it a relief to eat light dishes at home whenever possible at this time of year.
Delicate salmon fills the bill perfectly.
Most salmon sold today is farm raised, so it is of uniformly good quality.
If you can't find reasonably priced salmon, use another firm-flesh fish of approximately equal size like scrod, haddock or cod.


High-Tech Death From Alabama
The United States is already the most murderous nation in the Western world.
The last thing it needs is a more efficient way to commit homicide.
The Olin Corporation's Winchester Ammunition Division acted responsibly last year when it withdrew from the market a destructive, razor-fingered bullet known as the "Black Talon," which grinds up internal organs and threatens surgeons who try to remove it.
But the Signature Products Corporation of Huntsville, Ala., has stepped into the breach and is seeking Government permission to market two new bullets that, if Signature's claims are true, are just as destructive.
They should be banned.
The first is a Black Talon-like bullet that disintegrates into razor-sharp fragments, blowing horrific holes in the body.
Victims die a rapid, bloody death.
If they manage to survive, surgeons who treat them could cut their fingers and become exposed to blood-borne infections carried by the victim, including hepatitis and H.I.V., the virus that causes AIDS.
The American College of Emergency Physicians has warned that many trauma surgeons will simply quit if the risk becomes too great.


BUSINESS DIGEST
International
Mexico's economic crisis worsened as the peso plunged nearly 10 percent more against the dollar and stocks fell.
Despite calls from business leaders and foreign investors, the Mexican Government gave no public indication of its economic strategy.  [ Page A1. ]
A weaker peso means cheaper Mexican vacations for United States tourists.
But that could hurt tourism in the Caribbean.  [ D1. ] Trade talks between the United States and Japan appeared to make some procedural progress toward resolving a deadlock over the sale of American cars and car parts in Japan.  [ D2. ] Companies
ITT continues to sell off finance operations, announcing one deal and saying it was near another.
The sales are aimed at raising cash for the company's expansion into entertainment and gambling.
ITT agreed to sell Island Finance to Norwest Bank for $600 million.
The holiday shopping season was less robust than what many retailers had anticipated.
But the sluggish gains came amid increases in the use of credit cards, suggesting that higher debts may keep shoppers out of stores in the coming months.  [ D1. ] After the harvest comes the accounting.
For many large-scale farmers, this was a good year, with record harvests in corn, soybeans, rice and cotton, as well as a large wheat crop.
Now, farmers are negotiating with food processors, seed companies and grain merchants over what they will grow next year.  [ D1. ] The I.R.S. proposed charging taxpayers $43 for the privilege of paying in installments.
Though the agency already has several user fees, the plan was criticized by former I.R.S. officials.  [ D1. ] Sales of previously owned homes fell in November, hurt by higher mortgage rates, a real estate trade group said.  [ D6. ] Business Technology
Extracting oil from tar sands is economically feasible, thanks to technology like computerized dump trucks.
Oil sands operations in Alberta has surged in the last 10 years, and now account for a quarter of Canada's total crude oil production.  [ D5. ]
Markets
Stocks advanced, though retailing issues sagged.
The Standard &amp; Poor's index of 500 stocks rose 2.64 points.  [ D6. ] Treasury prices gained in thin trading.  [ D15. ] The dollar was little changed against leading currencies.  [ D16. ] Orange juice prices tumbled on signs of an abundant supply and favorable weather.
Energy prices rose in a late rally.  [ D16. ] Today's Columns
Can new management rejuvenate old brands?
That's the question investors must ask about Hain Food Group, a specialty foods company.
Some analysts are optimistic.
Market Place.  [ D6. ] A top executive has returned to McCann-Erickson New York.
The executive, Nina DiSesa -- who describes herself as "a macho mama" -- has been given the mission of revitalizing the creative culture of the agency.
Stuart Elliott: Advertising.  [ D17. ]


On Letting Dollars Fly Out the Window
To the Editor:
Judge Roderick R. McKelvie (letter, Dec. 20), commenting on the new Federal Courthouse in Manhattan's Foley Square, contends that a building with windows that open would offer savings in more efficient heating and cooling.
This is ludicrous.


Glenn MacNary, 81, Retired President Of Baking Company
B.
Glenn MacNary, a retired president and director of the Continental Baking Company, died on Sunday at Barnstable County Hospital in Bourne, Mass.
A former resident of Manhasset and Rye, N.Y., Mr.
MacNary was 81 and lived in North Falmouth, Mass.
He died after a brief illness, said the Chapman Cole &amp; Gleason Funeral Home in Falmouth, Mass.


Corrections
A picture caption yesterday about a couple looking at the Washington Monument referred incorrectly in some copies to the water between the monument and the Lincoln Memorial.
It is the Reflecting Pool, not the Reflecting Pond.


Stock Prices Advance Despite Bond Worries
The stock market rose yesterday in light trading, despite a bond market that may spell bad news for stocks.
The Dow Jones industrial average rose 28.26 points, to 3,861.69, while the broader Standard &amp; Poor's 500 index rose 2.64 points, to 462.47.
The smaller-company Nasdaq composite index rose 4 points, to 746.19.


It's Good They Didn't Get Ice Skates


Jefferson of Chargers Is Arrested
The San Diego Chargers receiver SHAWN JEFFERSON was jailed briefly yesterday in Alpine, Calif., after being arrested for investigation of drunken driving and gun violations.
Jefferson, 25, was arrested Monday after sheriff's deputies responded to reports that shots had been fired, Sheriff's Lieut.
B.
G.
CREIGHTON of San Diego County said.


CHRONICLE
The weather may be balmy for December in New York, but nevermind.
Coats are all that are on the mind of ED ABRAHAMS, director of the sixth annual New York Cares Coat Drive.
"On Christmas day, I was handing out coats at the Upper Room AIDS Ministry in Harlem," he said, adding that he has also spent almost every weekday since mid-December at the coat drive's warehouse at the 14th Street Armory.


For McCann-Erickson New York, a push to revitalize creativity.
AT the offices of McCann-Erickson New York, the arrival of a brightly painted popcorn machine, the type once found along carnival midways and beach boardwalks, says a lot about how the large and successful, yet stolid and stodgy, agency is remaking itself.
The wagon was the idea of Nina DiSesa, a former senior vice president and deputy creative director at McCann New York, who returned last month after more than three years as the top creative executive at J. Walter Thompson Chicago.
As executive vice president and executive creative director at McCann New York, Ms.
DiSesa is charged with enlivening, energizing and turning up the heat within the creative culture of the agency, the flagship of the McCann-Erickson Worldwide network.


Dolphins' Bowens Gets Rookie Honors
TIM BOWENS, a player some National Football League general managers and scouts regarded as a long shot, was selected yesterday as the 1994 Associated Press Defensive Rookie of the Year.


Accounts
*
Stone Products Corp., Napa, Calif., to Hayes Orlie Cundall, Sausalito, Calif., to handle advertising for the manufacturer of building products, previously handled in-house.
The billings were estimated to exceed $1 million. *
Medicine-on-Time, Baltimore, to the Reeves Agency, Baltimore, to handle consumer and trade advertising for the manufacturer of multiple-dose prescription packaging, previously handled by Eisner &amp; Associates, Baltimore.
The billings were not disclosed.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-7  MEXICAN PESO PLUNGES  Mexico's economic crisis worsened, as the peso plunged nearly 10 percent more against the dollar and stocks fell.
Meanwhile, the Mexican Government gave no indication of its economic strategy.
A1


Star Quality Is Back In Eye of Red Storm
A half an hour after St.
John's defeated Manhattan on Tuesday night at Madison Square Garden, Bobby Bonilla and John Franco of the Mets mingled with friends and players in the corridor that separates the dressing rooms leading to the Garden floor.
Bonilla, a star outfielder, has become a member of the sprawling St.
John's basketball family by virtue of his help in recruiting Felipe Lopez, making certain that player and college were a good fit.
Franco, a free agent and a former St.
John's pitcher, remains a fan of his alma mater.


Mexico: Don't Panic Over the Peso
Mexico's peso crisis has obviously shaken Mexican officials and foreign investors alike and could damage Mexico's short-term economic prospects.
But it does not reflect fundamental flaws in Mexico's newly liberalized economy.
Moreover, President Ernesto Zedillo's economic ministers have responded to the challenge competently, avoiding premature efforts to peg a new exchange rate.
The markets will eventually stabilize.
Yesterday the peso rebounded some 15 percent.
Devaluations inspire temporary crises of confidence, and this one is no exception.
It is likely to lead to slower growth, faster inflation and fewer imports from the U.S.
A larger gap between U.S. and Mexican wages could tempt more Mexicans to cross the border seeking work.


Grades Force Center To End Clemson Career
The senior center DEVIN GRAY has been ruled academically ineligible for the second semester, ending his Clemson career, Coach RICK BARNES said yesterday.
The Baltimore native had successfully returned to the Tigers this season after suffering a heart attack on April 4.
"I don't have anyone to blame but myself," Gray said.
"I spent too much time focusing on the physical part of my comeback and not enough on the biggest reason I was at Clemson, academics."


A New Alliance To Aid Professionals
BPA International, an organization that audits the circulation of business and consumer publications, and the Business Marketing Association, an organization for business-to-business marketing professionals, are teaming to offer members educational and professional development programs.


Loser for Maryland Governor Files Suit to Overturn Election
With three weeks until the scheduled inauguration of Parris N. Glendening as Maryland's next governor, the Republican he defeated, Ellen R. Sauerbrey, is doing what she can to keep him from being sworn in.
Saying voter fraud and technical improprieties were responsible for her loss to the Democrat by 5,993 votes, Mrs.
Sauerbrey on Tuesday sued Mr.
Glendening, his running mate, Kathleen Kennedy Townsend, and state and local election officials.
Mrs.
Sauerbrey is asking the court to either declare her the winner or order a new election.


Officer Charged in Rape
An off-duty New York City police officer was arrested in Suffolk County yesterday and charged with raping a 19-year-old acquaintance in his home early Tuesday, the police said.
The officer, Kevin Gradischer, 23, is accused of raping the woman at his home in Centereach, L.I., about 1:30 A.M., said Officer Marc Ryan, a spokesman for the Suffolk County police.
He would not provide details of the incident.


COMPANY BRIEFS
BOISE CASCADE CORP., Boise, Idaho, a maker of paper and office products, has acquired OE&amp;S Business Products, Jacksonville, Fla., an office products distributor.
Terms were not disclosed.
NATIONAL CITY BANCSHARES INC., Evansville, Ind., a bank holding company, said it planned to buy United Financial Bancorp Inc. in a stock swap valued at $20.8 million.


Region News Briefs; Woman Hit in Head By Metro-North Train
A woman was critically injured Tuesday night when she leaned over a railroad station platform in Mount Vernon and was struck in the head by a Metro-North Commuter Railroad train.
The woman, Tammie Goad, 33, of Mount Vernon, N.Y., was at the Fleetwood Station and looked straight at the oncoming New York-bound 9:19 train, said Marjorie Anders, a spokeswoman for Metro-North.


Spy Agency Under Siege; C.I.A. Critics Calling For Radical Changes
With his resignation as Director of Central Intelligence, R. James Woolsey leaves an agency under siege and still trying to articulate a new mission for the post-cold-war era.
Not since the 1970's has the C.I.A. come under such sustained and varied criticism both for its narrow vision and inbred culture.
And not since those days of Congressional inquiries and revelations of coups, plots and assassinations has the agency appeared to have so few friends in the Washington establishment.


It Roars? No, It Purrs
AMONG the few things in life that are free, you can now count the bus ride along Sunset Boulevard in West Hollywood, Calif., from Doheny Drive to Crescent Heights Boulevard.
Southern California Edison, the utility company in the area, will offer the rides from noon to 3 P.M., Monday through Friday, until Feb. 28 to show the viability of electric shuttle buses.
Enid Joffe, the company's executive assistant for transit policy, said that the bus, which carries 29 passengers, is meant "to take business people to lunch, tourists to shops and clubs, and to decrease congestion from cars."


Journal; Brock's Strange Journalism
Tabloid journalism is something you think you know when you see it, whether at the supermarket checkout or on the cash-for-trash television news magazines.
But it can also be committed in footnoted articles in seemingly sober journals -- and can soil the national discourse about subjects far loftier than O. J.
The current master of this insidious trade is David Brock of the right-wing monthly The American Spectator.
He has struck again, with a vengeance that might give "Hard Copy" pause.


No More Search-and-Seizure Loopholes
Political attacks on the exclusionary rule, which judges invoke to throw out illegally obtained evidence, are perennials.
Many police officers, prosecutors and conservative politicians argue that the justice system unjustly sets the guilty free because of an officer's mistaken search or seizure.
The attack resumes next month as part of the House Republicans' crime bill, part of a legislative package scheduled for a floor vote within 100 days.
The provision, mislabeled "Exclusionary Rule Reform," deserves careful study and ultimate rejection, not swift passage.


Walter McQuade, 72, Architecture Critic
Walter McQuade, a writer and architecture critic, died on Monday at Long Island Jewish Hospital in New Hyde Park.
He was 72 and lived in Great Neck, L.I.
The cause was pneumonia, his family said.


Nine Family Members Killed in Fire


Southern Co.(SO,N) reports earnings for 12mos to Nov 30


Julie Haydon Is Dead at 84; A Star in 'Glass Menagerie'
Julie Haydon, the actress who created the role of the fragile Laura Wingfield in the original production of "The Glass Menagerie," died on Saturday in La Crosse, Wis.
She was 84.
The cause was abdominal cancer, said Patricia Angelin, the executor of the estate of George Jean Nathan.
Miss Haydon was the widow of Nathan, the drama critic.


Corrections
A chart yesterday showing Census Bureau estimates of state population gains and losses over the last decade misstated the 1994 population of Texas.
It was 18,378,000, not 19,378,000.


New Baby, New Books
THE Walt Disney Company makes creates movies, musicals and theme parks for children, of course, and is now also producing a book that tells parents how to raise them.
"The Disney Encyclopedia of Baby and Child Care," in two volumes, is by Drs.
Judith Palfrey, Irving Schulman, Samuel L. Katz and Maria I. New (Hyperion).
Another new book is from one of the country's foremost medical centers: "Mayo Clinic: Complete Book of Pregnancy &amp; Baby's First Year," edited by Dr.
Robert V. Johnson (William Morrow).
Each costs $30, but there are marked differences in content.
The Mayo guide devotes more than half its 750 pages to the mother: prenatal tests, nutrition (pros and cons of a vegetarian diet, for example), illnesses that arise in pregnancy, labor and the new mother's physical and emotional health.


Craftsmanship in Iron
GIVE iron, tools and a forge to the eight Polish-born ironworkers employed by Mark Phillips, a manufacturer of furniture and decorative accessories in Brooklyn and Long Island City, and they can make anything, from a ship to a delicate screen. (The one at left, based on an early-20th-century design by Edgar Brandt, is $2,689.)
The men, who formerly worked in factories around Gdansk, Poland, moved to New York to find work in the Brooklyn shipyards.
Instead, Mr.
Phillips found them making window gates and fire escapes in small shops.
"When we saw the finesse and the finish, we knew they could make chairs," said Mr.
Phillips, shown in the foreground, above.


Norton McNaughtonInc.(NRTY,NNM) reports earnings for 13wks to Nov 4


Nets' Anderson Goes Absent Without Leave
On the day that Derrick Coleman finally returned to practice, Kenny Anderson felt the need to be absent.
Absent without leave, in Coach Butch Beard's words.


Lady Vols Defeat Texas
Tennessee 66, Texas 54
The all-American Nikki McCray returned from a six-game absence because of a hand injury and scored 11 points as No. 1 Tennessee defeated Texas, 66-54, at home last night.
The Lady Vols (10-0), who have already defeated six teams ranked No. 13 or higher this season, won their seventh straight against Texas (2-5).
Seton Hall 82, Monmouth 45
The sophomore guard Tahnee Heins scored a career-high 21 points as visiting Seton Hall, which is ranked 20th, overcame a slow start and rolled to its eighth straight victory in beating.
The Lady Pirates have won 9 of their last 10 games.
Monmouth fell to 5-3.
Connecticut 99, California 52
Kara Wolters scored 20 points and Rebecca Lobo added 18 as No. 2 Connecticut defeated California in Storrs, Conn.
With the victory, Connecticut (7-0) matched its best start ever.
San Diego St. 79, Alabama 76
Falisha Wright and Angela Walker each scored 18 points and Michelle Suman added 17 as San Diego State upset sixth-ranked Alabama in the opening round of the St.
John's Christmas Tournament in New York, handing the Crimson Tide (8-1) its first loss of the season.


Mexican Rebels Hint Readiness To Start Talks With Government
In an important step toward the resumption of long-stalled peace talks between the Government and peasant rebels in the southern state of Chiapas, the two sides have settled on mediators for a new dialogue.
In an effort to address one of the root causes of the year-old rebellion, the Government also promised today to begin confiscating and redistributing some illegally large private landholdings in the state.


A Liberal Looks Back With Pride
AFTER more than two decades in government, Stanley Brezenoff, executive director of the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey, makes no apologies.
He is what he is:
"A liberal. That's me. I'm an unabashed liberal. I still believe in government as an institution for improving the lives of people, as a mechanism to do good."


CHRONICLE
It's that time of year when organizations, associations and publications of all sorts issue lists of those people they have deemed to be the "10 Best" or top of the heap in innumerable categories.
The Feminist Majority Foundation is among those ringing in with its list this week of people who did the most to foster equality of women.
The list includes GRO HARLEM BRUNDTLAND, the Prime Minister of Norway; ISABEL ALLENDE, the Chilean novelist; BEVERLY HARVARD, Atlanta's Police Chief; TASLIMA NASRIN, a feminist writer from Bangladesh and a target of death threats from Muslim fundamentalists, and RENA WEEKS, a legal secretary who won a judgment against Baker &amp; McKenzie , the world's largest law firm, for sexual harassment.


Man Found Slain in Home
An 84-year-old retired electrician was found dead in his apartment yesterday in Fresh Meadows, Queens, where he had apparently suffocated after his mouth was taped shut during a robbery, the police said.


Test Device Appears to Aid Repair of Potentially Fatal Aneurysm
An experimental device that reinforces the body's main artery when it is weakened by an aneurysm can greatly simplify surgical repair of the condition, a new study being reported today shows.
An aneurysm is a ballooning of an artery, and it usually develops painlessly.
But an aneurysm can burst without warning, and cause death within minutes.
Aneurysms frequently develop on the body's main artery, the aorta, which carries blood from the heart to supply oxygen and other nutrients to the rest of the body.


Orange Has New Year's All to Itself (Well, Almost)
NBC's decision to televise the Orange Bowl on New Year's night should substantially lift the expected high ratings for the Nebraska-Miami game while aiding viewership for ABC's Sugar Bowl, the Orange Bowl's usual prime-time rival.
The major bowl games have shifted in the past to Monday when New Year's Day fell on a Sunday, as it will this weekend.
That scheduling last happened in 1989.


No Headline
"The Russians want to erase the face of this city. -- MAGUMED KHACHKEYEV, a soldier defending Grozny, the rebel capital.  [ A12:3. ]


U.N. Commander in Bosnia Meets Rebels
The commander of United Nations forces in Bosnia and Herzegovina flew today to the besieged northern enclave of Bihac, hoping to persuade anti-Government forces there to respect the cease-fire, which has brought fighting in the rest of the country to a virtual halt.
The commander, Lieut.
Gen.
Sir Michael Rose, met with officers of the Bosnian Army and of the rebel force, which is made up of Serbs from Croatia and Muslims loyal to a local leader, Fikret Abdic.


Correction
An editorial yesterday on a proposal to lease New York City's vacant lots to corporate sponsors misstated the number of community districts in the city.
It is 59.


Accepting 'Soft Money' As a Necessary Evil
The Mercer County Democratic Committee had only one local election on its hands this year, a low-key county freeholder race in which the Democrats were trounced.
So why were Jeffrey Katzenberg of Hollywood and the Walt Disney Company, and Leon Hess of the giant oil company that bears his name, and the teamsters' union in Washington pouring tens of thousands of dollars into the county party's coffers?
Simple.
In a perfectly legal backdoor financing maneuver, the money was funneled out of Mercer County and into statewide Democratic efforts, including, not coincidentally, the re-election campaign of Senator Frank R. Lautenberg.


Casinos in Pursuit of New Players
Rock and roulette, anyone?
Twanging guitars and clattering wheels of chance might once have sounded like a weird combination.
No longer.
In March, the Hard Rock Cafe and Harveys Casino Resorts plan to open a youth-themed casino and hotel in Las Vegas, Nev.


Corrections
An article in The Home Section last Thursday about governors' mansions misidentified the group that made the topiaries for Drum thwacket, the New Jersey executive mansion.
It was the Plainfield Garden Club, not the Plainview Garden Club.


Company Puts Hold on a Plastic Bullet
The maker of a new high-tech bullet that it says can pierce armored vests declared today that it would delay the bullet's manufacture after sharp criticism from police associations that criminals would gain access to it.
Speaking on the NBC News program "Today," David Keen, chief executive officer of the Signature Products Corporation of Huntsville, Ala., said this morning that he had "made a management decision" to put production of the bullets on hold "until some of the controversy can settle out and we can see what police officials really want."


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article on Dec. 19 about hiring by New York State during the transition between the Cuomo and Pataki administrations referred incorrectly in some copies to the agency being monitored by Michael Clemente, a Pataki transition aide.
It is the Department of Civil Service, not the Department of Motor Vehicles.


Bailout Plan For Mexico Wins Praise
Bankers and financial analysts gave a cautious welcome yesterday to reports that the United States was preparing a multibillion-dollar international aid package for Mexico.
But they cautioned that any revival of confidence in Mexico's battered currency and economy would remain fragile for a long time to come.
"The aid should give the Mexicans time to show the new measures they are taking to support their devaluation are going to work," said James Colmenares, vice president for portfolio management at Morgan Stanley Asset Management.


BUSINESS DIGEST
International
The United States is preparing a huge-scale rescue of the peso.
The Clinton Administration has begun discussions on providing billions of dollars in assistance to help Mexico support its currency and make payments on its short-term debt.  [ Page A1. ] The peso and Mexican stocks began to steady after further sharp losses on Tuesday.
The markets' improvement gave the Government breathing space as it continued pulling together a recovery plan.
But many Mexicans are worried about inflation.  [ D1. ] American bankers cautiously welcomed efforts to provide a rescue package for Mexico.
Bankers and analysts estimate the package will be worth $15 billion to $20 billion.
Still, confidence in Mexico's economy is likely to remain fragile, they said.  [ D6. ] Companies
The casino industry is trying to attract younger gamblers as part of an effort to keep its growth from slowing.
Gambling companies are also drawing interest from corporate suitors.  [ D1. ] Apple Computer picked its first Macintosh clone maker: a new company led by the designer of the Leading Edge Model D.  [ D1. ] A New York City life insurance agent was indicted on Federal charges that he defrauded five insurance companies through his collection of nearly $1 million in commissions.  [ D1. ] The F.D.A. approved two drugs marketed by Wellcome P.L.C.
The British drug giant is seeking two more approvals this week.  [ D4. ] Upjohn suspended trials on humans of the drug Freedox after unexplained deaths.
The drug, for the treatment of head injuries, is considered important to Upjohn.
The stock fell sharply.  [ D4. ] The Merry-Go-Round chain plans to close another 200 stores atop the 200 it has closed since it filed for bankruptcy in January.  [ D4. ] The Justice Department is investigating possible anticompetitive practices in tissue pricing by paper companies.  [ D4. ] Signature Products said it would delay the manufacture of new armor-piercing rounds after criticism from police groups.  [ A16. ] The Economy
Orange County, Calif., is asking top brokerage firms to devise ways for it to sell bonds to help pay its debts.  [ D2. ]
The nation's oil supply has apparently been unaffected by tough new antipollution rules on oil tankers.  [ D4. ] Markets
Stocks retreated, with the Standard &amp; Poor's 500 index falling 1.61 points.
Retailing issues continued to be weak.  [ D8. ] Treasury prices declined in thin trading.  [ D17. ] The dollar tumbled against the mark and other currencies on concerns over Mexico's financial crisis.  [ D18. ] Silver and gold prices rallied on the decline in the value of the dollar.
Crude oil prices advanced.  [ D18. ] Today's Columns
One image for two brands is the goal of "co-branding," a hot trend in marketing.
In one such joint venture, Wavy Lay's potato chips carry the trademark of the Hidden Valley Ranch brand of salad dressing.
Stuart Elliott: Advertising.  [ D1. ] Eastman Kodak's trade case against Fuji Photo Film of Japan helps to illustrate contradictions between antitrust and international trade laws, contradictions that Corporate America is discovering can be exploited at the expense of foreign competitors and American consumers.
Peter Passell: Economic Scene.  [ D2. ] A patent issue has created uncertainty for some drug stocks.
Glaxo says it will benefit from a patent provision under the new world trade pact, but analysts are not so sure.
Market Place.  [ D8. ]


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League
BALTIMORE ORIOLES -- Signed Jeff Huson, infielder, to a minor-league contract.


Bassett Furniture Industries(BSET,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Sun Television &amp; Appliances Inc.(SNTV,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Search Plane Discovers Sailor Stranded at Sea
Isabelle Autissier, the French solo sailor in the BOC Challenge, the around-the-world yacht race, survived a harrowing experience today in the storm-ravaged Indian Ocean.
After her boat, the 60-foot Ecureuil Poitou-Charentes 2, sent out distress signals, race officials in Sydney, Australia, sent a search plane to the last known coordinates for her yacht.


At the Closing Bell, a Celebration in Seoul


Calendar: Shows And Tours
Antiques Show  New York Coliseum, Broadway at West 59th Street; (212) 675-7036.


Essay; Office Pool, 1995
What fools we mortal chin-pullers be, to presume to predict tomorrow's news in the knowledge that multitudes will keep track and later go nyah-nyah.
But there is profit in prophecy if we use this oracular exercise to hone our humility and stretch our imaginations.
1.
Congress will pass, and three-fourths of the states will ratify in 1995, this one amendment to the U.S Constitution: (a) term limits; (b) school prayer; (c) balanced budget.


AT HOME WITH: Lonette McKee; A Life Between, On Stage and Off
LONETTE McKEE has been in her Upper East Side brownstone for less than a month.
For now, walls painted crimson and faux leopard rugs are the most vivid glimpses of her style.
But soon, she hopes, each room will resonate with a different part of the actress's personality.
For the woman who finds stray sparrows on the street and carries them home, there will be an aviary.
For the show-business veteran ready to create her own opportunities, there will be a recording studio in the basement.


Local Economy Is 'Very Weak,' Comptroller's Report Finds
The New York City economy is "very weak" and its recovery "very fragile," the City Comptroller said yesterday, adding that job growth slowed sharply, office vacancies increased and retail sales grew more slowly in the third quarter, which ended Sept. 31.
Data provided by the Comptroller, Alan G. Hevesi, also showed that the city lost 2,000 jobs from Sept. 31 to Nov. 30.
Employment was the only one of the economic measures analyzed for those months.


Helen Walsh, 97, Society Figure Who Championed the Disabled
Helen Payne Wilshire Walsh, who for decades worked on behalf of the disabled, died on Monday in Greenwich (Conn.) Hospital.
A resident of Greenwich, she was 97.
Mrs.
Walsh suffered a long illness, said her niece, Helen Payne Clarke, also of Greenwich.


Proponent of Work for Welfare Is Among 9 Pataki Appointments
Governor-elect George E. Pataki yesterday named Westchester's Commissioner for Social Services to do for the state what she has done at home -- dramatically reduce the cost of welfare.
But unable to persuade Commissioner Mary E. Glass to sign on for the long term, he agreed to limit her appointment to 90 days.
Aides to Mr.
Pataki, who named eight other top members of his administration yesterday, said that even if Ms.
Glass were unable to complete the task of revamping the Department of Social Services, he would have sent a strong signal that he intended to make good on a campaign pledge to change welfare.


Is the BBC Too Adult For American Viewers?
My favorite "urgent update" of the year came from the Learning Channel, warning reviewers that they had inadvertently been sent the British version of "Desmond Morris's The Human Animal: A Personal View of the Human Species." The notice explained: "Portions of the series that will premiere on the Learning Channel have been edited to cut back on some of the potentially objectionable nudity contained in the British version." Saved by the bell!
And while you're at it, Pa, hide the National Geographics.
The kids are coming over.
It's hardly news that America is inhabited by large numbers of Puritanical hysterics.
A week rarely goes by without some watchdog group railing against four-letter words, nudity and -- the all-purpose smear -- pornography.
One group, Morality in Media, aims its latest newsletter specifically at ABC's "N.Y.P.D. Blue" and HBO's "Real Sex" while also calling for a Turn Off TV Day that would penalize all of television.
"N.Y.P.D. Blue" and its producer, Steven Bochco, are attacked for showing "rear-end nudity." The newsletter warns that "if we don't interrupt his attempt to desensitize the viewing audience completely, sexually explicit themes with full frontal nudity will be next." The human animal can, it seems, indeed be terrified.


Young, Eager and Deep in Debt
Two weeks ago when Bill Clinton introduced his "Middle-Class Bill of Rights," it was no surprise that college tuition relief was first on the list.
The steep cost of an education has become a problem for voters of all ages.
The President's proposed $10,000 tax deduction for tuition is more generous than a Republican proposal that would increase the burden by making students newly responsible for interest accumulated while they were in school.
But -- with a maximum saving of about $1,500 a year -- it still isn't going to solve anything.
Mr.
Clinton wants the support of young voters.
He speaks with pride of the National Service Trust Act, which he signed into law last year.
There's just one problem.
As pitched during the campaign, the act was to have three provisions: college students would be able to borrow money directly from the Government, bypassing banks; graduates would be able to pay off loans in proportion to their incomes and those still in school could work off their debt through a program of national service.


London Journal; The $28 Million Jackpot: A British Morality Tale
The publicity symbol for Britain's new national lottery is a giant celestial hand that sweeps down from the night sky, trailing Disneyesque stardust, to point to a lucky winner.
It is meant to conjure up a miracle -- as easy as Cinderella's fairy godmother waving her magic wand.


JAPANESE DEPARTMENT STORES TO FORM ALLIANCE
Mitsukoshi Ltd. and Daimaru Inc., two large Japanese department store companies, said yesterday that they had formed a merchandising alliance to increase their buying power and reduce costs.
The companies plan to work together to produce private-label merchandise, buy branded goods and develop joint distribution and marketing and advertising programs.
Although Mitsukoshi and Daimaru will remain separate companies, their goals in forming the alliance are similar to the goals of American retailers who are consolidating through mergers and acquisitions.
With 14 stores in western Japan, Mitsukoshi has about $7.9 billion in sales.
Daimaru, which operates seven stores in the eastern part of the country, has revenues of about $5.4 billion.


Accounts
*
Khoper Invest, Moscow, to YAR Communications, New York and Moscow, to handle the financial services company's account in Russia, previously handled by various Russian agencies.
Billings were estimated to exceed $20 million. *
Management Recruiters International, Cleveland, to Wyse Advertising, Cleveland, to handle the recruitment company's account, previously in-house.
Billings were estimated to exceed $1 million.


In the Provinces, Russians Back Drive on Chechnya
Russians don't tie yellow ribbons to trees to signal their support of their soldiers fighting in the rebellious region called Chechnya.
They don't paste bumper stickers to their cars to protest the bombing there.
But here, only 30 miles from Moscow, support for the use of force seems greater than in the capital, where less than 30 percent of people surveyed favored military action.


Heinz Chooses Langworth Pantel
The Heinz U.S.A. division of the H. J. Heinz Company has named the Langworth Pantel Group in White Plains to handle promotions for Heinz ketchup, Heinz 57 sauce and Heinz Home Style gravy.
Billings were not disclosed.
Langworth Pantel, which had handled the brands on a project basis since last December, was awarded the assignment after a six-month review that began with 60 agencies and was narrowed to Langworth Pantel and two or three other undisclosed finalists.


Miami-Nebraska a Battle of Big Lines
They met three weeks ago in Orlando, when the status of Nebraska's Zach Wiegert and Rob Zatechka and Miami's Warren Sapp as the most honored college linemen in the nation was confirmed.
They were in Disney World, somewhere in that strange place between the football season and an Orange Bowl meeting.
They were this far removed from the reality of their public lives: They were linemen in suits and ties.
Wiegert, the offensive right tackle, received the Outland Trophy that night.
Zatechka, Nebraska's other offensive tackle with a 4.0 average and a degree in biological sciences, was named Academic all-American of the year.
Sapp, a defensive right tackle who had already won the Lombardi Award, was named defensive player of the year.


For Carters, No Lack of Honors
He lifted weights at midnight and still beat his mother home from work.
His business was football, her business was to put food on the table, and, to this day, they still have no trophy to show for it.
Ki-Jana Carter got as close as you can to the Heisman statue without actually taking it home.
He sat in the front row of the Downtown Athletic Club -- just as he used to sit up front in biology class -- and entered a trance.
"I knew I wasn't going to win," he remembered now, a week before the Rose Bowl.
"But, in the back of my mind, I was, 'What if I did?' I had to close my eyes, act like I was asleep, to ease my mind."


Tracking Down Winter Trails With Computers
A picture may be worth a thousand words, but owners of ski areas are finding that a computer network may be more valuable yet.
It is a vast new outlet for ski areas that in the past have relied on brochures and advertisements to enrich their businesses.
It is called Internet, a public information highway connected by telephone to 32 million computers worldwide.
For the ski industry, that means boundless ways of selling itself.
But for the skier, it means an easy way to get information -- to look at a trail map, arrange for a ski lesson, check out a lodge, rent equipment or learn new technique from an expert.


Corrections
The mutual fund table in Business Day yesterday, compiled by Tribune Media Services, carried outdated prices.
They reflected trading last Thursday rather than this Tuesday.
Readers wishing copies of the corrected table may write to the Business Editor, The New York Times, 229 West 43d Street, New York, N.Y. 10036, or telephone (212) 556-1474.


For Apple, Clones and Competition
Apple Computer Inc. has picked its first Macintosh clone maker, a little-known company that may soon give Apple some tough competition.
Since Apple announced in September that it would begin licensing its Macintosh operating system, there was speculation that the company would first choose a large personal computer maker like Acer America to produce Macintosh-compatible machines.
But Apple has turned to the Power Computing Corporation, a start-up company led by Stephen S. Kahng.


Corrections
An article yesterday about the Independent Television Service misidentified a documentary film maker who commented on the service's early output.
Alan Raymond, along with his wife, Susan, did the principal camera and sound work on the PBS documentary "An American Family"; the series was produced by Craig Gilbert.


Youth, Resisting Robbers, Is Slain on Subway Platform
Wanda Matthews always told her 17-year-old son Adonis to keep his jewelry hidden and not resist robbers.
But just before midnight on Tuesday, on a subway platform in Bedford-Stuyvesant, Brooklyn, he was wearing a gold medallion and chain around his neck.
And when two men tried to rob him, he fought back and was shot to death, the police said.
After being spotted, the two men fled, without taking the medallion, the chain, the diamond-studded gold teeth clamped into his mouth or the $11 in his pocket.


Sexual Harassment Suit Cannot Be Tried While Clinton Is President, U.S. Judge Rules
In a compromise decision, a Federal district judge ruled today that the sexual harassment lawsuit filed against President Clinton must not go to trial until after he leaves office.
The judge, Susan Webber Wright of Little Rock, Ark., also decided that the parties could proceed with pretrial fact finding to insure that the lawsuit filed by a former Arkansas state employee, Paula C. Jones, would not be compromised by fading memories, disappearing witnesses or dated evidence.
And in a setback for the White House, the judge said Ms.
Jones's lawyers could question Mr.
Clinton.


Declining Dollar Pushes Treasury Prices Lower
Prices of Treasury securities fell yesterday in thin trading, hurt by a sharp decline in the value of the dollar.
Prices of the longer maturities declined as some investors sold bonds and turned to the short end of the market to wait out current jitters.
The investors were concerned that a falling dollar would discourage foreign investors from buying United States debt securities.
The dollar was affected by worries about the possible impact of the financial crisis in Mexico.


Life Evolving Through Nikolais's Prism
"The Crystal and the Sphere," a mixed-media dance piece that Alwin Nikolais created in 1990 shortly before his death, is one of the more imaginative holiday programs on show this week.
The work was intended for children, but the playful abstractions that make up the Nikolais signature might, in this case, appeal even more to adults.
The triangle and circle implied in the title are geometric forms basic to all civilization and they often carry magic connotations.


Plan to Cut Program For Disabled Youths
As part of their effort to redesign welfare and control costs, House Republicans are drafting legislation to abolish a part of the Supplemental Security Income program that provides cash grants of up to $446 a month for children with severe disabilities like mental retardation, cerebral palsy and spina bifida.
The program, which serves 847,000 children, would be replaced with vouchers that could be spent on a more limited program of medical care.
Article, page A16.


Flexing Its Muscle, Italy's Northern League Beats Up on Itself
The federalist Northern League, whose mercurial leader was instrumental in bringing about the resignation of Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi last week, has since been plunged into one of the most troubled and unstable periods in the party's brief history.
It took a day of crisis meetings here on Tuesday to heal the rift caused when the League's leader, Umberto Bossi, lined up with the Communist opposition to challenge Mr.
Berlusconi with a no-confidence motion in Parliament.
The move divided the League, which had been part of Mr.
Berlusconi's coalition.


Gingrich PAC Adheres to Election Law; An Academic Course
To the Editor:
"Open the Books on Newt Inc." (editorial, Dec, 20) wrongly portrays the Progress &amp; Freedom Foundation, which was founded in 1993 to lead America out of the industrial age into the information age.


Nelson to Return
Coach DON NELSON, who has missed the Warriors' last five games while recovering from viral pneumonia, is expected to return next Tuesday for a game at home against the San Antonio Spurs.
Nelson, who last coached Golden State on Dec. 13, was hospitalized for four nights beginning Dec. 14. (AP)


METRO DIGEST
A PATAKI APPOINTEE FOCUSES ON WELFARE
Governor-elect George E. Pataki named Westchester County's Commissioner for Social Services to do for the state what she has done at home -- dramatically reduce the cost of welfare.
But unable to get the Commissioner, Mary E. Glass, to sign on for the long term, he agreed to limit her appointment to 90 days.
A1.


Yonkers Mayor Returns Campaign Contributions
The Mayor of Yonkers, who has been accused by City Hall employees of pressuring them to contribute to his re-election campaign, announced today that he was returning all $17,510 that he had received from city workers this year.
In a statement released this afternoon, the Mayor, Terence M. Zaleski, made no reference to the allegations against him and his wife, Lynn, who is his campaign treasurer, nor did he refer to a continuing investigation of his administration by the Westchester County District Attorney.


RESULTS PLUS
N.B.A.
Kukoc Leads Bulls  Toni Kukoc scored 27 points and 6 other Bulls joined him in double figures last night as Chicago defeated the Celtics, 105-97, in Boston.
B.
J.
Armstrong, Pete Myers and Will Perdue each scored 13 points, Scottie Pippen added 12 points and grabbed 11 rebounds and Steve Kerr and Bill Wennington chipped in with 11 points each.
The Celtics dropped their fourth straight game and 11th in their last 14. (AP)


Battle Over Black Studies; City College Uses Classes to Counter Jeffries
The black studies department at City College still offers more than 30 courses each semester, much as it did before its chairman, Prof.
Leonard Jeffries, drew national attention in 1991 for a speech that vilified Jews.
But now City College, stymied in its legal efforts to remove Dr.
Jeffries as department chairman, is offering what is effectively an alternative black-studies curriculum.
This set of courses, built up in the last three years across many departments, provides for a wider range of black voices, many of whom do not share Dr.
Jeffries's divisive views.


Henry W. Ehrmann, 86, Author Who Taught Law at Dartmouth
Dr.
Henry W. Ehrmann, an author, legal scholar and retired professor of law and political science, died on Sunday at the Green Hospital of the Scripps Clinic in La Jolla, Calif.
He was 86 and lived in Hanover, N.H., and La Jolla.
The cause was heart failure, said Dartmouth College, where he taught for many years.


Hollywood's Wish For the New Year: Not to Repeat 1994
Not since the advent of talking movies in the 1920's or at least since the video revolution of the 1970's has the film industry been seized with so much anxiety.
Despite its veneer of glamour and the astonishing sums lavished on even second-tier executives, film makers and performers, the industry is facing a maze of financial fears, creative bewilderment and almost paralyzing self-doubt.
A result has been a year of seismic changes in Hollywood's power structure and a remarkable failure by studios to produce first-rate movies.


Markets Are Calmer In Mexico
Mexico's volatile financial markets started to calm down today, with both the stock exchange and the peso improving.
But worries increased about the specter of runaway inflation.
The peso closed at 4.975 to the dollar, rallying by more than 14 percent from 5.70 on Tuesday.
The Mexican stock exchange also gained 2.7 percent, to close at 2,338, partly on the news that Zapatista rebels in the southern state of Chiapas had expressed willingness to restart stalled peace negotiations with the Government.


The Last Ride of His Life
This beach needs lifeguards or a priest.
The body of an expert surfer washed ashore here at Pillar Point last Friday, swallowed by waves that grow like weeds, and, yet, his peers are already leaping back in.
They are virtual kamikaze pilots, baited by swells the size of two-story condominiums and rides that can last one minute at a time.
A sign stamped in the sand today said, "Danger: Extremely Hazardous Waves," and, if that is not warning enough, they can read the obituaries of Mark Foo, the world class surfer, and two boaters who drowned Monday, 50 miles up the shore.


Gun Exchange Plan Yields Few Results
The Goods for Guns exchange that took about 2,800 guns off the streets and out of homes in New York in a six-week period last year took in only 313 guns last week, the organization's founder said yesterday.
The sharp drop prompted Fernando Mateo, the Washington Heights carpet and flooring dealer who founded the exchange, to begin a hunger strike yesterday.
He said he would subsist only on water and fruit juices until at least 1,000 guns were turned in for cash and gift certificates or until New York public figures began making appeals in support of his effort.


Republican Bill Would Trim Aid for Poor Children Who Are Ill or Disabled
House Republicans are drafting legislation that would abolish Federal cash payments for 847,000 poor children who are severely disabled or chronically ill.
They would replace the payments with vouchers that could be spent on a more limited program of medical care.
The lawmakers said the proposal was part of the Republicans' overall effort to redesign the nation's welfare system and control costs.
It would fundamentally alter the program, Supplemental Security Income for children, which provides cash grants of up to $446 a month for children with chronic illnesses and disabilities like mental retardation, cerebral palsy and spina bifida.


Economic Scene; From Kodak, two images of its competitive position.
AS far as the Eastman Kodak Company is concerned:
(a) It's a big, bad world out there, one in which the giant American film company is engaged in a grueling duel with Fuji Photo Film for domination of the global market.


U.S. Petroleum Data
In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
Dec. 23
Dec. 16
Dec. 24
1994
1994
1993
Gasoline production, daily
7.8
7.6
7.6
Distillate production, daily
3.4
3.2
3.4
Gasoline stocks
210.2
211.8
224.5
Distillate stocks
140.4
142.1
142.7
Crude imports, daily
6.6
6.7
6.0
Product imports, daily
1.8
1.2
1.5
Crude stocks
337.9
335.6
347.9
Crude production, daily
6.7
6.7
6.9
Refinery utilization (%)
93.0
93.5
90.4
Source: American Petroleum Institute


Agent Named In Insurance Fraud Case
For at least seven years, Steven R. Genovese of New York City seemed to be an unusually successful life insurance sales agent.
In a business where more aspiring agents fail to make the grade than succeed, he had been a member of the prestigious Million Dollar Round Table since 1987 and had collected commissions that in some years exceeded $200,000.
But that success is now under a cloud.
Mr.
Genovese was accused on Friday by the United States Attorney's Office in Brooklyn of defrauding five insurance companies through his collection of nearly $1 million in commissions.


From the Ivy League and Bay Ridge, Two of Pataki's Conservative Pillars
They are the odd couple of conservative politics.
Thomas L. Rhodes has two Ivy League degrees and made millions on Wall Street.
Michael R. Long skipped college to join the Marines and now runs a liquor store in Bay Ridge, Brooklyn.
But for all their differences, Mr.
Rhodes, the founder and guiding spirit of the anti-tax group Change-N.Y., and Mr.
Long, the chairman of the state Conservative Party, speak the same political language: they are angry about taxes, welfare costs and a state bureaucracy they see as bloated and burdensome.
As major supporters of Governor-elect George E. Pataki, credited by some as second only to Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato in getting him elected, they are in a position to push their agendas.


Top Deal for Franco
JULIO FRANCO formally agreed yesterday to a $3.5 million, one-year contract with the Chiba Lotte Marines of Japan's Pacific League, the highest average annual value in the history of Japanese baseball.


Police Arrest Man in 1991 Slaying of Tourist in Chinatown
The police arrested a 22-year-old man yesterday and charged him with second-degree murder in the shooting of a tourist who was struck by a stray bullet at an intersection in Chinatown in 1991.
The man, Chiu Wai-Ip, 22, who formerly lived at 44-46 47th Street in Queens, was arrested in Hong Kong by the Royal Hong Kong Police and was extradited to the United States.


State Approval Sought for Stricter Watershed Regulation
To protect its water supply, New York City has put together a plan to regulate everything from new development to the disposal of plowed snow in the vast upstate region that supplies the city's water.
The proposal, which was forwarded to the state last Friday, drops a hard political choice squarely into the lap of Governor-elect George E. Pataki, even before he takes office.
The rules pit upstate communities that voted overwhelmingly for Mr.
Pataki, moved in part by resentment of New York City, against the city, whose mayor, Rudolph W. Giuliani, crossed party lines to campaign against the new Governor.


Frito-Lay Puts Its Cowboy On 2 Horses at Same Time
After decades of playing cowboys in westerns from "Shane" to "City Slickers," Jack Palance is familiar with branding.
Now the actor is becoming involved with one of the hottest trends in consumer marketing, co-branding.
Beginning Sunday, Mr.
Palance will be featured in an estimated $10 million campaign for a new-product co-venture between Frito-Lay Inc., the nation's largest seller of salty snacks, and the food products division of the Clorox Company.
The advertising promotes a ranch flavor of Wavy Lay's potato chips, which Frito-Lay markets, that also carries the trademark of the Hidden Valley Ranch brand of salad dressing, which Clorox markets.


This Season, Bikinis Are Out


Gingrich PAC Adheres to Election Law
To the Editor:
"Gingrich: Man in Spotlight and Organization in Shadow" (front page, Dec. 18) and "Open the Books on Newt Inc." (editorial, Dec. 20), on Gopac and other political interests of Newt Gingrich, the incoming House Speaker, were filled with insinuations masquerading as facts.


Seton Hall Romps to Take Sixth Straight
Seton Hall 90, Lehigh 59
Seton Hall didn't make the mistake of looking past Lehigh in the opening round of its own tournament -- in either half.


Roaming Far, From Fractals To Fibonacci
Elliott Sharp led three different ensembles -- a guitar quartet, a string quartet and a rock quartet -- through his music on Thursday night at the Knitting Factory.
Mr.
Sharp, a fixture in downtown Manhattan's avant-garde music clubs, is well known for his refusal to stick to any single style of music or grouping of musicians and for his insistence on breaking down the perceived barriers separating composed music, improvisation, rock, jazz and acoustic theory.
In his most basic guise, he hops onstage with any band and improvises on his double-necked bass-guitar; at his most complicated, he twists music derived from mathematical concepts like the Fibonacci series or fractal geometry into dense sonic structures.
On Thursday, Mr.
Sharp demonstrated that he is no mere dabbler: his vast array of compositions were all unified by a thick, chunky sound and sharp, pointillistic playing.
The evening began with a strong series of pieces played by Mr.
Sharp's guitar quartet, which also included Roger Kleier, David Mecionis and John Myers.
Though the group investigated the shimmering overtones that can result from clusters of synchronized retuned guitars (as heard in the music of Glenn Branca), it also explored other terrain, from the out-of-phase riffing of "Residue" to the Sonic Youth-style dissonance of "Flowtest," both from the band's new album, " 'Dyners Club," available from the Swiss label Intakt.


No Headline


More Glimpses Into the Life of Leonard Bernstein
LEONARD BERNSTEIN A Life By Meryle Secrest Illustrated. 471 pages.
Alfred A. Knopf. $30.


The Pop Life
A Reluctant Success
For any musician, selling over 200,000 copies of a record is quite an accomplishment.
But for Babyface, who with his former partner, L. A.  Reid, has won Grammy Awards for producing the soundtrack to "The Bodyguard" and for producing and writing the Boyz II Men hit "End of the Road," it's all the more extraordinary because he has no intention of becoming a solo artist full time.


Krone to Be Married
The annual Saratoga racing meet has always been good to jockey JULIE KRONE.
This August, it will be really something special.
Krone, 31, and MATT MUZIKAR, 25, plan to be married in August 1995 in Saratoga Springs.


Bridge
Players often fail to realize that a minor-suit game in a 4-4 fit may be the right contract if three no-trump is unattractive and there is no major-suit fit.
The diagramed example, noted and analyzed by the Rev.
Caxton Doggett of Lake Junaluska, N.C., makes this point.
If South is able to open one heart, he may have an uninterrupted run to five diamonds, as shown.
He ruffs the spade lead, and uses dummy's heart entries to ruff two more spades.
He then cashes the club ace, ruffs a club, and reaches this position: [ Diagram ]
Another spade is led, and East must choose.
If he throws a club, South ruffs, cashes the club king and ruffs a club.
Then a spade lead endplays East for an overtrick.


Russian Military Presses Attack In Fiercest Fighting of Rebellion
Russian troops, waging their fiercest assault yet on the Chechen capital, pushed into Grozny today, bringing the fighting in the separatist republic to a new level.
Although only a few Russian troops have entered Grozny, thousands more are poised to follow.
They have occupied the highest hills overlooking the capital, and it appears that the only thing that prevented them from storming the city was the knowledge that casualties would be heavy because many Chechen soldiers are clearly willing to fight to the death.


Putting It Together on the Environment
To the Editor:
The Clinton Administration's logging plan for the Pacific Northwest, which a Federal judge has just approved (front page, Dec. 22), is more than a blueprint for protecting the spotted owl.
It is the first complete example of the Administration's new policy of ecosystem management.


U.S. IS READYING FURTHER BILLIONS TO RESCUE MEXICO
The United States is preparing to spend billions of dollars, possibly as soon as next week, to help Mexico in its financial crisis.
The money would be used to prop up the peso in foreign-exchange markets and help make payments on Mexico's national debt, an Administration official said today.
The money would be in addition to the $6 billion line of credit that the United States made available to Mexico last week.
It would most likely consist of American loans to the Mexican Government and possibly American purchases of pesos in currency markets, the official said.


Chechnya Sounds Alarm of a Russian Breakup
To the Editor:
In "Moscow's Dangerous Game" (Op-Ed, Dec. 22), Prof.
Ronald Grigor Suny of the University of Chicago writes of the peril posed by the Chechnya crisis.
He argues that if other fights were to break out between Moscow and Russia's secession-minded minorities, the destabilization of Russia could result.


George Coleman, 35, Publishing Executive
George Coleman, a vice president and executive editor at G. P. Putnam's Sons, died on Saturday at St.
Luke's-Roosevelt Hospital Center.
Mr.
Coleman, who lived in Manhattan, was 35.
The cause was progressive multifocal leukoencephylopathy, a rare neurological disorder associated with AIDS, said his companion, Mark T. Lameier.


DIRECTOR OF C.I.A. TO LEAVE, ENDING TROUBLED TENURE
The Director of Central Intelligence, R. James Woolsey Jr., has resigned after a troubled tenure of just under two years as the nation's chief of spies.
The White House said Mr.
Woolsey's decision was his alone.
President Clinton said in a statement that he accepted the resignation with regret, and praised Mr.
Woolsey as "a staunch advocate of maintaining an intelligence capability that is second to none."


People
*
Kris Nelson was named to the new position of senior vice president for planning and research at Miller Meester Advertising, Minneapolis.
She was previously director of customer marketing and marketing services at Land O' Lakes Inc., Arden Hills, Minn.


Nine in Family Die as Fire Engulfs Home
The fire swept through the rickety house this morning with such speed that there was little chance to flee.
The body of one woman was found sprawled across four children, as if she had tried frantically to shelter them from the oncoming flames.
In all, nine members of a Haitian immigrant family from three generations -- six young siblings, their mother, grandmother and aunt -- were killed, the authorities said.
The blaze, which appeared to have erupted when a blanket touched an electrical heater, virtually wiped out a deeply religious family that was known for reaching out to other newcomers to this country.
The Moise home at 421 Hillside Avenue here had become a gathering place in recent years, where people from Haiti could seek advice or even spend the night.


St. John's Needs to Counter Penn Savvy
There is one thing that can be counted on in tonight's championship game of the Chemical Bank ECAC Holiday Festival at Madison Square Garden: St.
John's isn't going to outsmart the Penn Quakers.
It has nothing to do with a Big East school playing an Ivy League opponent.
It has everything to do with youth versus experience.
"Penn is a legitimate Top-25 team," Coach Brian Mahoney of St.
John's said yesterday.
"People in college basketball know that. They're an experienced team that plays well together."


Computer Replaces Razor For Rabbi's Prison Picture
A conflict between a New York State prison regulation requiring that inmates be photographed clean-shaven and a religious belief that a man's beard must not be touched was resolved in Federal court yesterday through the latest computer technology.
For the first time, New York State accepted a computer-generated image of what an inmate, in this case, Rabbi Shlomo Helbrans, would look like without a beard instead of making him shave for a conventional photograph.
The state requires that a bearded inmate be photographedshaven so that he can be more easily identified if he escapes and shaves off his beard.


HANDLEMAN TO ACQUIRE LEVY MUSIC AND VIDEO
The Handleman Company, the nation's largest supplier of music, video, books and personal computer software to retail chains, said yesterday that it had agreed to buy Levy Music and Video, a music and video supplier.
Terms of the deal were not disclosed.
Levy Music and Video, a division of Levy Home Entertainment Inc. of Chicago, has annual sales of more than $50 million.
Handleman, based in Troy, Mich., said the deal would probably be completed in early January.


In Serbia and Croatia, Attacks on Independent Press Continue
Three weeks ago, the Croatian President, Franjo Tudjman, struck against a leading Zagreb newspaper, Vjesnik, by arranging for a friendly bank to buy it and dismiss its independent-minded editor.
Soon afterward, the President of Serbia, Slobodan Milosevic, made a similar attack on the Belgrade newspaper Borba.
After a court ruled that Borba was operating illegally, Mr.
Milosevic named an aide as its editor, sparking a revolt by the staff.


Visions of the Lower East Side
IMAGINE the Lower East Side as Jody Culkin did, with a pool running the length of Allen Street.
Or Rutgers Street as Gilda Pervin envisioned it: a living-room piazza, above, with sofa and flower-bedecked rug.


Umpires Will Be Locked Out
Major league umpires were notified yesterday that they will be locked out beginning next week.
They don't have any games to umpire, so it is their salaries they will be locked out from receiving.
The umpires' four-year labor agreement with the National and American Leagues expires Saturday, but their pay under that agreement ordinarily would continue because they are paid on a year-round basis.
The league presidents have decided to withhold the umpires' pay because they think Richie Phillips, the umpires' lawyer, has not begun to negotiate seriously.


Adoption Saga Of Rio's Streets
As she stood in front of the Candelaria Church on a recent steel-gray afternoon, at the site of the 1993 murder of eight street children, tears welled in Jacquelyn Bracy's eyes.
In August 1993, she learned of the plight of Rio's street children while watching a segment on ABC's "World News Tonight," at her home near Sacramento, Calif.
Mrs.
Bracy had been so moved by the tears of a young Brazilian boy named Fernando Cesar that she had not only tried to contact and help him, but had eventually sought to adopt him.


Knicks Get Another Victory but Have a Loss Too
The Knicks won another game, but they lost another player to injury.
Despite losing their veteran backup center, Herb Williams, with a fractured middle finger on his left hand last night, New York rode strong performances by Patrick Ewing, Charles Smith and Anthony Mason to a 101-93 victory over the Detroit Pistons at Madison Square Garden.
It was the second consecutive victory for the Knicks (14-12), who snapped a three-game home losing streak.
But because Williams is expected to be out four to six weeks after undergoing surgery today and power forward Charles Oakley is out until at least mid-February after toe surgery on Tuesday, the Knicks face the prospect of playing an extended period without two of their best low-post defenders.


Petrie Stores
Shares of Petrie Stores of Secaucus, N.J., established a 52-week low of $21.625 yesterday on the New York Stock Exchange before rebounding slightly.
Analysts are worried about the earnings of Petrie and other retailers after a disappointing Christmas season.


Family of Dr. King, Feuding With U.S., May Curb Tours at Shrine
The tomb and birthplace of the Rev.
Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr., the most popular tourist attraction in Atlanta, may be visible only from a distance if a long-running feud between the National Park Service and the King family is not resolved.
For 14 years, in partnership with the King family, the Park Service gave guided tours of the property, part of the Martin Luther King Center for Non-Violent Social Change.
But this week, the family has ordered the rangers to clear out, and has no plan of its own, so far, to offer guided tours.


Westchester Tax Secrets
To the Editor:
Philippe M. Gille, senior assistant to Westchester County Executive Andrew P. O'Rourke, says homeowners will see an increase in property taxes next year of only "a few cents a day" (news article, Dec. 21).


The Writers' Choices
DEION SANDERS didn't need a full season to be selected the 1994 Associated Press Defensive Player of the Year.
And MARSHALL FAULK didn't waste any time being chosen as A.P.'s offensive rookie of the year.
Sanders, the pre-eminent two-sport star, waited until the baseball season was canceled in September before signing with the San Francisco 49ers as a free agent.


INSIDE
Suit Against Clinton Delayed
A Federal District judge ruled that the sexual harassment lawsuit filed against the President by Paula Jones should not go to trial until Mr.
Clinton leaves office.
Page B6.
Bad Scene in Hollywood
After a year of financial and creative failure, the American film industry finds itself almost paralyzed by self-doubt.
Page C11.
Bullet's Inventor Backs Off
The man who says he invented a new armor-piercing bullet promised to delay its release after criticism from police associations that criminals would get access to it.
Page A16.


Balloon Crew Ready To Try for Record By Circling the Earth
With the arrival of five truckloads of helium gas at Reno Stead Airfield, about 15 miles from Reno, final preparations were in progress yesterday for a launching today of the Earthwinds Hilton balloon, whose three-member crew hopes to make the first nonstop circumnavigation of the globe in a balloon.
Each of the four previous attempts by the Earthwinds team, headed by Larry Newman, a pilot for America West Airlines, has failed.
But Mr.
Newman said recently that he and his flight team were more confident than ever of success.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.50
8.50
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
4.75
4.75
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
5.43
5.60
2.85
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.48
5.56
2.98
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
6.23
6.24
3.18
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.79
7.75
5.69
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.83
7.76
6.24
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.66
8.65
7.23
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.90
6.90
5.50
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt *
Federal Farm Credit Bank is selling $100 million of medium-term notes due in 1998 through First Tennessee Bank.
The notes are noncallable and carry an interest rate of 7.95 percent and are priced at par.


As Congress Fumes, Clinton Urges North Koreans to Free Pilot
President Clinton called on North Korea today to release an American pilot captured 11 days ago, as key lawmakers of both parties of Congress predicted that Congress would block a nuclear agreement between the two countries if the diplomatic crisis is not resolved.
"We have made it clear to the North Koreans that we want the prompt release of Airman Hall and that there is no reason for his detention," the President said, rejecting North Korean accusations that the pilot, Chief Warrant Officer Bobby Hall, was on a spy mission.


Survival Assured, A Designer Can Plan
As a textile designer, Leonard F. traveled the world, working in Haiti, Hong Kong and Italy in a career that spanned nearly 30 years.
But a stroke in April of 1989 robbed him of his livelihood, leaving him nearly totally paralyzed and forcing him to return to New York from Italy to seek medical treatment.


Volkswagen Seeking Review Candidates
Volkswagen of America Inc. has begun sending questionnaires to about 20 agencies that the company hopes will participate in the review of its account, which has billings estimated at $90 million.
Volkswagen's office in Auburn Hills, Mich., is closed this week for the holidays.
But advertising executives who spoke on the condition of anonymity said that some of the agencies that received questionnaires were Carmichael Lynch in Minneapolis; Deutsch Inc. in New York; Fallon McElligott in Minneapolis; Hill, Holliday, Connors, Cosmopulos in Boston and Houston Effler Herstek &amp; Favat in Boston.


Sports of The Times; Starks Has Found An Answer
IN these dire times, with the Mighty Oak felled, the Knicks need leadership to steady their season.
So John Starks took it upon himself to provide such guidance.
Against the Nets Tuesday night at the Meadowlands, while Charles Oakley and his toe were nestled in a Manhattan hospital after surgery, Starks immediately took charge, or what he considered to be charge.
With little more than a minute gone in the game, and the score 0-0, Starks was fouled from behind by Kenny Anderson at halfcourt to prevent a fast break.
Starks then took dead aim and heaved the ball against the 24-second clock above the basket.
Why the 24-second clock should receive such treatment only Starks knew.
But he later explained.


Beyond Probation: Trying to Break Cycle of Arrest and Rearrest
On a bone-chilling morning last April, Tony W., a powerfully built teen-ager who specialized in armed robberies on the streets of New York City, stepped out of one of New York State's most forbidding institutions for teen-agers to begin what he hoped would be a new life.
The sky was stained a dispiriting gray, and a light rain was pelting Tony's windbreaker.
But he had been locked up for more than five months -- a long time for a 15-year-old -- and a wave of euphoria swept through him as he took his first steps to freedom that morning.
Rattling down to the city in the train, he promised himself he would never be back behind bars.


Market Place; A patent issue in GATT clouds the outlook for Glaxo Holdings.
GLAXO HOLDINGS P.L.C. says a little-noted patent measure tucked into the new world trade agreement may benefit the company, but after reading the fine print, analysts are not so sure.
Pharmaceutical stocks moved up briefly last week after Glaxo Holdings, based in London, said that a provision of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade, meant that the basic patent on Zantac, its blockbuster ulcer treatment, would be extended by 19 months, to July 1997.
American depository receipts for Glaxo shares rose to a six-month high of $21.25 on Dec. 21 on the announcement.
The A.D.R.'s closed unchanged yesterday at $20.625 on the New York Stock Exchange.
Each A.D.R. represents two ordinary shares.


Wherever Parcells Travels, There Are Giants in the Mist
It seems as though every time he looks at an opponent, Bill Parcells sees some remnant of his past as the Giants' coach.
A few weeks ago, it was Dolphins receiver Mark Ingram.
Last week, it was Bears running back, Lewis Tillman.
On Sunday, when the Patriots play Cleveland in the first round of the National Football League playoffs, there will be enough former Giants for a family reunion.


A Year to Forget: 1994 Leaves Mexico Reeling
There were clues right from the start that something was very, very wrong with Mexico's 1994.
The year that was predicted to be such a good one had barely begun when an uprising broke out in the state of Chiapas.
Following closely were the assassinations of top political figures -- the first since 1929 -- the kidnappings of powerful businessmen, vicious infighting in the long-ruling political party and Mexico's worst economic crisis of the last decade.


COLLEGE HOCKEY REPORT
Princeton
To find a time when the Tigers were previously a force in this sport, historians have to go back to the pre-World War I days of Hobey Baker.
It was a time when the team played its "home" games in New York at the St.
Nicholas Hockey Club's long-gone arena on Central Park West.


Agriculture Nominee Meets the Press


Miscellany
*
Saturn Corp., Troy, Mich., has signed a 24-week sponsorship agreement with Hot Wired, the on-line computer service of Wired magazine.
Beginning in mid-January, Hot Wired will carry Saturn advertising created by Hal Riney &amp; Partners, San Francisco, including photographs of 1995 models and dealer locations.


Honors
*
The New York Festivals and the United Nations Department of Public Information, New York, named Marca Lintas, Bogota, Colombia, to receive the 1994 gold plaque U.N.D.P.I.
Award for a television commercial promoting condom use to prevent the spread of AIDS.
VVL/ BBDO, Brussels, was named to receive the silver plaque for a commercial against racial discrimination.
The bronze plaque went to ALMAP/BBDO, Sao Paulo, Brazil, for an anti-AIDS spot.
The awards will be presented Jan. 12 at a ceremony in New York.


Times Square Club Announces Its Closing
Club USA, the $8 million nightclub-cum-playground that draws crowds of tourists and young New Yorkers each weekend, is to close next month, said its owner, Peter Gatien.
Mr.
Gatien said he was vacating the space, at 218 West 47th Street, at Broadway, because the building was in foreclosure.


Padres and Astros Make a 12-Player Swap
Operating on the economic theory that a club has to spend money to make money, the new owner of the San Diego Padres reversed the free fall yesterday and restocked his team with some talent.
In the biggest baseball deal in numbers in 37 years, the Padres made a 12-player trade with the Houston Astros, acquiring third baseman Ken Caminiti and center fielder Steve Finley in their group of six players.
"We want a competitive, winning team, an exciting team," said Larry Lucchino, the Padres' new chief executive under the new owner, John Moores.
"To improve this team, on the field and in stability and prosperity, expenses and revenues have to go up."


Trying to End a Cycle Of Juvenile Arrests
Odds weigh heavily against the legions of teen-agers freed from prisonlike institutions and returned to the families, neighborhoods and schools where they got into trouble.
Because so many violent juveniles are arrested -- and few spaces exist for them -- they are often released before counseling can take hold.
A special report, When Trouble Starts Young, turns today to the problem of recidivism.
Article, page B7.


Time to Look at Baseball's Exemption
The owners of baseball's 28 major-league teams have declared an impasse in wage negotiations and imposed what their players dreaded most -- a cap on team payrolls.
The players vow to continue their strike and seek legal remedies.
The result is that baseball's wealthy owners and players have left the game in even sorrier shape than last year, when their failure to reach a new labor agreement destroyed the end of the regular season, the playoffs and the World Series.
This year there could be no games at all -- or at best games played by impostors.
The two sides have a responsibility to resume talks.
The owners may not want to, but two influential U.S.
Senators -- Daniel Patrick Moynihan, Democrat of New York, and Orrin Hatch, Republican of Utah -- think they have hit upon the right stimulus.
They will offer legislation ending the owners' cherished, 72-year-old exemption from antitrust laws.
That exemption gives the owners uniquely broad powers over wages and work rules that, the Senators believe, dampen their incentive to compromise.


CHRONICLE
"Should auld acquaintance be forgot . . . " This New Year's Eve, it's hard to imagine anyone to whom those lyrics will mean more than HARRY GROENER.
When the curtain falls at "Crazy for You" on Saturday night, Mr.
Groener will lead the audience in singing the holiday's anthem.
He will also say farewell to the show, which he has starred in since its opening in Washington in December 1991 and its subsequent move to Broadway in February 1992.
Leaving the show after 1,191 performances is at once happy and sad, he said yesterday in his dressing room at the Shubert Theater.
"It's simply time to move on," he said.
"Three years is a good round number at which to leave, and I'm looking forward to the freedom to read a book and strip the paint in my kitchen."


Shattered Nation: A special report.; Rwanda Now Faces Painful Ordeal of Rebirth
Signs that life is returning to normal can be found everywhere in Rwanda.
A roaring crowd fills a Kigali stadium for a Sunday afternoon soccer match.
The cement factory in the southwest is operating again.
Children play in dirt schoolyards.
Day laborers in their green aprons pick tea on vast estates.
And the carols of worshipers pour forth in a packed church where scores were massacred in April.
But in the six months since the end of a civil war that surpassed the unthinkable -- hundreds of thousands of people were slaughtered and then hundreds of thousands fled -- such signs mask two crucial unresolved problems that threaten to pitch this country into another cauldron of violence.


When Hope Falters, Balm for the Soul
WHEN the ancients were sick, they walked among trees and plants and breathed the fresh air to soothe their pain.
Then came the discovery of penicillin, chemotherapy, laser beams.
High-tech medicine buried the garden under high-rise hospitals with sealed windows.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-15  RECOVERY ELUDES RWANDA  Months after the end of mass slaughter and civil war, two intertwined problems threaten to pitch Rwanda into another cauldron of violence.
More than a million Rwandans are still refugees in neighboring countries; and no system is in place to punish those who carried out the massacres.
A1


New Jersey Ruling on Free Speech Burdens Shopping Malls
To the Editor:
I read with mixed reaction "Court Protects Speech in Malls" (front page, Dec. 21), on the New Jersey Supreme Court decision upholding a protest group's right to hand out leaflets in shopping malls.


Getting Things Squared Away? Professional Help Is Plentiful
FOR those who make New Year's resolutions, organizing finances, housecleaning and rearranging a home office are right up at the top of the list with losing 10 pounds.
Whether such resolutions are observed, of course, is another matter.
"They're usually too big or too vague," said Stephanie Winston, a professional organizer and the author of "Stephanie Winston's Best Organizing Tips" (Simon &amp; Schuster, $20).
Ms.
Winston's overall advice is to keep resolutions precise and realistic: plan to clean up, say, the hall closet, not the whole house.


Wrong to Shoot Man At White House Gate
To the Editor:
Street people may be eyesores and sometimes obnoxious, but they don't deserve to be shot by the police.


North Korea Says U.S. Pilot Admits a 'Flagrant Violation'
North Korea said today that a captured American helicopter pilot had confessed to illegally intruding into its territory and had asked for leniency so he can return to his family.
The official Korean Central News Agency released a statement it said had been signed on Sunday by the pilot, Chief Warrant Officer Bobby Hall, whose Army helicopter entered North Korean air space on Dec. 17.
In the statement, Mr.
Hall admitted to "criminal action" but not to espionage, the accusation made by the North.


Soprano Drops Out of the Met's 'Boccanegra'
Cheryl Studer, the soprano who was to sing Amelia in the Metropolitan Opera's new production of Verdi's "Simon Boccanegra" next month, has withdrawn from the cast.
Kiri Te Kanawa, who last sang the role at the Met in 1986, will take over Miss Studer's five performances, one of which is to be taped for television.
Miss Studer, who has never sung the role, told the Met she had decided against adding Amelia to her repertory.
It is not an especially taxing role; in "Simon Boccanegra" the title character has the most strenuous music.
But Miss Studer, who was considered an incomparable Strauss and Wagner singer in the late 1980's, has been unlucky with Verdi since she switched to Italian roles a few seasons ago.
Recent performances in "Il Trovatore" in Vienna, "La Traviata" in Munich and "Aida" in London were poorly received.


Scenes From 1994 to Remember and Forget
Another year in TV sports is as dead as Jacob Marley. What has it wrought?
BEST PLAY-BY-PLAY CALL: "Oh, no. Oh, no, no. Oh, my God. Oh, God, no. I don't believe it. I'm going to throw up." Eddie Clinton and Denny Garver, announcers for Plano East High School, cried in alternating gasps of disbelief as John Tyler High School thwarted Plano East's amazing last-minute football comeback.


Last Chance
Here is a sampling of shows and exhibitions in New York City that are to close soon: Closing This Weekend
"A CHRISTMAS CAROL," Paramount, Seventh Avenue and 33d Street.
A musical adaptation of the Charles Dickens story; book by Lynn Ahrens and Mike Ockrent; lyrics by Ms.
Ahrens; music by Alan Menken; directed by Mr.
Ockrent.
Through New Year's Day.
Performances: today at 2, 5 and 8 P.M.; New Year's Eve, at 11 A.M. and 2, 5 and 8 P.M.; New Year's Day at 1 and 4:30 P.M.
Tickets: $25 to $55.
Information: (212) 465-6741.
"DAMN YANKEES," Marquis Theater, 1535 Broadway, at 45th Street.
A revival of the 1955 musical based on Douglass Wallop's novel "The Year the Yankees Lost the Pennant"; book by George Abbott and Mr.
Wallop; music and lyrics by Richard Adler and Jerry Ross; directed by Jack O'Brien.
Closes after New Year's Eve performances; reopens at the end of February with Jerry Lewis.
Performances: today and New Year's Eve at 2 and 8 P.M.
Tickets: $25 to $67.50.
Information: (212) 307-4100.
"FAMILY SECRETS," Westside Theater Downstairs, 407 West 43d Street, Clinton.
A comedy about three generations of a Jewish family, by Sherry Glaser and Greg Howells.
Through New Year's Day.
Performances: tonight at 8 P.M.; New Year's Eve at 2 and 8 P.M.; New Year's Day at 3 P.M.
Tickets: $35 to $45.
Information: (212) 307-4100.
"THE FLYING KARAMAZOV BROTHERS DO THE IMPOSSIBLE," Helen Hayes Theater, 240 West 44th Street, Manhattan.
A juggling clown ensemble featuring Paul David Magid, Michael Preston, Sam Williams and Howard Jay Patterson.
Through Jan. 1.
Performances: tonight at 8; New Year's Eve at 2 and 8 P.M.; New Year's Day at 1 and 6 P.M.
Tickets: $29 and $49.Information: (212) 307-4100.
"THE GLASS MENAGERIE," Roundabout Theater, 1530 Broadway, at 45th Street.
The Tennessee Williams drama, with Julie Harris, Calista Flockhart, Zeljko Ivanek and Kevin Kilner, directed by Frank Galati.
Through New Year's Day.
Performances: Today at 2 and 8 P.M.; no shows New Year's Eve; New Year's Day at 2 and 7 P.M.
Tickets: $50.
Information: (212) 869-8400.
"A CHEEVER EVENING," Playwrights Horizons, 416 West 42d Street, Clinton.
A play by A. R. Gurney, based on a collection of stories by John Cheever, with John Cunningham, Jack Gilpin, Julie Hagerty, Jennifer Van Dyck, Mary Beth Peil and Robert Stanton.
Through New Year's Day.
Performances: tonight at 8; New Year's Eve and New Year's Day at 3 and 8 P.M.
Tickets: $37.50.
Information: (212) 279-4200.
"THE DIVA IS DISMISSED" and "SOME PEOPLE," Joseph Papp Public Theater, 425 Lafayette Street, East Village.
Both through New Year's Eve.
"The Diva Is Dismissed," a one-woman show by Jenifer Lewis about her journey from Missouri to Hollywood.
Performances: tonight at 10:30; New Year's Eve at 7 P.M.
"Some People," a one-man show in which Danny Hoch assumes the roles of 11 New York City characters.
Performances: tonight at 8; New Year's Eve at 3 and 9:30 P.M.
Tickets to each show: $25.
Information: (212) 598-7150.
"UNCOMMON WOMEN AND OTHERS," Second Stage at the Lucille Lortel Theater, 121 Christopher Street, Greenwich Village.
Wendy Wasserstein's 1977 comedy, directed by Carole Rothman.
Through New Year's Day.
Performances: tonight at 8; New Year's Eve at 2 and 8 P.M.; New Year's Day at 3 and 7 P.M.
Tickets: $37.50 to $50.
Information: (212) 239-6200.
"LOVE! VALOUR! COMPASSION," Manhattan Theater Club, Stage I at City Center, 131 West 55th Street, Manhattan.
A drama by Terrence McNally, directed by Joe Mantello, with Randy Becker, Stephen Bogardus, John Glover, John Benjamin Hickey, Justin Kirk, Nathan Lane and Stephen Spinella.
Closes Sunday; begins previews on Jan. 20 and opens Feb. 14 at the Walter Kerr Theater, 219 West 48th Street, Manhattan.
Performances: tonight at 8; New Year's Eve at 2 and 8 P.M.; New Year's Day at 2 and 7 P.M.
Tickets: $40.
Information: (212) 581-1212.
ALVIN AILEY AMERICAN DANCE THEATER, City Center, 131 West 55th Street, Manhattan.
Through New Year's Day.
Performances: tonight at 8; New Year's Eve at 2 and 8 P.M.; New Year's Day at 3 and 8 P.M.
Tickets: $10 to $55.
Information: (212) 581-1212.
MOMIX DANCE COMPANY, Joyce Theater, 175 Eighth Avenue, at 19th Street, Chelsea.
Through New Year's Day.
Performances: tonight at 8; New Year's Eve, at 2 and 8 P.M.; New Year's Day at 2 P.M.
Tickets: $30.
Information: (212) 242-0800.
"ROYAL TOMBS OF SIPAN: PERUVIAN TREASURES OF A LOST CIVILIZATION," American Museum of Natural History, Central Park West at 82d Street.
An exhibition of jewelry, weapons, ornaments, costumes and other artifacts of the Moche culture.
Through Jan. 2.
Hours: today, 10 A.M. to 8:45 P.M.; New Year's Eve, New Year's Day and Jan. 2, 10 A.M. to 5:45 P.M.
Admission: $6; $3 for children 12 and younger; $4 for students and the elderly.
Information: (212) 769-5800.
Closing Next Weekend
"PASSION," Plymouth Theater, 236 West 45th Street, Manhattan.
The Tony Award-winning musical based on the 19th-century novel "Fosca," by Igino Tarchetti, music by Stephen Sondheim, book and direction by James Lapine, with Donna Murphy, Jere Shea and Marin Mazzie.
Through Jan. 7.
Performances: tonight at 8; New Year's Eve at 2 and 8 P.M.; no performances New Year's Day; Monday, Tuesday, Thursday and Jan. 6 at 8 P.M.; Wednesday and Jan. 7 at 2 and 8 P.M.
Tickets: $40 to $65.
Information: (212) 239-6200.


Japanese Less Confident of Economic Future, Poll Finds
The Japanese have become less confident that their country will dominate the world economy in the next century, and Americans have grown more certain that they can meet Japanese competition, a new poll shows.
In the survey, conducted early this month in both countries by The New York Times, CBS News and the Tokyo Broadcasting System, only 25 percent of Japanese respondents said they believed their country would be the world's premier economic power over the long term.
Three years ago, 53 percent of the Japanese expected Japan to emerge as the most important economic superpower.


BUSINESS DIGEST
International
Mexico's President, breaking silence, outlined a plan to stabilize the economy.
The plan, which depends on a political consensus of labor, peasants, business and the Government, requires deep cuts in spending and international aid of as much as $15 billion.
Some details of the plan were disclosed as President Zedillo announced the resignation of his Finance Minister.  [ Page D1. ]
Once the best and brightest of Mexico's technocrats, Mr.
Serra became an early casualty of the devaluation fiasco.  [ D2. ] Companies
Viacom is close to a sale of its cable systems to a group that includes Tele-Communications for more than $2 billion, people close to the negotiations said.  [ D1. ] The Pentagon endorsed the merger of Martin Marietta and Lockheed.
Orange County, Calif., plans to dip into a special reserve fund to repay some bonds to conserve its limited cash.  [ D2. ] The Commerce Department's index of leading indicators rose three-tenths of 1 percent in November.  [ D16. ] Markets
Stocks ended mixed.
The Dow Jones industrial average fell 6.06 points, while the Nasdaq composite index advanced 7.07 points, lifted by gains in technology issues.  [ D6. ] Prices of Treasury securities were mixed.  [ D16. ] The dollar recovered slightly against most leading currencies in light trading.
The Canadian dollar continued to weaken.  [ D15. ] Copper prices surged on signs of increased demand in Asia.  [ D15. ] Today's Columns
Investors are sticking with stock mutual funds, despite a growing nervousness about the market.
Floyd Norris: Market Place.  [ D1. ] Few imaginative ideas emerged from the billions of dollars of sales pitches that ran during 1994.
The highlights included a milk ad with an attitude, dirty pots clamoring for S.O.S and a foolish liar declaring "Yes I am!" Stuart Elliott: Advertising.  [ D1. ]


The Original Molotovs
To the Editor:
The Molotov cocktail, a modified version of which, according to the New York City Police Department, blew up on a subway train, may have, as you say, "gained notoriety in 1956 when Hungarian nationalists used them to disable Soviet tanks" (news article, Dec. 22).


Museums' Holiday Hours
To help in planning outings this weekend, here are the holiday hours for some of New York City's major museums: AMERICAN MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY, Central Park West at 79th Street, (212) 769-5100.
Today, 10 A.M. to 8:45 P.M.; New Year's Eve, New Year's Day and Monday, 10 A.M. to 5:45 P.M.
BRONX MUSEUM OF THE ARTS, 1040 Grand Concourse, at 165th Street, Morrisania, (718) 681-6000.
Today, 10 A.M. to 5 P.M.; closed tomorrow through Tuesday.
BROOKLYN MUSEUM, 200 Eastern Parkway, at Prospect Park, (718) 638-5000.
Today and New Year's Eve, 10 A.M. to 5 P.M.; closed New Year's Day, Monday and Tuesday.
COOPER-HEWITT MUSEUM, 2 East 91st Street, Manhattan, (212) 860-6868.
Today and New Year's Eve, 10 A.M. to 5 P.M.; closed New Year's Day and Monday.
FRICK COLLECTION, 1 East 70th Street, Manhattan, (212) 288-0700.
Today, 10 A.M. to 6 P.M.; New Year's Eve, 10 A.M. to 6 P.M.; closed New Year's Day and Monday.
SOLOMON R. GUGGENHEIM MUSEUM, 1071 Fifth Avenue, at 89th Street, (212) 423-3500.
Today, 10 A.M. to 8 P.M.; New Year's Eve, 10 A.M. to 5 P.M.; New Year's Day and Monday, 10 A.M. to 6 P.M.
GUGGENHEIM SOHO, 575 Broadway, at Prince Street, (212) 423-3500.
Today, 11 A.M. to 6 P.M.; New Year's Eve and New Year's Day, 11 A.M. to 5 P.M.
Closed Monday.
JEWISH MUSEUM, 1109 Fifth Avenue, at 92d Street, (212) 423-3200.
Closed today and New Year's Eve.
Open New Year's Day and Monday, 11 A.M. to 5:45 P.M.
METROPOLITAN MUSEUM OF ART, Fifth Avenue at 82d Street, (212) 535-7710.
Today, 9:30 A.M. to 8:45 P.M.; New Year's Eve, 9:30 A.M. to 4:45 P.M.; closed New Year's Day and Monday.
MUSEUM OF MODERN ART, 11 West 53d Street, Manhattan, (212) 708-9480.
Today, noon to 8:30 P.M.; New Year's Eve, New Year's Day and Monday, 11 A.M. to 6 P.M.
NATIONAL ACADEMY OF DESIGN, 1083 Fifth Avenue, at 89th Street, (212) 369-4880.
Today, noon to 8 P.M.; New Year's Eve, noon to 5 P.M.; closed New Year's Day and Monday.
QUEENS MUSEUM OF ART, New York City Building, Flushing Meadows-Corona Park, (718) 592-9700.
Today, 10 A.M. to 5 P.M.; New Year's Eve, noon to 5 P.M.; closed New Year's Day and Monday.
STATEN ISLAND INSTITUTE OF ARTS AND SCIENCES, 75 Stuyvesant Place, St.
George, (718) 727-1135.
Today and New Year's Eve, 9 A.M. to 5 P.M.; closed New Year's Day.
Open Monday, 9 A.M. to 5 P.M.
STUDIO MUSEUM IN HARLEM, 144 West 125th Street, (212) 864-4500.
Today, 10 A.M. to 5 P.M.; New Year's Eve and New Year's Day, 1 to 6 P.M.; closed Monday.
WHITNEY MUSEUM OF AMERICAN ART, 945 Madison Avenue, at 75th Street, (212) 570-3676.
Today, 11 A.M. to 6 P.M.; closed New Year's Day and Monday.


The Fall Came Quickly For Mexico's Rising Star
No sooner had Jaime Serra Puche taken over as Mexico's new Finance Minister this month than the pundits began to rate him as a favorite to succeed President Ernesto Zedillo Ponce de Leon.
That a nomination was more than five years away seemed to matter little: Mr.
Serra was the man who had brought home the North American Free Trade Agreement for the previous Government of President Carlos Salinas de Gortari, a smooth-talking symbol of Mexico's new confidence in its economic future.
Among Mr.
Serra's supporters, it was inconceivable that the handsome, articulate former Trade Minister would somehow not succeed.


Maker Seeks to Lift Ban on ATR Plane
The maker of the commuter plane that crashed two months ago in Indiana has proposed a solution that it hopes will persuade Federal regulators to lift a ban on flying its aircraft in icy conditions.
That ban has disrupted travel plans for thousands of people.
The company, Avions de Transport Regional, made the American Eagle ATR-72 that crashed near Roselawn, Ind., in late October, killing all 68 aboard.
It said yesterday that it had suggested to Federal regulators that pilots of its aircraft watch for a particular ice shape forming on the side windows of the cockpit as a signal to move to an area with better weather.


Abroad at Home; The One And the Many
For centuries one of the great fishing areas of the world was the Georges Bank, in the Atlantic off the New England coast.
Over the last 20 years, as the catch declined, commercial fishermen resisted limitations.
Now so few cod and haddock and flounder are left that they may not be able to revive in significant numbers.
Two weeks before Christmas the National Marine Fisheries Service closed much of the Georges Bank to fishing.
Anguished local fishermen complained that the Government should have stopped the overfishing long ago.
Some said they should be paid now for not fishing.


Stock Prices Seesaw As Dow Retreats 6.06
The stock market was generally inconclusive yesterday as it headed toward the New Year's holiday, with blue-chip stocks drifting lower even though technology issues surged.
"I'd call it a typical end-of-the-year market, a mixed bag," said Lawrence R. Rice, chief investment oficer of Josephthal, Lyon &amp; Ross.
"The Dow whipped back and forth all day, and the breadth of the market ranged back and forth from positive to negative."


Old Building, New Finances; Lean Times Don't Stop Renovation at City Hall
Some 180 years ago, New York's new City Hall, with its gracious French Renaissance facade and elegant Georgian interior, was considered one of the most handsome buildings in the country.
Today, after 56 mayoral administrations, several technological revolutions and multiple fiscal crises, City Hall is a mixture of the grand, the pedestrian and the crumbling.
Gawky metal coat racks line graceful corridors.
A grandfather clock insists it is 2:35, 24 hours a day.
The rotunda's white marble is chipped and discolored.


Don't Abolish Meals Program for Elderly
To the Editor:
For 30 years the Older Americans Act has provided vital services to people 60 years old and older, particularly those with the greatest economic and social needs.
One of the most important services has been the nutrition program through which well-balanced meals are provided at senior citizen centers or are delivered to the homebound.


Miller to Introduce A TV Spot by Leap
The Miller Brewing Company is introducing a television commercial for Miller Lite beer created not by the brand's agency, Leo Burnett U.S.A. in Chicago, but by the Leap Partnership, a small Chicago shop hired by Miller this year to handle special projects.
Burnett continues as the Miller Lite agency, said Scott Epstein, a spokesman for Miller in Milwaukee.
He said the commercial, which begins running on Sunday, was produced by Leap as part of a special Super Bowl assignment.
Burnett, which is producing additional commercials for Miller Lite, has created four Miller Lite campaigns in the three and a half years since it landed the estimated $100 million account.


Bond Prices Are Mixed In Pre-Holiday Trading
Prices of Treasury securities were mixed yesterday with some of the longer maturities down slightly in thin pre-holiday trading.
The market was weighed down by a report showing a larger-than-expected gain in the Government's chief forecasting gauge and by only a modest recovery in the dollar after a sharp decline on Wednesday.


Corrections
An article yesterday about Governor-elect George E. Pataki's choice for Commissioner of Social Services referred incorrectly in some copies to his administration's plan for reductions in the home-relief welfare program.
The changes would not require legislative approval.
In some editions, the article also misstated the breakdown by sex of Mr.
Pataki's 14 top appointments so far.
The group includes 10 men and 4 women, not 11 and 3.


A New Mission on New, Mean Streets
Two years ago, the Rev.
Jim Watson was executive director of a mission in Fairmont, W. Va., that ran a soup kitchen, a 100-bed shelter and a 111-acre children's camp.
But now Mr.
Watson, 41, a Baptist minister, is working on the streets of Bridgeport, running a shelter and feeding the homeless in the most dangerous sections of Connecticut's largest city.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article on Wednesday about a visit by the Israeli Prime Minister to Oman misstated the history of Israeli diplomatic contacts in the region.
Several Israeli officials visited Iran during the Shah's rule there; the Oman trip was not the first by an Israeli leader to a country in the Persian Gulf region.


Two Confident Fighters Ready to Take On a New Year; Despite Some Setbacks, Giuliani Presses On With Defiant Style
As he stood in the Blue Room of City Hall, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani's face carried the warning signs of his impatience, the pursed lips and the raised eyebrows.
And then on this December day, as so often in his daily news conferences, he let loose his vexation.
In this case, his target was the Board of Education and its refusal to heed his ultimatum that Schools Chancellor Ramon C. Cortines should leave.
But his words were emblematic of the defiant self-confidence that, while alienating so many of his fellow officials, now propels the Mayor into his second year in office.


Seton Hall Also Sports A Newcomer of Note
Seton Hall 92, Southern Cal 72
Donnell Williams of Seton Hall has spent much of the season listening to everyone in the New York metropolitan area talking about the newcomer Felipe Lopez of St.
John's.
Williams, who missed his freshman season with a foot injury, reminded everyone last night in the championship game of the Seton Hall-Meadowlands Tournament in East Rutherford, N.J., that there's another newcomer to worry about in the Big East Conference.


Ringing In The New With Music
ON New Year's Eve in New York City, it's a seller's market for revelry.
The streets are swarmed and the restaurants packed with prospective merrymakers, all seeking the right place and atmosphere to share the ballyhooed moment when the calendar changes.
Live music, with its promise of instant community and Dionysian prospects, is a potent lure; from the jazz cafes to Madison Square Garden, music packs 'em in, as people choose to spend the evening with others who share their taste or dance to the same beat.
For many people, putting on a party hat and slipping a CD into the home stereo -- or watching the Guy Lombardo Orchestra on PBS -- just doesn't provide the same excitement.
Even at places that don't usually present music, New Year's Eve is the time to book a band.


U.N. Reports a Bihac Truce Agreement by Rebel Muslim
The United Nations has won agreement from a leader of a pro-Serbian Muslim faction to observe a cease-fire around the besieged town of Bihac in northwestern Bosnia, according to Lieut.
Gen.
Sir Michael Rose, the commander of United Nations forces in Bosnia.
"I've heard from him that he has agreed to a cease-fire on his side," General Rose told reporters in Sarajevo, referring to the breakaway Muslim leader, Fikret Abdic.
"The Bosnian Government, the Bosnian Serbs and the Abdic forces have all signed cease-fire agreements, and there were indications today that the Croatian Serbs are interested as well. We are ending the year on a very good note."


Motherwell Painted Art From the Gut But Used His Head
Trained at Stanford, Harvard and Columbia, Robert Motherwell (1915-1991) was probably the best educated of the Abstract Expressionists.
His literary interests, his extensive writings on art and his activity as the editor of the influential series of translations "The Documents of 20th-Century Art" have all conspired to leave an image of an artist who was too intelligent for his own good.
Abstract Expressionist painting was supposed to come from the gut, or so the cliche ran, while Motherwell painted with his head.
Knoedler &amp; Company has set out to dispel this image by presenting a selection of pictures from Motherwell's most successful series of paintings, "Elegies to the Spanish Republic." Four large canvases devoted to this theme are accompanied by a closely related work, "At Five in the Afternoon," and by a dozen smaller studies on paper and cardboard.
The result is a triumphant vindication of Motherwell's pictorial talent.
One's first impression upon entering the gallery is that of a tremendous consistency, a consistency that does not become repetitive but adds to the cumulative impact of Motherwell's paintings.
Although the series was begun in 1949, the earliest canvas here dates from 1958-60.
It sets forth the basic elements of the series: a succession of broad black vertical bands, often rounded and curving at their bases, interspersed with black ovoids floating before a white background.
The stark contrast of blacks and whites evokes the blinding sunlight and inky shade of a Spanish afternoon, while the semi-abstract black forms suggest a bull's sex organs, as E. C. Goosen, the art critic, pointed out in a 1959 article on Motherwell. (The sacrificial ritual of the bullfight and the tragedy of the Spanish Civil War were intimately linked in Motherwell's personal iconography.) The 1958-60 "Elegy to the Spanish Republic" is about 6 feet high and 8 feet wide.
Executed in oil and charcoal, with obvious areas of reworking, it has a handmade, improvised feeling perfectly in keeping with the critic Harold Rosenberg's famous description of the canvas as an arena in which the artist was to act.


The Worlds in Small-Town and Big-City Life
ALL THE DAYS AND NIGHTS The Collected Stories of William Maxwell 415 pages.
Alfred A. Knopf. $25.


Unisys to Cut 4,000 Jobs Next Year
The Unisys Corporation said yesterday that it would cut 4,000 jobs, or 8.5 percent of its worldwide work force of 46,900, in 1995.
The cuts are meant to bring costs into line with revenues and profit margins as Unisys continues its shift from manufacturing large mainframe computers to selling and servicing smaller systems.


Sounds Around Town: On New Year's Eve
POP AND ROCK Bernhard, Kidding or Not
Sandra Bernhard, U.S.A., 218 West 47th Street, Manhattan, (212) 869-1063.
The fearless comedian, singer, actress, fashion maven and queen of ambivalence is emotionally mercurial, to the point that you're not always sure when she's kidding and when she's not.
Who else would think to perform a furious riot girl version of "The Ladies Who Lunch" in the same set with a San Francisco reverie that includes a homage to Sylvester, the disco drag queen?
Shows are at 11 P.M. and 2 A.M., with doors opening at 9 P.M.
Tickets are $40.
STEPHEN HOLDEN Do the Hustle
France Joli, Martha Wash and Vicki Sue Robinson, Expo Nightclub, 124 West 43d Street, Manhattan, (212) 819-0377.
"Disco Space Odyssey" is the nostalgic name for an evening of dancing and music.
The club plans to feature a 45-foot video screen showing the activities in Times Square and three performers associated with the golden age of disco.
France Joli, who is to go on at 11:30 P.M., was a one-hit wonder with her lush, dreamy disco ballad, "Come to Me." Martha Wash, who is to go on at 1 A.M. scored her biggest hit, the humorous disco-gospel anthem "It's Raining Men," with her group, the Weather Girls.
Vicki Sue Robinson, who is to go on at 2:30 A.M., had one of the first and toughest disco hits, "Turn the Beat Around," which was recently rerecorded by Gloria Estefan.
Doors open at 9 P.M.
Tickets bought in advance cost $100, or $200 for V.I.P. seating in the balcony.
S.
H.
Boyz II Men
Boyz II Men, Babyface and Tevin Campbell, Madison Square Garden, (212) 307-7171.
The stars of this promising triple bill are the younger generation's leading torch-bearers for old-fashioned pop-soul romance.
Boyz II Men, the Philadelphia quartet that has led the revival of post-doo-wop harmony-group singing, has sold more than six million copies of its second album.
Its latest hit, "On Bended Knee," with its lush vocal blend and ardent plaintiveness, is as delicious a piece of ear candy as the genre has produced.
Show time is 8:30 P.M.
Tickets are $50 and $35.
S.
H.
Angelina Reaux
Angelina Reaux, Merkin Concert Hall, 129 West 67th Street, Manhattan, (212) 362-8719.
One of the few opera singers with the ability to relax and stretch into vernacular music, Angelina Reaux is performing a program that juxtaposes Jerome Kern, Stephen Sondheim and Richard Rodgers with Poulenc, Satie and Britten.
Ricky Ian Gordon is to accompany on piano.
The evening is to begin at 8 P.M. with hors d'oeuvres and Champagne, with the concert at 9.
Tickets are $50.
S.
H.
Sanborn and Schuur
David Sanborn and Diane Schuur, Blue Note, 131 West Third Street, Greenwich Village, (212) 475-8592.
The most popular saxophonist after Kenny G, David Sanborn makes appealingly soulful music that begins with a rhythm-and-blues base and ripples out to embrace elements of world music and jazz-fusion without settling into the snoozy formulas that have given electric jazz a bad name.
Ms.
Schuur is a technical powerhouse of a singer whose style suggests a more formalized Ella Fitzgerald inflected with Kate Smith's clangy brightness.
The first seating, from 7 P.M. to 12:30 A.M., is $175 at tables and $90 at the bar.
The second, from 1 A.M. on, is $100 at tables and $60 at the bar.
S.
H.
CABARET Celebrating at the Top
Tommy Tune, Maureen McGovern and the Impalas, the Rainbow Complex, 30 Rockefeller Plaza, 65th floor, (212) 632-5000.
Starting at 9 P.M. on New Year's Eve, each of the three rooms atop the General Electric Building in Rockefeller Center will have its own year-end celebration.
Like an apparition from a 1930's movie musical, Tommy Tune is to strut down the staircase of the Rainbow Room at 11 P.M. and perform with a swing band led by Michael Andrews.
The evening, which includes dancing to Mr.
Andrews's orchestra, includes a seven-course dinner and costs $375 a person, not including beverages, tax and gratuities.
Down the hall at the Rainbow and Stars cabaret, Maureen McGovern, the most vocally disciplined and technically resourceful of New York cabaret singers, is to perform her new show, "My Reel Romance With the Movies," a program of classic movie songs, at 11 P.M.
High points are medleys of songs by Henry Mancini and Harold Arlen.
The evening, which includes a seven-course dinner, costs $325 a person.
In a more rock-and-roll vein, holding forth at the Rainbow Pavilion after 11 P.M. are to be the Impalas, the vocal group best remembered for its 1959 hit, "Sorry (I Ran All the Way Home)." Dance music is provided by Uptown, an eight-member jazz band.
The evening includes a seven-course dinner and costs $325 a person.
The Promenade Bar will be open from 9 P.M. on and costs $50 a person.
At midnight, Rainbow's Fellini Fantasy Parade, a conga line, is to make its way across the complex.
No matter which room you choose, the setting offers the essence of Manhattan glamour.
S.
H.
Mary Cleere Haran
Mary Cleere Haran, Russian Tea Room, 150 West 57th Street, Manhattan, (212) 265-0947.
Mary Cleere Haran is something like a 90's Doris Day, but hipper and jazzier, with a feminist sensibility and an intellectual take on pop nostalgia.
She is to perform her acclaimed show of 1950's movie songs, in which gorgeous renditions of songs like "An Affair to Remember" are accompanied by witty, sometimes barbed commentary on the Eisenhower era.
Shows are at 9 and 11:30 P.M., and there are two dinner seatings, at 8 and 10:30 P.M.
There is a $45 music cover charge and a $30 food and beverage minimum.
S.
H.
Weslia Whitfield
Weslia Whitfield, Algonquin Hotel, 59 West 44th Street, Manhattan; reservations: (212) 840-6800, extension 154.
Weslia Whitfield, the San Francisco cabaret singer who is almost a regular fixture at the Algonquin, combines an impeccable taste in classic pop songs with a homey, low-key delivery that is discreetly flavored with jazz.
The 9 P.M. show is sold out.
The 10:30 P.M. show includes an 8:30 dinner seating and costs $190 a person.
S.
H.
COMEDY Looking for Laughs
Comedy at Caroline's, 1626 Broadway, at 50th Street, (212) 757-4100.
Heading the New Year's Eve bill at New York's leading comedy club is to be Dave Attell, a balding 30-year-old comic from New York whose who wears ripped jeans and a jean jacket and delivers a barrage of sarcastic topical jokes.
Four other rising comics are to join him on the bill: Jim David, Linda Smith, Greg Giraldo and John Henson.
There are two shows: an 8 P.M. dinner package at $65 a person and a 10:30 P.M. countdown celebration (with dinner) for $110 a person.
Reservations required.
S.
H.


Art in Review
Frederick Sommer  Pace/MacGill Gallery 2 East 59th Street Manhattan Through Jan. 7


Clash Over a Football Ends With a Death in Police Custody
It started with an errant football hitting a police patrol car early on the morning of Dec. 22, and it ended with the death of a 29-year-old Bronx man.
The police have said the man, who was being arrested for disorderly conduct, died of an asthma attack.
But his family yesterday accused the police of choking him to death, and the Medical Examiner's office indicated that the cause of death was probably asphyxiation.


METRO DIGEST
THE FIGHTING MAYOR OF NEW YORK CITY
One year after he was narrowly elected as the first Republican mayor of New York in more than two decades, Mayor Giuliani's combativeness and the zeal he retains from his days as a prosecutor have brought him a series of victories and, many leaders say, have touched a chord in a city longing for leadership.
A1.
Mayor Giuliani unilaterally imposed nearly $800 million in spending cuts.
A1.
NEW YORK CITY GRADUATION RATE FALLS IN NEW YORK
The New York City schools in 1994 produced one of the lowest graduation rates in eight years, according to a report issued yesterday by Chancellor Ramon C. Cortines.
But he said the system's dropout rate has been improving partly because more students who failed to graduate in four years are remaining in school.
B3.
TIMES SQUARE NEWS ZIPPER IS SAVED
A British media conglomerate has stepped in to preserve the zipper, the moving illuminated bulletin board on the triangular building at 42d Street and Broadway.
B3.
REGION PATAKI NAMES HEALTH OFFICIAL
Dr.
Barbara Ann DeBuono, 39, the health director for Rhode Island who began a program there to enroll poor people in managed-care programs, has been nominated by Governor-elect Pataki to be his health commissioner.
B4.
PATAKI PREDICTS $100 MILLION DEFICIT
After meeting with his new budget director and with Cuomo administration budget officials, Governor-elect Pataki said he expects to have to close a deficit of at least $100 million before the state fiscal year ends on March 31.
B4.
CUOMO APPOINTS SUPPORTERS TO BOARD
In one of his final acts as Governor, Mario M. Cuomo appointed three longtime officials in his administration to jobs on the state's Unemployment Insurance Appeals Board, giving them job security for between two and four years and salaries of more $68,000.
A Pataki spokeswoman called the appointments "politics as usual." B4.
WHISTLEBLOWER RECEIVES $4 MILLION
George Denoncourt, a whistleblower who quit a $470-a-week job as a New York State social services trainee four years ago and accused his department of misusing Federal funds, has won more than $4 million as part of a settlement in which the state has agreed to pay the Federal Government $27 million.
B5.
VIOLATIONS SUSPECTED IN DEADLY FIRE
Officials investigating a fire in Orange, N.J., that killed nine members of a Haitian immigrant family said there appeared to have been zoning and safety violations in the house.
B5.
A NEW MISSION ON THE MEAN STREETS
Two years ago, the Rev.
Jim Watson was executive director of a mission in Fairmont, W. Va., that ran a soup kitchen, a 100-bed shelter and a 111-acre children's camp.
But now Mr.
Watson, 41, a Baptist minister, is working on the streets of Bridgeport, running a shelter and feeding the homeless in the most dangerous sections of Connecticut's largest city.
B5.
Chronicle B2
Neediest Cases B3
Holiday Schedule B3


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-13  NORTH KOREA FREES U.S.
PILOT  Ending an impasse that threatened to jeopardize a nuclear accord with the United States, North Korea released an American pilot whose helicopter was downed over the country 13 days ago.
A1


CHRONICLE
The new film version of Louisa May Alcott's "Little Women" is giving HEATHER CAMPBELL a little headache.
"Things are chaotic here," said Ms.
Campbell, the assistant director for preservation and collections at Orchard House, the Alcott homestead and museum in Concord, Mass.
"We've had hundreds of phone calls since the movie opened on Christmas Day."


When Trouble Starts Young -- Concluding a series of periodic reports: Seeking Solutions; Doing Whatever It Takes to Save a Child
No one knows where Jose Villarreal, a thickset ninth grader with a baby's cheeks and a rebel's crew cut, might be if Gina Ybarra had not gone to his house so many cool mornings and pulled the covers from his face, had not lugged him out of bed and waited for him to get dressed so that she could drive him to school.
It is not certain what would have happened if Ms.
Ybarra, his case manager in a widely regarded pilot project for troubled youths, had not gone to class with him to make sure he behaved and did his work.
Or if she had not argued his case whenever the principal wanted to suspend him for cursing the teachers and fighting.
Or if the project had not got him a summer job or into therapy.


Mediator: Get Serious
The mediator asked by the Clinton Administration to try to help settle baseball's labor dispute is prepared to continue his efforts, but the owners and the players have to indicate they seriously want to negotiate an agreement.
That was the position of Bill Usery Jr. after a meeting with Secretary of Labor Robert Reich earlier this week, a person familiar with Usery's view said yesterday.


Problems? Anderson And Beard Make Up
Today was damage-control day at Nets camp for Kenny Anderson and his coach.
Anderson was on hand after skipping Wednesday's practice without so much as a phone call.
The All-Star point guard, who was fined an undisclosed amount for his absence, met with Coach Butch Beard for about 15 minutes before today's practice, then vanished into the training room to receive treatment for his sore right shoulder and sore right calf.


TRANSACTIONS
Basketball National Basketball Association  PHOENIX SUNS -- Waived Aaron Swinson, forward.
SEATTLE SUPERSONICS -- Suspended Vincent Askew, guard, for one game for conduct detrimental to the team and against policy.
Football National Football League  NFL -- Named Atlanta Falcons wide receiver Terance Mathis to the NFC Pro Bowl team, replacing Sterling Sharpe of Green Bay.
DENVER BRONCOS -- Fired Wade Phillips, coach.


Corrections
A picture caption in The Living Section on Wednesday that accompanied a report in the Food Notes column about Mika, a new restaurant in SoHo, referred incorrectly to the woman shown with Kamioka Katsushi, Mika's sushi chef.
She was Michaela Sharon, Mika's managing partner, not Andrea Cullen, its manager.


With Help, Overcoming An Illness Of Solitude
The old man turned his eyes toward the floor and spoke softly of his wife's death.
He had stood by her hospital bed for months, witnessing the waning of her life.
As she grew sicker, Mike F. succumbed to an unfamiliar helplessness.
"All I could do was sit there and watch her go," he said. "And then I was alone."


North Koreans Free U.S. Pilot Held 13 Days
An American helicopter pilot stepped solemnly out of North Korea this morning, ending 13 days of captivity and a crisis that had threatened to reignite the nuclear tensions on the Korean peninsula.
The pilot, Chief Warrant Officer Bobby Hall, appearing to be in generally good condition, stepped across the concrete slab that marks the border in this tense village at 11:15 A.M. (9:15 P.M. Thursday Eastern time) and was clasped around the shoulders by Gen.
Gary E. Luck, the commander of the United States forces in South Korea.


Graduation Rate Declines To Lowest in Eight Years
The New York City Schools in 1994 produced one of the lowest graduation rates in eight years, according to a report issued yesterday by Chancellor Ramon C. Cortines.
But he pointed out that, at the same time, the system's dropout rate has been improving partly because more students who failed to graduate in four years are remaining in school.


3 Campaigns Set For Holiday Release
Three large advertisers are introducing big campaigns during the long holiday weekend.
The International Business Machines Corporation will introduce its first worldwide brand campaign, which is being created by Ogilvy &amp; Mather Worldwide in New York.
Three television commercials, scheduled to begin on Sunday in the United States, carry the theme, "Solutions for a small planet."


For Madison Avenue, a Year Filled With More Creative Misses Than Hits
In looking back on the year's best and worst advertising, picking the worst, alas, is easy.
It takes only a moment to find 10 -- or 10 times 10 -- mishaps, misfires and backfires.
But the best? Oy!


Louis Martinz; Former Panamanian Spokesman, 54
Louis Martinz, a Panamanian businessman who was a former spokesman for President Guillermo Endara of Panama as well as a former diplomat and publisher, died on Monday at his home in Panama City.
He was 54.
The cause was pneumonia, said his niece Ana Victoria Posse de Vallarino.


Mexican Trade Won't Gain From Devaluation
To the Editor:
Apropos "Mexico's Devaluation: Not So Scary" (editorial, Dec. 24): Some discussions in support of the Mexican peso's devaluation, though not this particular discussion, argue that currency values can be manipulated to manage trade.
This was the essence of mercantilist trade theory, which died in the 19th century with the global influence of the British gold standard.


Too Much Immunity in the Jones Case
In ruling that President Clinton need not defend himself at a sexual harassment trial until after leaving office, in 1997 or 2001, a Federal judge in Little Rock has given Mr.
Clinton more leeway than the Constitution requires or any defendant deserves.
The only mitigating element is the judge's companion ruling that pretrial evidence-gathering may nevertheless proceed.
That is a fair accommodation to the need to preserve evidence for a trial that may not take place until the next century.
For all the tawdriness of her lawsuit and the surrounding circumstances, Paula Jones, a former Arkansas state employee, has raised novel legal questions and tricky political issues.
Should a sitting President, while in office, be excused from the toils of litigation for actions allegedly taken before he entered the White House?
Or does Ms.
Jones, accusing Mr.
Clinton of misconduct when he was Governor of Arkansas, have a right to speedy resolution of her civil suit?


Market Place; In Fund Investing, A Collision Of Tides
Investors are ending 1994 nervous about the stock market but still putting more money into stock mutual funds than they are taking out.
But higher interest rates are scaring investors out of bond funds, with investor withdrawals rising to record levels.
For the mutual fund industry, the continued faith of investors in the stock market has been the best news of 1994.
The year will probably end up as the second-best ever -- after only 1993 -- in terms of cash flows into stock funds.
But those flows are down substantially from early in the year, with November ranking as the worst month in more than three years.


Both Sides Can Claim A Victory In Release
The breakthrough that led to the release of an American pilot whose helicopter went down over North Korea was the result of intense negotiations that have allowed both the United States and North Korea to claim victory.
The State Department spokesman, Michael D. McCurry, told reporters this evening that Thomas Hubbard, a special American envoy, had secured agreement on release of the pilot, Chief Warrant Officer Bobby Hall, after two days of talks with North Korean officials.


U.S. Warns Russia: Stop Attacking Chechen Civilians
The Clinton Administration directly criticized Russia's handling of the Chechnya crisis for the first time today, warning Moscow to stop its attacks against Chechen civilians.
The warning reflected growing concern that indiscriminate Russian bombing of civilian areas of Grozny, the Chechen capital, is undermining the Government of President Boris N. Yeltsin and exposing the Clinton Administration to the charge that its support of Russia's actions in the breakaway republic shows indifference to the lives of Chechen civilians.


ON HIS OWN, MAYOR CUTS $800 MILLION FROM CITY BUDGET
Having failed to resolve the budget impasse that has preoccupied City Hall for more than a month, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani yesterday carried out his threat to unilaterally impose nearly $800 million in spending cuts.
The move puts into place a budget that will reduce spending for virtually all municipal services, even while it leaves many aspects of the budget unclear.
Mr.
Giuliani's decision to cut the budget by such a large amount on his own -- the first step of such magnitude by a mayor -- comes a week after a state judge threw out both his initial budget proposal and an alternative version of cuts enacted by the Council.
The Mayor's aides said his latest move would finally allow them to achieve their goal of balancing the city's $31.6 billion budget by cutting city spending by nearly 4 percent.


World News Briefs; Buddhist Monks Demand Apology by the Pope
A conference of Sri Lankan Buddhist monks demanded today that Pope John Paul II withdraw remarks he made about their religion in his new book, a spokesman for the monks said.
The spokesman for the Federation of Buddhist Organizations said the monks said the Pope's scheduled visit to Sri Lanka, which is 70 percent Buddhist, on Jan. 20 and 21 would be viewed as an act of aggression if he did not withdraw his comments.
They were not satisfied with an apology issued last week by a Sri Lankan bishop, he added.


We've Known Alcott's Secret for 50 Years
To the Editor:
To indicate that Louisa May Alcott has suddenly become a "hot author" (arts pages, Dec. 20) is misleading.
For the last 20 years the Alcott scholar Madeleine Stern has been publishing the anonymous and pseudonymous thrillers written by Louisa May Alcott in the days before "Little Women" when she needed money and let her hair down.


Sports of The Times; Is Nebraska Gambling To Win?
TOMMIE FRAZIER has been told that the chances of a blood clot reappearing are 5 percent.
That sounds like 1 in 20 to me.
And that also sounds a bit risky, considering that on Sunday night some very large people will be pounding on Tommie Frazier's body, which is how he got the blood clot in the first place.
"That's a very slight chance; right now, I'm not even thinking about it," Frazier said yesterday after being named the starting quarterback against Miami in the Orange Bowl as Nebraska tries to win its first national football championship under Coach Tom Osborne after many frustrations.


Diner's Journal
Bistro Virtues
Every restaurantgoer in Manhattan seems to be searching for the same thing: an attractive restaurant with good food and reasonable prices.
That must be why four people have told me about Jubilee in the last three weeks.
The six-month-old restaurant, at the moment dominated by a giant Christmas tree, occupies a long, narrow space with white walls and blue banquettes that are already peopled with regulars.
Customers laugh and joke with the waiters as they twist between the tables, catching their reflections in the narrow strip of mirror that runs along the wall.


Tracing Human Behavior Back a Few Million Years
Desmond Morris, longtime observer of the species he calls "The Naked Ape," begins "The Human Animal," his new six-part series, with an hour on "The Language of the Body." Going here and there around the world, the zoologist lights on the gestures people use for quarreling and socializing, buying and selling, and just gabbing.
Since gestures vary by country, a traveler's advisory is in order: what is considered a friendly motion here may get you into big trouble there.
For example, the American sign for O.K., a circle of thumb and index finger, has lewd connotations in other climes and Bulgarians evidently shake their heads from side to side when they mean yes.


N.H.L. Sets a Date, but It's Not Etched in Ice
The National Hockey League told the Players Association in a memo yesterday that play "must begin by Jan. 16 in order to schedule 50 regular-season games and a full playoffs."
Though that date has long been projected as the cutoff for a meaningful season, it was not clear whether the memo meant the league would cancel the season if play doesn't begin by Jan. 16.


French Sailor Under Watch
Two Australian search planes yesterday continued their watch over Isabelle Autissier, the French solo sailor whose 60-foot yacht lost both its masts in a raging storm on the Indian Ocean.
"There's really nothing they can do," said Susan Ward, a spokeswoman for the BOC around-the-world yacht race.
"They had a surveillance on her basically all day. They don't seem to have any cause for concern."


C. A. Ribaudo, 85, New York Physician
Dr.
Charles A. Ribaudo, who was chief of pulmonary medicine at St.
Vincent's Hospital in Manhattan for 20 years until his retirement in 1978, died last Friday at the Carillon House Nursing Home in Huntington, L.I.
He was 85 and lived in Ridge, L.I.
The cause was lung cancer, said a son, Msgr. Charles Ribaudo of Oyster Bay, L.I.


Scientists Report Finding a Way to Shrink Tumors
Researchers in California reported today that in laboratory experiments on animals they had discovered a novel and potentially powerful way to make tumors regress with a single injection of either of two types of proteins.
The proteins, which are either genetically engineered or synthetic, block the growth of blood vessels that feed cancerous tumors, starving them and making them shrink.
The proteins were not toxic in the experiments conducted by researchers from the Scripps Research Institute in San Diego and seemed not to affect noncancerous tissue.


Starting the New Year With a Few Laughs at the Old
Weighted down with announcements of corporate downsizings and specters of Newt's orphanages, 1994 at last limps to an end.
Who's going to argue that a few laughs, or at least a giggle or two, aren't in order?
Showtime obliges on New Year's Day at 10 P.M. with "But Seriously '94." The year's most newsworthy events are reviewed by stand-up comics working in clubs around the country.
The clips, clustered around specific subjects, are provided by, among others, David Brenner, Richard Belzer, Joy Behar, Pam Stone, Will Durst, Rick Ducommum, Paul Mooney and, yes, he's back, Andrew Dice Clay.


Cuomo Names 3 Supporters to State Board
In one of his final acts as Governor, Mario M. Cuomo today appointed three longtime officials in his administration to jobs on the state's Unemployment Insurance Appeals Board, giving them job security for between two and four years and salaries of more than $68,000.
The appointments do not require confirmation by the State Senate and cannot be rescinded by Governor-elect George E. Pataki, who takes office on Sunday.


Dole Assails Deal Paying $4.5 Million For Gingrich Book
In his first public criticism of his fellow Republican leader, Senator Bob Dole today questioned the propriety of the $4.5 million book advance for Representative Newt Gingrich, the next Speaker of the House, and suggested that the deal could mar efforts by Republicans to get off to a strong start when they take over Congress on Wednesday.
While Mr.
Dole, the Kansas Republican who will become the Senate majority leader, said he was "not ready to pass judgment" on the deal, the largest ever for a sitting member of Congress, he added that it raised questions and would "have to be addressed."


Sounds Around Town: On New Year's Eve
POP AND ROCK Big Time Sarah
Big Time Sarah, Chicago Blues, 73 Eighth Avenue, at 14th Street, Greenwich Village. (212) 924-9755.
Big Time Sarah does everything a good-time blues belter has to do: she shouts, she rasps, she wails, she slings double-entendres and she gets the audience to join in.
Her group, the B.T.S.
Express, chugs along and smiles at her exuberance.
Sets are at 10 and 11:30 P.M. and 1 A.M.
Admission is $20.
JON PARELES N.R.B.Q., Unpredictably
N.R.B.Q., Bottom Line, 15 West Fourth Street, Greenwich Village, (212) 228-7880.
Take the raucous twang of rocked-up rockabilly and splash on the tone clusters and manic piano pounding that link Jerry Lee Lewis to Sun Ra.
Add to a seemingly bottomless repertory of well-known and obscure old songs, throw in some jovial pop originals by the band, and this results in N.R.B.Q., a band as unpredictable as it is seasoned.
The Motorkings, led by Frank Funaro, formerly the Del-Lords' drummer, are to share the bill.
Admission to the early show, at 9:30 P.M., is $30; the late show, at 1 A.M., is $25.
J.
P.
Cypress Hill
Cypress Hill, Palladium, 126 East 14th Street, East Village, (212) 473-7171.
In Cypress Hill's singsong raps, characters spend half their time smoking pot, the rest shooting at people.
As a spokesgroup for the legalization of marijuana, Cypress Hill makes the worst possible case for its cause.
But its fans make a party out of irresponsible intentions and bad vibes.
Doors open at 9 P.M.; tickets are $60 in advance, $75 at the door.
J.
P.
God Street Wine
God Street Wine, Irving Plaza, Irving Place at 15th Street, Manhattan, (212) 777-6800.
Among the coterie of young bands rooted in the Grateful Dead's jamming, God Street has a few custom options: glimmers of progressive rock and reggae, an occasional rap and a post-hippie precision.
Otherwise, the two-chord vamps just keep percolating along for the tie-dyed dancers.
Tickets are $28.50 in advance, $33 on Saturday.
J.
P.
Blues and Techno
Debbie Harry and the Lunachicks, Don Hill's, 511 Greenwich Street, at Spring Street, SoHo (212) 334-1390.
Two generations of women's punk-rock.
Debbie Harry, who led Blondie in the 1970's and early 80's, helped invent a cool, clear-headed, barbed pop that opened doors for performers as diverse as Madonna, the Go-Go's and Liz Phair.
The Lunachicks are faster, sloppier and louder, sometimes angrier, sometimes funnier.
Admission is $25.
Doors open at 9 P.M.; the Lunachicks are to perform at 11:30 P.M. and Debbie Harry at 2 A.M.
J.
P.
Funk and Social Issues
Milo Z., A.K.A., 77 West Houston Street, SoHo, (212) 673-7325.
Milo Z. revives the plunging bass lines and wah-wah guitars of 1970's funk.
While the music echoes Kool and the Gang and Parliament-Funkadelic, the lyrics take on social issues from interracial romance to gun control.
Three sets to begin at 10 P.M.; $75 admission includes an open bar.
J.
P.
JAZZ Vernon Reid and Masque
Vernon Reid and Masque, the Sun Ra Arkestra and Kehinde Ouhuru and the El Shabazz D'Jembe Orchestra, the Cooler, 416 West 14th Street, meat-packing district, (212) 229-0785.
Masque is a new group led by Vernon Reid, the guitarist in Living Colour, who can blast out hard-rock riffs, zoom through blistering solos or jab and squiggle into realms of electric jazz.
The Sun Ra Arkestra has lost its keyboardist and navigator, Sun Ra, but its longtime saxophonist, John Gilmore, leads one of the few big bands to embrace both Fletcher Henderson's swing arrangements and the open-ended possibilities of "Space Is the Place." Doors open at 8 P.M.; music is to begin at 9 P.M.
Tickets may be bought in advance for $20 by calling (212) 645-5189.
Tickets are $25 at the door.
J.
P.


The List for C.I.A. Director Is Short, for a Good Reason
R.
James Woolsey Jr. vowed to "change the culture" of the Central Intelligence Agency.
It now appears that the culture got to him first.
And whoever takes on his unfinished job faces the enormous task of rethinking, reshaping and renewing the C.I.A., and the rest of the nation's intelligence agencies, from the ground up.
A caretaker who will keep the nation's secret services out of the headlines is not enough, White House and Congressional officials say.
But a surprisingly small circle of people possess the combination of brainpower, experience and intestinal fortitude to become the Director of Central Intelligence in a time of change.
The job has overwhelmed more than a few of the 16 men who have held it.


Security Measures in Albany


Sounds Around Town: On New Year's Eve
POP AND ROCK Music, Jokingly
Black Velvet Flag, John Lurie and James Chance and the Contortions, Mercury Lounge, 217 East Houston Street, East Village, (212) 260-4700.
Like most jokes, Black Velvet Flag gets less and less funny with each telling.
The band plays sedate lounge-music versions of raucous punk-rock classics by California bands like the Germs, Black Flag and the Circle Jerks.
Occasionally, the band tosses a few similarly anomalous original songs into their straight-faced performances.
James Chance, on the other hand, is the real thing.
A survivor of New York's noisy no-wave scene of the late 1970's, Mr.
Chance continues to merge punk, funk and free jazz.
While John Lurie, the star of several of Jim Jarmusch's films, is informed by punk and lounge music, he will probably be looking to avant-garde jazz and pop music for his smart, sometimes noisy saxophone playing during this rare solo performance.
The show is to begin at 10 P.M.; tickets are $25 in advance and $30 on the day of the show, and include hors d'oeuvres, a Champagne toast and party favors.
Reservations accepted for tables.
NEIL STRAUSS Women and Men
Friggs and Jackass, Brownie's, 169 Avenue A, East Village, (212) 420-8392.
This might be one of the only nights to see these two bands without getting jostled and nudged by myriad talent scouts looking to sign them to a record label.
The Friggs are four women who play garage rock that hits as hard as surf music and swings as much as rockabilly.
Jackass is a group of men who have an edge on other bands that play disaffected guitar grunge: its lead singer would look good on a magazine cover.
Also appearing: Trickbabys, Clowns for Progress, and N.Y.
Loose.
The show is to begin at 8:30 P.M.; tickets are $10 in advance and $12 on the day of the show.
N.
S.
Rocket From the Crypt
Rocket From the Crypt, Swingin' Neckbreakers and Portastatic, Maxwell's, 1039 Washington Street, Hoboken, N.J., (201) 798-4064.
Maxwell's capacity is probably less than that of a New Year's Eve party in a Manhattan studio, but if a sense of community and a strong, mixed-bag lineup of alternative rock is what you're looking for, then look no further.
Rocket From the Crypt is a band from San Diego that mixes pop contrivances with punk-rock spontaneity, the Swingin' Neckbreakers play melodic, high-energy garage rock that seems untouched by any musical innovation since 1965 and Portastatic is the name for Mac McCaughan of Superchunk's side project, which plays pensive solo songs and slow-building group rockers.
The show is to begin at 10:30 P.M.; admission is $25 and includes a buffet and Champagne toast.
N.
S.
A 15-Hour Party
Heaven, at a location to be announced this afternoon, (212) 592-4444 or (212) 696-8939.
Heaven, a huge rave being held in a warehouse that holds some 3,500 people, is the perfect place for partygoers who want to test their stamina.
It begins at 9 P.M. on New Year's Eve and ends on noon the next day.
The 15-hour party features live drummers, performances and the latest electronic dance music played by disk jockeys from around the world.
The highlight of the night should be the set by Juan Atkins, a musician and disk jockey from Detroit who was a pioneer in techno dance music.
Also to appear working the turntables are Doc Martin from Los Angeles, Paul Van Dyk from Berlin, Wild Child from London, Tiga from Montreal.
For those who can still stand, the party is to move to another location after noon for more of the same.
There will be no Champagne at Heaven, but there will be free whistles, flashlights and noisemakers.
Tickets are $18 in advance and $22 tomorrow.
N.
S.


Penn Springs Well-Guarded Machine on St. John's
The University of Pennsylvania backcourt tandem of Jerome Allen and Matt Maloney came into last night's championship game of the ECAC Holiday Festival heralded as one of the best in the nation.
And for much of 40 minutes it showed the St.
John's Red Storm why.
Maloney's deadly shooting from the perimeter and Allen's crafty ball-handling and floor leadership proved too tough a combination for the Red Storm.
The duo combined for 47 points to lead the Quakers to a 79-73 victory before 15,812 at Madison Square Garden.
It was the first loss in eight outings for 25th-ranked St.
John's.
Penn improved to 6-1.


In Fashion And in The Streets
William Klein is one of the most important photographers of his generation, but there's little evidence of this in "William Klein: In and Out of Fashion," the limp show at the International Center of Photography's uptown space.
Mr.
Klein is famous for his dynamic books about New York City, Tokyo, Rome and other cities, published in the 1950's and 60's; none of the photographs from those volumes are in this show, which focuses on the fashion work he has done over the last four decades, and throws in some of the painted-over photographic pieces he has produced in recent years.
That Mr.
Klein, who is 66, should be represented by such an undistinguished show is especially unfortunate because his reputation has never been as secure in this country as it should be.
The frenetic, self-consciously graphic quality of the photographs from his most important project, the study of New York City that was published in 1956, didn't sit well with American photographic tastes of the period; moreover, Mr.
Klein has spent much of the last 40 years in France, out of the orbit of the New York photo scene, and for much of that period he has devoted his energies to making films.


RESULTS PLUS
N.B.A.
Curry Helps Hornets Halt Magic's Streak  Dell Curry scored 28 points and Charlotte, playing without the injured Alonzo Mourning, made a club record 14 3-pointers to beat the Orlando Magic, 125-123, last night.
Curry sank 6 long-range shots and host Charlotte made 14 of 22 in snapping Orlando's 5-game winning streak.
The Hornets made 13 3-pointers in a victory earlier this season at Utah. (AP) Rockets 126, Warriors 124: Vernon Maxwell's desperation 3-pointer with 1.9 seconds to play lifted host Houston over Golden State.
Hakeem Olajuwon had 42 points and 8 rebounds as the Rockets held off a fourth-quarter rally by the Warriors. (AP) Heat 126, Clippers 83: Glen Rice scored 35 points as Miami beat visiting Los Angeles by the biggest margin in Heat history.
The 43-point victory eclipsed the mark set by the Heat against Philadelphia last March 5 in a 120-83 victory. (AP) Trail Blazers 104, Nuggets 93: Cliff Robinson scored 27 points as Portland defeated visiting Denver.
It was the Blazers' eighth consecutive victory over the Nuggets.
Clyde Drexler added 19 points for Portland and Rod Strickland 16 and 10 assists. (AP) Lakers 96, Sonics 95: Cedric Ceballos scored 35 points as Los Angeles ended a six-game losing streak by edging visiting Seattle before this season's first sellout crowd at The Forum. (AP) COLLEGE FOOTBALL B.Y.U.
Routs Oklahoma in Copper Bowl  John Walsh made Gary Gibbs's last game as Oklahoma's coach a nightmare, throwing for 454 yards and 4 touchdowns last night in leading No. 22-ranked Brigham Young to a 31-6 victory in the Copper Bowl at Tucson, Ariz.
Gibbs announced his resignation in November but chose to coach through the bowl game.
Walsh threw a 43-yard completion on the first play of the game and did not slow down.
The quarterback wound up 31 of 45, setting a Copper Bowl record for completions.
The Cougars finished the season 10-3, Oklahoma 6-6. (AP) WOMEN'S BASKETBALL St.
John's Wins Title in Own Tournament  Tawana Jackson's pair of free throws with 14 seconds left capped a 21-point performance last night that helped St.
John's to an 81-77 victory over San Diego State in the championship game of the St.
John's Christmas Invitational Tournament at Alumni Hall.
Jackson, who was named most valuable player of the four-team event, also had 6 assists, 4 rebounds and 4 steals for the Red Storm (5-3).
Suzanne Collins added 17 points, going 13 of 18 from the foul line, with 10 rebounds.
No. 6-ranked Alabama, which was upset by San Diego State (6-4) in the first round, beat North Carolina-Asheville, 119-46, in last night's consolation game. (AP) North Carolina 80, Rhode Island 68: Tracy Reid scored 19 points and grabbed 8 rebounds as No. 4 North Carolina beat Rhode Island in the first round of the Diamond Club Classic at Blacksburg, Va.
Marion Jones added 18 points and Tonya Jackson scored 14 for the Tar Heels (11-0). (AP) Virginia 105, Fordham 55: Jeffra Gausepohl's 19 points topped six Cavaliers in double figures as No. 11 Virginia rolled over visiting Fordham.
Virginia (7-2) shot 60 percent from the field and outrebounded Fordham by 47-22.
Denise Hammersley led the Rams (6-4) with 15 points and 8 assists. (AP) JUNIOR HOCKEY Unbeaten Canada Defeats United States  Canada remained undefeated in the world junior championships last night, routing the United States, 8-3, at Red Deer, Alberta, for a 24-5 margin in its first three games.
Jeff Friesen had two goals for the winners.
Landon Wilson, Jamie Langenbrunner and Shawn Bates scored for the United States, which has lost two straight after opening with a victory over Russia. (AP)


For Children
'Whodunit?' 'The Science of Solving Crime'  Liberty Science Center  251 Phillip Street  Jersey City  (201) 451-0006  Recommended ages: 6 and up  Through Jan. 8


Bonn Journal; Novel of Feline Revenge, and Germany Laps It Up
In a country racked over the past three years by right-wing violence against Turks and other foreign immigrants, it may come as a big surprise to learn that the best-selling author of popular novels in Germany is a man who was born in Turkey 35 years ago.
Akif Pirincci was 10 years old when his parents brought him and his sister to Ulmen, a small town in the Eifel hills near here where his mother and father worked in a textile factory.


Times Sq. Flash: ***ZIPPER SAVED***
A major New Year's Eve disappointment loomed.
The ball would drop at exactly midnight, the fireworks would begin in Central Park, 17 blocks north, and the news zipper on the triangular building at 42d Street and Broadway would go out.
Yesterday, a British media conglomerate stepped in to preserve the moving illuminated bulletin board, after the current leaseholder, New York Newsday, said earlier this month that it would not renew as of year's end.
The conglomerate, Pearson P.L.C., said it had signed a lease to run news and announcements on the zipper, starting Saturday.
The lease runs month to month, and terms were not disclosed.


Inside Art
Dealer's Collection
Collectors are always fascinated with what dealers buy for themselves.
The professional eye, they believe, sees what others do not.
Which may explain why the sale of sculpture and other artworks belonging to Cyril Humphris, the London-based sculpture dealer, at Sotheby's in New York on Jan. 10 and 11, is important to many people in the art world.


Art in Review
Wenceslaus Hollar 'A Bohemian Artist in England'  Yale Center for British Art  New Haven  Through Jan. 22


Momix's Relentless Quest to Laugh at the Logic of Gravity
It was golden oldie time for Momix on Wednesday night at the Joyce Theater (175 Eighth Avenue, at 19th Street, Chelsea), where the irrepressible group performs through Sunday afternoon.
The well-staged program of 13 short pieces included some of the most beautiful-looking and funniest pieces created by Moses Pendleton, Cynthia Quinn and collaborators over the company's 13-year history.
The selection also said a lot about Momix itself.
The best of the classics is still Alan Boeding's oddly poignant "Circle Walker," a solo set to music by Yas Kaz, in which a man moves about the stage inside and beside an object that looks and behaves like a giant gyroscope.
Propelled by the rolling sculpture, created by Mr.
Boeding, Terry Pexton's body flipped and spiraled eerily through space in a slow-motion breakdown of Momix-style gymnastics, unaffected here by gravity.


WHITE HOUSE SAYS YOUNG WILL SUFFER UNDER G.O.P. PLAN
The Clinton Administration said today that five million children would be dropped from the welfare rolls under House Republican proposals.
Republicans who helped write the legislation acknowledged that was a possible result, but asserted that the children would not be harmed.
About 9.7 million children are beneficiaries of the nation's main cash welfare program, Aid to Families with Dependent Children.
Donna E. Shalala, the Secretary of Health and Human Services, said her department estimated that more than half of these children -- 5.3 million -- would eventually become ineligible under the bill that House Republicans plan to introduce when the 104th Congress convenes next week.


Programs Seek to Stop Trouble Before It Starts
The subject for the day in Natalie Nash's sixth-grade class was "dissing" and the lesson was how children could keep their self-respect when challenged in real life.
Two boys in baggy sweat shirts were assigned to act out roles from a textbook on what happens when one child insults another.
"Man, you're so dumb you don't know nothing," said Hector, assuming a practiced swagger.
Faster than a magician, the second student, Angel, pretended to punch Hector in the face.


Orange County to Draw On Reserve for Payment
In a sign of further belt-tightening, officials of Orange County, Calif., said today that the bankrupt county would dip into a special reserve fund to paying interest to bondholders, rather than cash on hand.
The move, intended to conserve the county's limited cash, is also aimed at assuring Wall Street that the county will maintain a tight grip on its financial resources and continue to meet its debt payments.


INSIDE
Mexican Leader Offers Emergency Fiscal Plan
President Ernesto Zedillo Ponce de Leon of Mexico moved to take control of that nation's economic crisis by outlining an emergency plan that includes an international aid package totaling $10 billion to $15 billion.
He also announced the resignation of the Finance Minister.
Page D1.
Russia Limits Rebel Targets
In a switch, Russia seemed to limit its air attacks on the rebel region of Chechnya to strategic targets.
The United States warned Moscow to halt attacks on civilians.
Page A12.
Haitians Will Lose Haven
Citing improved security in Haiti, the United States told Haitians living at an American base in Cuba that they must go home.
It offered them incentives to cooperate.
Page A3.


Unlikely Team Prepares to Battle for Rowland's Budget
When Lorraine M. Aronson was asked to become deputy budget director in Governor-elect John G. Rowland's administration, her reaction was instantaneous.
"Get out of the car," she yelled at Reginald L. Jones, the future budget chief, whom she had picked up for what was to be a friendly lunch.


CHRONICLE
On one of the noisiest nights of the year, the New York Road Runners Club will observe a moment of silence.
Before the club's annual raucous New Year's Eve run in Central Park, whose midnight start is marked by fireworks, the 5,000 runners expected to participate will pay tribute to Fred Lebow, the club's longtime president and founder of the New York City Marathon, who died in October.


New Year Plans
Here is a sampling of activities for the New Year's weekend in New York City.
Admission is free unless otherwise noted: Today
MILLIONAIRES' MILE WALKING TOUR, Adventure on a Shoestring.
A walking tour of Fifth Avenue between 59th and 79th Streets. 3 P.M.
Fee: $5.
Information and meeting place: (212) 265-2663.
SORRENTINO HOLIDAY FESTIVAL, Sorrentino Recreation Center, 18-48 Cornaga Avenue, Far Rockaway, Queens.
Arts and crafts for Kwanzaa and the New Year holidays. 2 to 5 P.M.
Free.
Information: (718) 471-4818.
New Year's Eve
FIRST NIGHT NEW YORK '95, various locations in midtown Manhattan.
Alcohol-free activities for adults and children are to start at Bryant Park at 11 A.M. and go on until after midnight.
They include a petting zoo, dance and music performances, magic, skating, dancing, and communicating by computer with other First Night celebrations in Boston, San Francisco, Rome and other cities.
In addition to Bryant Park, the locations include Grand Central Terminal, the New York Public Library, the Manhattan Center, the Empire State Building, the Fifth Avenue Ballroom and Sky Rink.
Sponsored by the Grand Central Partnership, the 34th Street Partnership and the Bryant Park Restoration Corporation.
Buttons admit wearer to all activities; fee, $20; $7 for children 3 to 12; free for children under 3.
Buttons may be bought at various locations including Grand Central Terminal and the New York Public Library.
Schedule and information: (212) 922-9393.
PEACE CONCERT, Cathedral of St.
John the Divine, Amsterdam Avenue at 112th Street, Morningside Heights.
Lukas Foss is to conduct the Brooklyn Philharmonic tomorrow night at 7:30 in the annual New Year's Eve Peace Concert.
The concert, which is dedicated to the 50th anniversary of the end of World War II and the liberation of the Nazi concentration camps, will include the premiere of Mr.
Foss's "Elegy for Anne Frank." Information: (212) 316-7564.
BIG APPLE CIRCUS, Damrosch Park, Lincoln Center.
A special New Year's Eve performance, to be followed by a toast and dancing in the ring with circus company members. 9:30 P.M.
Tickets: $35 to $125.
Information: (212) 307-4100 or (212) 721-6500.
"BRANDENBURG" CONCERTOS, Bargemusic, under the Brooklyn Bridge, Brooklyn.
Bach's "Brandenburg" Concertos Nos. 3, 5 and 6; Michael Parloff, flutist; Theodore Arm, Ik-Hwan Bae and Carmit Zori, violinists; Misha Armory, Hsin-Yun Huang and Cynthia Phelps, viola players; Rafael Figueroa, Fred Sherry and Ronald Thomas, cellists; Peter Lloyd, bass player, and Robert Wolinsky, harpsichordist. 7:30 P.M.
Tickets: $100; proceeds are to benefit Bargemusic.
Information: (718) 624-4061.
"CHAMPAGNE BURIAL," Playhouse, 15 Vandam Street, SoHo.
The interactive comedy "Grandma Sylvia's Funeral" to be performed from 9 P.M. to midnight, with dancing, Champagne and appetizers. $45.
Information: (212) 691-1555.
CHINATOWN WALKING TOUR, Adventure on a Shoestring.
The tour will visit various historic sites, including the oldest row house in New York City, the oldest remaining man-made artifact in the city, and the Chatham Club, where Irving Berlin was a singing waiter.
Optional dinner to follow. 6 P.M.
Tour: $5; dinner, $8.
Information and meeting place: (212) 265-2663.
CRUISE INTO THE NEW YEAR, World Yacht Marina, Pier 81, West 41st Street and the Hudson River.
A three-hour cruise, a five-course dinner and dancing to a live party band.
Boarding, 9 P.M.; departure, 10 P.M. $195.
Information: (212) 630-8100.
CHICAGO CITY LIMITS, Chicago City Limits Theater, 1105 First Avenue, at 61st Street.
Comedy troupe members to perform "1994: The Year in Review." Shows at 8 P.M. and 11 P.M., with a party after the late show.
Tickets: $30 for the first show, $40 for the second.
Reservations: (212) 888-5233.
FIREWORKS AT SOUTH STREET SEAPORT, Marketplace, 19 Fulton Street, financial district.
Midnight.
Free.
FIREWORKS AT PROSPECT PARK, Prospect Park Grand Army Plaza. 11:30 P.M.
Free.
Information: (718) 965-8999.
MUSIC BY BACH AND OTHERS, St.
George's Church (Episcopal), 209 East 16th Street, Manhattan.
Bach's Toccata and Fugue in D minor; Liszt's Preludes, arranged for organ; works by Chopin, Rachmaninoff, Gordon and Hundley.
Margaret Morrison, soprano; Kenneth Dake, organist and pianist. 8 P.M.
Suggested contribution: $10.
Information: (212) 475-0830.
MARATHON READING OF "FINNEGANS WAKE," Paula Cooper Gallery, 155 Wooster Street, SoHo.
Nonstop from noon tomorrow through Sunday afternoon.
Free.
Information: (212) 787-8556.
MIDNIGHT RUN AND FIREWORKS, Tavern on the Green, Central Park West at 66th Street.
More than 5,000 runners are expected to participate as fireworks light up the sky.
Sponsored by the New York Road Runners Club. 11:30 P.M.
Information: (212) 860-4455.
TIMES SQUARE.
The 87-year-old ball-dropping tradition starts 11:59 P.M., followed by eight minutes of fireworks, set off in Central Park to be seen in Times Square, balloons and confetti.
New Year's Day
NINETEETH-CENTURY NEW YEAR'S DAY RECEPTION, where the tradition of visiting friends and family and exchanging gifts is celebrated with tours and refreshments.
Sunday, 1 to 4 P.M., at the Old Merchant's House Museum, 29 East Fourth Street, East Village.
Admission: $6.
Information: (212) 777-1089.
MUSIC BY BYRD AND OTHERS, Corpus Christi Church (Roman Catholic), 529 West 121st Street, Morningside Heights.
Byrd's Mass for Four Voices; the motets "Felix Namque Es" and "Beata Virgo"; Gregorian chant.
Choir; Louise Basbas, music director. 11:15 A.M.
Information: (212) 666-9350.
MUSIC BY HANDEL AND OTHERS, St.
Bartholomew's Church (Episcopal), 109 East 50th Street, Manhattan.
At 11 A.M., Bertalot's "Calypso Carol"; Handel's "In Nomine Jesu," and organ music by Bach and Buxtehude.
Choir.
At 4 P.M., Sweelinck's "Hodie Christus Natus Est"; Cornelius's "Three Kings"; Davies's "O Little Town of Bethlehem." Choir; William Trafka, organist; James Litton, conductor.
Information: (212) 751-1616, extension 227.
MUSIC BY BYRD AND OTHERS, St.
Thomas Church (Episcopal), Fifth Avenue at 53d Street.
At 11 A.M., three by Byrd: Mass for Three Voices, "Ecce Advenit" and "Gloria Tibi, Domine." At 4 P.M., Batten's Short Service for Men's Voices; choir; Gerre Hancock, organist.
At 5:15 P.M., organ recital by Quentin Lane.
Information: (212) 757-7013, extension 3003.
THE GAYGGLES, Castillo Theater, 500 Greenwich Street, SoHo.
The improvisational comedy group presents its "Gayggles and Lox" brunch performance.
Bagels, lox and Champagne will be served; show, 3 P.M.
Admission, including brunch: $20.
Information: (212) 941-1234.
POETRY PROJECT'S ANNUAL MARATHON READING, St.
Mark's Church, 131 East 10th Street, East Village.
More than 100 poets, musicians, dancers and artists, to include Jim Carroll, Penny Arcade, Eric Bogosian, Lenny Kaye and Maggie Estep, are to perform and read from their new works. 2 P.M. to midnight.
Tickets: $15; $12 for members.
Information: (212) 674-0910.


For Packers, Life Without Sharpe
The Green Bay Packers had seen it before.
Sterling Sharpe, lightly hit, buckles then falls.
Numb.
"The week before, he was hurt the same way, and then when it happened again last Saturday at Tampa, we knew something big was wrong," said Packers cornerback Terrell Buckley.
"We were standing around him. He said he couldn't feel anything. As a football player, you know what that means. You know it's big trouble."


Art in Review
Farrell Brickhouse  Pamela Auchincloss Gallery 558 Broadway (between Spring and Prince Streets) SoHo Through Jan. 14


John H. Powell Jr. Dies at 63; Led Equal Opportunity Panel
John H. Powell Jr., a former chairman of the Federal Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, died on Dec. 19 in the Veterans Affairs Hospital in Oakland, Pa.
He was 63 and lived in Churchill, Pa.
The cause was a stroke, his family said.


Nathan Daniel, 82, Innovator in Electric Guitars
Nathan I. Daniel, the creator of Danelectro guitars and amplifiers, which offered a point of entry for a generation of would-be rock-and-roll musicians, died on Saturday at Queen's Medical Center in Honolulu.
He was 82 and lived in Honolulu.
The cause was a heart attack, said his son, Howard.


Up-to-Date Clothes, Ahead of Their Time
Fashion presentations today tend to be produced on a giant scale.
Even the introduction of a designer collection for the next season has moved from the intimacy of a manufacturer's showroom to a tent or an amphitheater seating thousands.
The cut or the fabric of an outfit is hardly the selling point, since the details cannot be seen beyond the first few rows.
The music, the choreography and the lighting supersede the clothes.
The mood is that of a Broadway musical.
Those who assemble fashion exhibitions feel similarly compelled to put on the glitz.
It is therefore somewhat astonishing to come upon a small, modest, straightforward presentation of clothes by Claire McCardell, this country's finest designer, at the Parsons School of Design's exhibition center in Greenwich Village.
The clothes have not been gussied up.
They emit an air of reality, as if real people can wear them as they go about their daily lives.
What is most astonishing is the fact that most of the styles are more than 40 years old.
McCardell died in 1958 at the age of 53.


Jaspers Get Around And Block Colgate
The shots went up. The shots kept coming back. And back and back and back.
And so did the memories for Fran Fraschilla.


Noteworthy Connections From France to Russia
As the quest for the perfect thematic programming leads musicians to find increasingly obscure connections between works and composers, certain more obvious and musically workable connections are being overlooked.
Andrew Davis revived one of them on Wednesday evening at Avery Fisher Hall, when he led the New York Philharmonic in a program that showed the kinship between Russian and French music.
The musical accents are distinct, yet because Russian composers tended to look toward France rather than Germany for models, the music often shows traces of a French sensibility, particularly in matters of coloration and lyricism.
Mr.
Davis showed that this influence was not a one-way street.
The exoticism that drives Borodin's "Polovtsian Dances" is mirrored in a more sophisticated way in Ravel's "Bolero," composed about half a century later.
Borodin's vision was of a mythical tribe of nomads in ancient Russia and Ravel's model was essentially Spanish and contemporary, yet both rely heavily on modal, Eastern-tinged melodies.


A Tinkerer Leaves the C.I.A.
With an office overlooking the wooded hills of northern Virginia, the Director of Central Intelligence enjoys a view that should inspire creative reflection, and no topic should have been more on his mind than the role of American espionage after the collapse of the Soviet Union.
Yet in the two years he occupied the director's suite, James Woolsey showed little sign that he could see beyond the cloistered world of an agency overtaken by history.
Mr.
Woolsey's resignation this week was merely ratification of a fatal loss of Congressional and public trust over his handling of the Aldrich Ames case, the most serious betrayal of American intelligence secrets in the cold war.
His gentle disciplining of officials who failed to detect or pursue Mr.
Ames's mercenary work for Moscow, long before Mr.
Woolsey's arrival, may have satisfied the C.I.A.'s internal standards of justice.
But the letters of reprimand did not fit a case that exposed rot at the core of the agency, including lax security, clannish protection of colleagues and blindness to unfolding problems that should have led investigators to Mr.
Ames years before he was caught.


Mexican Trade Won't Gain From Devaluation; Oversold Agreements
To the Editor:
"Mexico's Devaluation: Not So Scary" (editorial, Dec. 24), asserting all is well with the North American Free Trade Agreement, states that "the purpose of trade is not to raise employment -- which the Federal Reserve now controls," but "to steer workers into high productivity jobs."


Miscellany
*
Pepsi-Cola International will sponsor a free concert tomorrow by Rod Stewart in Rio de Janeiro, as part of efforts to promote the re-introduction of Pepsi-Cola to the Brazilian market.


French Bank Seeks Buyer for MGM Theaters in Europe
Credit Lyonnais, the French banking company plagued by losses stemming from financing the 1990 acquisition of Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer, said yesterday that it was seeking a buyer for what had been the studio's European theater chain.
The chain, which has about 125 locations and 500 screens in Britain, the Netherlands and Denmark, was one of the few hard assets left in 1992 when Credit Lyonnais seized control of the studio after Giancarlo Paretti, the Italian financier who acquired MGM, defaulted on loans.


Corrections
A brief report in Business Day yesterday about a decline in the shares of Petrie Stores misstated the company's business.
The company sold its retail chain on Dec. 9 and has no store revenues.
Its major asset is stock in Toys "R" Us Inc.


Melvin Milligan 2d, 71, Lawyer And a Collector of Rare Books
Melvin Lee Milligan 2d, a retired lawyer who collected and dealt in rare books, died on Wednesday at his home in New Milford, Conn.
He was 71 and had lived in Greenwich until recently.
The cause was complications from hemochromatosis, a blood disorder, his family said.


Our Unready Military
Although secretaries of defense have repeatedly proclaimed that readiness is their No. 1 priority, it has declined steadily since the Persian Gulf war.
Readiness covers everything from the proper functioning of weapons, to instructors and training materials, to salaries and benefits, to housing for the armed forces.
But the defense budget has no "readiness" line item.
The closest approximation of the cost of readiness combines several accounts -- operations and maintenance, family housing, military personnel -- which total more than $140 billion in the current, fiscal 1995 defense budget.


Keep in Mind
FIRST NIGHT NEW YORK '95.
Tickets: $15 for adults, covering all First Night events; $5 for children 3 to 12.
Information: (212) 922-9393.
"BASEBALL," the new dance program by Momix portraying some of the moves and myths of the sport, with photographic images simultaneously shown on a scrim at the front of the stage. (A few dances are performed by partly nude female dancers.) Recommended for children 8 and up.
Tomorrow at 2 and 8 P.M. at the Joyce Theater, 175 Eighth Avenue, at 19th Street, Chelsea.
Tickets: $30.
Information: (212) 242-0800.
"APPELEMANDO'S DREAMS," a new children's opera based on the book about a boy whose dreams blow into Drabtown, which exists in his imagination.
At the Vineyard Theater, 309 East 26th Street, Kips Bay; today and tomorrow, 1 and 3 P.M.
Tickets: $12 for adults; $6 for children.
Reservations: (212) 353-3874.
"WILBUR THE CHRISTMAS MOUSE" and "A CHILDREN'S CHRISTMAS CAROL," the first a play about a family whose house is overrun with mice, the latter a takeoff on the Dickens story, with Scrooge owning a toy factory with Santa.
Presented by the Little People's Theater Company, 39 Grove Street, Greenwich Village.
Tomorrow and on Jan. 7 and 8, "Wilbur" at 1:30, and "Christmas Carol" at 3 P.M.
Tickets: $8 for both shows.
Reservations: (212) 765-9540.
"RUBBISH! SHE CRIED," the new Paper Bag Players revue with an eye on the environment and recycling; for ages 4 to 9.
At the Emelin Theater, Library Lane, Mamaroneck, N.Y.
Today at 11:30 A.M. and 1:30 P.M.
Tickets: $12.
Reservations: (914) 698-0098.
TOY TRAINS EXHIBITION, with model trains from 1954, set in a tableau with scenes of President Dwight D. Eisenhower in a Cadillac, a drive-in theater, and an interstate highway; in addition, a toy-train-making workshop.
At the Eli Whitney Museum, 915 Whitney Avenue, Hamden, Conn.
Hours: Wednesdays through Fridays and Sundays, noon to 5 P.M.; Saturdays, 10 A.M. to 3 P.M. (open noon to 5 P.M. on New Year's Day)
; through Jan. 16.
Admission: $2.50 for adults; $1.50 for children.
Information: (203) 777-1833.


Limited
Shares of the Limited Inc. inched up yesterday on the New York Stock Exchange.
The stock of the specialty retailer had been moving steadily downward since mid-December as it became apparent that Christmas apparel sales would be disappointing.


Cable Sale Called Near For Viacom
Viacom Inc. is close to announcing the sale of its cable systems to a group that includes Tele-Communications Inc. for more than $2 billion, people close to the talks said yesterday.
The deal for the systems could include $2 billion of cash as well as Tele-Communications stock, one person familiar with the discussions said.
Viacom officials could not be reached for comment, and executives of Tele-Communications declined to comment.


Program to Help Rape Victims Also Helps Win More Sexual-Assault Cases
A program created here to insure the compassionate treatment of rape victims is securing more convictions for county prosecutors in the sexual-assault cases they try.
The program uses specially trained registered nurses to perform the forensic examinations of rape victims once carried out by emergency room doctors.
And it brings to the treatment of sexual-assault victims the coordinated efforts of medical, law-enforcement and crisis-intervention teams.


Rusk Stayed Calm In a Wrenching Era
To the Editor:
As deputy to Averell Harriman in his quest for a negotiated settlement of the Vietnam War during the early to mid-1960's, I spent hundreds of anxious, frustrating and harrowing hours in the presence of Secretary of State Dean Rusk (obituary, Dec. 22).


Arena Plan Brightens Spirits in Washington
The idea of a new football stadium for the city's Redskins evaporated.
Its Senators baseball team is history.
Its budget is unbalanced.
And thousands of people, fed up with its crime and poor schools, left the District of Columbia for the suburbs last year.
But a ray of hope for the city appeared this week when Abe Pollin, owner of the Bullets and the Capitals, respectively the city's professional basketball and hockey teams, offered to finance a $180 million sports arena in downtown Washington.


U.S. Tells Haitians Held at Guantanamo They Must Go Home
The United States moved today to end its policy of providing safe haven to Haitian refugees, giving Haitians living at the American naval base at Guantanamo Bay formal notice that they would have to go home.
A State Department statement in Creole delivered to the more than 4,400 Haitians at the base in Cuba did not give the Haitians a deadline for their return, but senior Administration officials said they hope all of the Haitians will be back home within weeks.
The statement said those Haitians who agree to go home by Jan. 5 will receive a cash payment of $80 and the offer of a job for two to four months.
Until today, the United States has offered Haitians $16 to return.


Mild Weather Finally Over In Northeast
More wintry weather has finally arrived, just in time to end an unusually lamblike December that was marked by Christmas surfing, frantic snow-making at Eastern ski resorts, and warehouses full of road salt and dormant plows.
After last year's record cold and snowfall, many cities and businesses, especially in the Northeast, took the Farmer's Almanac prediction of another rough winter seriously, loading up on salt and snow shovels.


Gingrich Programs May Find Home on Cable
Tele-Communications Inc., the nation's largest operator of cable television systems, is negotiating to carry several politically oriented cable services, one of which features programs with the incoming Speaker of the House, Newt Gingrich, as its host.
Bob Thomson, a senior vice president at Tele-Communications, said last night that the company planned to put channels with a range of political views on its cable systems around the country.
He said the decision to carry the service with Mr.
Gingrich's programs did not represent "a plot to carry a particular viewpoint."


Sounds Around Town: On New Year's Eve
POP AND ROCK Elliott Sharp
Elliott Sharp, Nick &amp; Eddie, 203 Spring Street, SoHo, (212) 219-9090.
Elliott Sharp, a guitarist who is a fixture on the downtown experimental scene, is to lead a trio that will show his roots.
From 9:30 P.M. to midnight, he is to play jazz standards; at midnight he is to start playing blues.
A four-course dinner and a Champagne toast is $90.
There's no cover at the bar.
PETER WATROUS James Blood Ulmer
James Blood Ulmer and Defunct, Knitting Factory, 74 Leonard Street, TriBeCa, (212) 219-3055.
This New Year's Eve is James Blood Ulmer's sixth at the Knitting Factory, which sounds a bit like a tradition.
The guitarist has recorded with everyone from Ornette Coleman to Art Blakey and Joe Henderson.
His current music, which makes uses of drones and odd tunings, is distinct.
It's hard-rocking, slippery music charged with power, except when he sings.
Defunct is a hard funk-and-noise band that remembers the early 1980's.
The sets start at 10 P.M.
The $20 cover includes a free drink and a Champagne toast.
P.
W.
JAZZ John Hicks
John Hicks, Bradley's, 70 University Place, Greenwich Village, (212) 228-6440.
John Hicks is an articulate, active pianist who always plays as if the present chorus is the last.
He is to be backed by the bassist David Williams and the drummer Victor Lewis, which is an exceptional rhythm section.
It is to be interactive, a three-way musical conversation at its best.
The show is to start at 9 P.M., and $115 buys a five-course dinner and Champagne.
The cover without a meal is $25, with a $20 minimum.
From 1 A.M. to 4 A.M., the cover is $20, with a $15 minimum.
P.
W.
Michael White
Michael White, Village Vanguard, 178 Seventh Avenue South, at 11th Street, Greenwich Village, (212) 255-4037.
Michael White's New Year's shows are becoming a tradition, and they should be.
This clarinetist leads what may be the best New Orleans-style band in jazz.
It's raucous, with tight ensemble parts giving way to the polyphonic group improvisations that bray and holler.
The band invites listeners into a time warp and makes them understand why the music so quickly became the popular dance music of its era.
It traffics in joy.
Sets are at 9:30, 11:30 and 1:30 P.M.
There is a $40 cover and a $20 minimum.
P.
W.
Dennis Jeter Big Band
Dennis Jeter Big Band, Iridium, 44 West 63d Street, Manhattan, (212) 582-2121.
Mr.
Jeter, a trumpeter, leads the Iridium jam session every Monday night, and he has put together a big band to help people dance in the New Year.
The music will start at 10 P.M. and will not be stopping until after 2 A.M.; $150 a person includes a four-course dinner, a bottle of Champagne for each couple and a bagel buffet at 2 A.M.
The $75 cover at the bar allows a listener to drink anything, all night long.
P.
W.
Jimmy Witherspoon
Jimmy Witherspoon, Fat Tuesday's, 190 Third Avenue, at 17th Street, Manhattan, (212) 533-7900.
One of the last of the great blues shouters is to treat an audience to classic stanzas of the blues.
He can have a sweetness to his voice as well, and he's always ready to improvise on jazz standards, all of which come with a blues nastiness to them.
Sets are at 8:30 and 11 P.M. and 1 A.M.
There is a $25 cover charge and a $15 minimum, which will include party favors, at the appropriate moment.
P.
W.
Big Band
George Gee, Metropolis, 31 Union Square West, at 16th Street, Union Square, (212) 675-0851.
George Gee's big band is to be taking both upstairs and downstairs duty, playing for dancers and diners and cocktail drinkers.
Upstairs, for $110, patrons receive a four-course dinner with unlimited Champagne, starting around 8 to 10 P.M. and staying all night.
Downstairs, for $60, one can dance, drink at an open bar and eat hors d'whatevers, starting at 9:30 P.M.
P.
W.
Saxophones and More
Gerry Gibbs, Ravi Coltrane, Mark Turner and John Swana, Smalls, 183 West 10th Street, West Village, (212) 929-7565.
The most intimate and relaxed jazz club in New York offers, for $30, food and drinks (no alcohol is served) and a group that includes two promising tenor saxophonists, Ravi Coltrane and Mark Turner.
That is to start at 10 P.M.; at 4 A.M., Frank Hewitt on piano, Victor Gaskin on bass and Jimmy Lovelace on drums are to come on, and there's music, as usual, until 8 in the morning.
P.
W.
Two Pianists
Hank Jones and Jacky Terrasson, Sweet Basil, 88 Seventh Avenue South, above Bleeker Street, Greenwich Village, (212) 242-1785.
A double bill of the smoothest pianist in jazz, Hank Jones, and this year's sensation, the pianist Jacky Terrasson.
Mr.
Jones is to be here with a group that includes the saxophonist Raph Moore and the trumpeter Tom Harrell; Mr.
Terrasson is to be performing solo.
The show is to start at 9 P.M.
A full dinner, with Champagne and party favors, is $150.
The late show, which starts at 1 A.M., has a $50 cover and a $25 minimum, and includes a Champagne toast.
P.
W.
Mance and Lightsey
Junior Mance and Kirk Lightsey, Cecil McBee and Marcus Belgrave, at Zinno's, 126 West 13th Street, Greenwich Village, (212) 924-5182.
Junior Mance, a bluesy, sophisticated pianist, is to open with a solo set at 6 P.M.
He is to be followed by a trio led by the pianist Kirk Lightsey, including Cecil McBee on bass and Marcus Belgrave on trumpet.
The first show, featuring a full dinner for $29.95, is to start at 6 and end at 9.
The second show, which is to start at 9 or 9:30 P.M., costs $90 and includes dinner and Champagne.
P.
W.
LATIN Tito Puente
Tito Puente, S.O.B.'s, 204 Varick Street, at Houston Street, South Village, (212) 243-4940.
The percussionist and band leader Tito Puente is to spin his sticks over his head, dance a bit, stick out his tongue and egg his orchestra on to bigger and better music.
He's a titan who understands the nexus between music and entertainment, and when he convenes a salsa orchestra, it's hard to find tougher dance music.
The $175 package includes a five-course dinner starting at 8 P.M.; Champagne and breakfast at dawn; $90 includes appetizers, starting at 10:30 P.M., Champagne and breakfast; for $50, one can enjoy the music from 12:30 on until breakfast.
P.
W.
On Broadway
Club Broadway, Broadway at 95th Street, (212) 864-7600.
For $20, one gets some of the better Latin dance music in the city, including the great Conjunto Clasico, the singer and whistler El Canario and the singers Ray Sepulveda and Tito Rodriguez Jr.
It's a bill built for dancing, in a club perfect for dancing on a night made for dancing.
Arrive before 10 P.M.
P.
W.


France Ensnared; However Much It Regrets Its Fate, Paris Is a Party to Algeria's Conflict
With the pace, violence and denouement of an action movie, the obscure civil war in Algeria vaulted into prominence this week when four Algerian rebels hijacked an Air France airliner, killed three hostages and then were themselves slain by French commandos.
But for France, Algeria's former colonial ruler, this victory over terrorism has brought only temporary solace.
France knows the war will go on and, whether it likes it or not, it knows it is a party to the growing conflict between Islamic militants and Algeria's army-backed Government.


Computer Use Indictment Is Thrown Out
Declining to prosecute a computer-age crime with telegraph-era law, a Federal judge in Boston yesterday dismissed an indictment against a student at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology who had been accused of operating a computer system used for distributing pirated software.
The student, David LaMacchia, a 21-year-old electrical engineering and computer science major from Rockville, Md., was indicted in April for using two of the university's computers as secret electronic bulletin boards, where computer users linked to the Internet could trade illegally copied software.





Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.50
8.50
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
4.75
4.75
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
5.43
5.48
2.82
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.45
5.48
2.97
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
6.17
6.23
3.20
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.79
7.79
5.79
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.84
7.83
6.34
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.73
8.70
7.32
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.91
6.90
5.52
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Bowls Here and There, but None for Mixing
On and on they go.
College football's post-season bowl games.
There are 20, not counting all-star games.
Five bowl games have been played, including last night's Copper Bowl.
There are four more games this afternoon and tonight, two tomorrow, two Sunday and seven Monday.
Nebraska and Penn State are the only real candidates for the unofficial national championship, and although each is playing in a bowl game, they can't play each other.
If Nebraska beats Miami in Sunday night's Orange Bowl, it seems certain to retain its No. 1 ranking.
If Nebraska loses and if Penn State beats Oregon Monday in the Rose Bowl in Pasadena, Calif., Penn State seems sure to move up from No. 2 to No. 1.
Nebraska is a slight favorite, Penn State a heavy favorite.


Early Signals From Mr. Pataki
George Pataki's initial appointees are a mix of experience, diversity, friends and -- what else? -- politics.
We and others who opposed his election as New York's governor feared he would be handcuffed by and to the state's junior Senator, Alfonse D'Amato, the politician to whom he is most indebted.
While D'Amato loyalists will have some key slots, the Governor-elect has already drawn on a broader universe of talent to take the state in the direction he wants to go in the next four years.
Among the early selections are two women with a wealth of experience for two particularly important posts -- Patricia Woodworth, Michigan's budget chief and previously Florida's, to harness spending in New York; and Mary Glass, the social services commissioner in Westchester County, to launch welfare reform statewide.


On Stage, and Off
Producers are more squirrelly than usual at this time of year.
These rich tourism weeks are the last chance to store up enough to get through the long, cold January through February slump.


Home Video
For all the talk about CD-ROM and multimedia, home video's plan for next year is as basic as it was this year: to replenish a stream of big movies selling millions of cassettes.
In January there will be "The Mask," in March "The Lion King," in April "Forrest Gump." All will be priced under $25.
While people still rent plenty of movies, they increasingly buy them.
In 1994, the two best-selling titles have been "Jurassic Park" and "Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs," with a combined total of about 40 million copies shipped to video stores.


Frazier Is Picked to Start Painting Cornhuskers' Orange Portrait
Tommie Frazier, the Nebraska quarterback whose season once appeared over because of recurring blood clots in his right leg, was named the starter today for the Orange Bowl game Sunday night when the unbeaten Cornhuskers will try to win a national championship against the University of Miami.
Frazier, who has not played since leaving a game against the University of the Pacific on Sept. 24, will play ahead of Brook Berringer, the starter for seven of Nebraska's 12 victories.


Star-Crossed Celebrities, Generations Later
The big heads of George Foreman and O. J. Simpson floated above a troubled SportsWorld in 1994, looking like the masks of comedy and tragedy or perhaps the advertising blimps of Comeback and Fall.
The resurrection of Foreman from losing thug to teddy bear champion was more surprising than Simpson's fall from grace; there are few second acts in sports and hardly any are fun.
The two men captured our attention in the late 60's, two African-Americans born six months apart, both Western street toughs apparently saved from lives of crime by sports' subculture of violence.
Both were celebrated as establishment answers to the so-called athletic revolution of which Muhammad Ali was the spiritual leader.


Art in Review
Jake Berthot  McKee Gallery 745 Fifth Avenue (at 58th Street) Through Jan. 11


Safety Violations Suspected At House Where Nine Died
Officials investigating a fire that killed nine members of a Haitian immigrant family said today that there appeared to have been zoning and safety violations in the family's wooden house, including at least one illegal apartment.
At least 17 people apparently were living in the house.
But the officials said that even if violations were found, they did not plan on charging the house's owner, Pierre Moise, whose six children and wife, Viviane, died in the blaze Wednesday morning.
Mrs.
Moise's mother and sister also died.


Reporter's Notebook; A Sunny Day in Grozny, Until It Rained Bombs
It was peaceful and sunny in Grozny this morning.
Old women stood quietly in the bread lines.
Men searched for water, fuel and pickles.
Neighbors gathered to chat about the little things: electricity, heat, light.
The usual gang of devoted soldiers stood on the steps of parliament pledging their faith to God and the motherland.
"I'm getting water for my family and the dogs in the building," said Mikhail Parkhomenko, 56, a history professor in a black fedora, a tighly knotted gray tie, and blue and white checked shirt.
He was holding two full pails and was trailed by several mutts who clearly knew a friend when they found one.
He said he needed 8 to 10 buckets a day and he traveled more than a mile to the city stadium to get them.


CHRONICLE
EDWARD and BETTY SCRIPPS are so fond of their doctor, EDWARD C. ROSENOW 3d, that they decided to establish a professorship for him at the Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research in Rochester, Minn.
The Scrippses, who own the Scripps League Newswpapers, have given the Mayo Foundation $1 million for the creation of the Edward W. and Betty Knight Scripps Professorship of Medicine in honor of Dr.
Rosenow.
The doctor, who has been a consultant to NASA and whose patients include Nancy Reagan, is a specialist in thoracic medicine at Mayo.


Nicholas G. Pappas, New York Official And Writer, 66
Nicholas G. Pappas, a writer and former economic development official for New York City, died on Wednesday at New York University Medical Center.
He was 66 and lived in Brooklyn Heights.
The cause was complications after heart surgery, said Bill Neugebauer, a family friend.


No Headline
"Welfare was not meant to be a lifelong program, and we want people to know it. -- REP. BILL ARCHER, Republican of Texas.  [ A1:6 ]


Governor-Elect Forsees Deficit Of $100 Million for This Year
After meeting today with his new budget director and with Cuomo administration budget officials, Governor-elect George E. Pataki said he expects to have to close a deficit of at least $100 million before the state fiscal year ends on March 31.
Both during this year's gubernatorial campaign and after the Nov. 8 election, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo contended that the state would realize a small surplus this year, its third surplus in a row after four years of year-end shortfalls.
He used the expectation of a surplus to promote his credentials as a fiscal manager.


Two Confident Fighters Ready to Take On a New Year; Clinton's Course: Islands of Constants in Ocean of Political Change
As Bill Clinton has struggled to right his Presidency in the grim weeks since Election Day, his advisers say, he has consulted friends old and new, far and wide, and heard them out at all hours of day and night.
But he appears to have listened mostly to the man who has been his chief political strategist for 20 years: Bill Clinton.
If there was any doubt about the President's resolve to keep his job, he removed it today, taking the opportunity of a year-end interview with news-service reporters to declare unequivocally that he would run for re-election and to allow gamely that he was "not worried" about the possibility of a Democratic primary challenge.


Met's Eakins: Beneath Precision, Currents Of Emotion
THOMAS EAKINS (1844-1916), the subject of a small, illuminating exhibition at the Metropolitan Museum of Art, is famous for being neglected.
His status as one of the foremost American painters of the 19th century is a posthumous development; during his life, the unalloyed realism of Eakins's art cost him commissions, prizes and visibility.
His famous masterpiece "The Gross Clinic," a grisly if monumental portrait of Dr.
Samuel David Gross presiding over a lecture and operation, so repelled the selection committee of the 1876 Centennial Exhibition that it was displayed not with other paintings, but among medical exhibits in a hospital.
In fact, while respected by a small circle of friends and artists and revered by his students, Eakins spent most of his career on the margins of the official art world, where he found himself after being dismissed from his prestigious post at the Pennsylvania Academy of the Fine Arts in 1886.
At issue was his unstinting pursuit of anatomical accuracy: he insisted on using completely nude models in classes that included students of both sexes.
His study of the body also included the taking of photographs of nudes for which he, his fellow teachers and his students posed.


Atlanta Journal; Beans and Greens Bow to 'Progress'
In a city of glass towers and theme restaurants, there is a little place on Luckie Street where hungry people can still get a big plate of collards, sweet potato souffle, comfort and joy.
In Thelma's Kitchen, rivers of gravy run through mounds of white rice, the black-eyed peas simmer all day, as God intended, and the fried chicken is almost too good to have been prepared by human hands.


A Rights Movement That Emerges From the Right
To established civil rights groups, Richard A. Samp is an obstruction, at best.
At worst, he is the enemy.
But Mr.
Samp, a conservative public interest lawyer, says he has inherited the mantle that his critics should be wearing.
"I look upon us as bearers of the torch of the civil rights movement," said Mr.
Samp, chief counsel of the Washington Legal Foundation.
"I see us as successors to Martin Luther King and Thurgood Marshall."


Knicks Look to Draft a Free Agent
The Knicks focused their attention yesterday on acquiring a free agent who could help their injury-weakened frontcourt.
With Herb Williams expected to miss four to six weeks after undergoing successful surgery yesterday on his broken left middle finger, the Knicks will sign a player within the next few days to replace Williams on the roster.


Mexican President Outlines Rescue Plan
President Ernesto Zedillo Ponce de Leon moved to take control of Mexico's economic crisis today by outlining an emergency plan to stabilize the economy and announcing the resignation of the Finance Minister who oversaw the devaluation of the peso that led to the collapse of the Government's economic strategy.
Breaking a public silence that had lasted for five days and confounded investors, Mr.
Zedillo told national radio and television audiences of a plan "in which everyone will have to do their part and no one will be exempt from sacrifice."


Haiti Bids au Revoir to Francophilia, Says Yo to G.I. Joe
American soldiers are still patrolling the streets, but now they are being joined by American advisers to Government ministries, American aid workers and American business executives.
Teen-age Haitians from wealthy families, eager to appear trendy, now drive around with their car radios tuned to the American armed forces station that broadcasts here.
For a nation whose language is French-based and which has traditionally identified itself with France and French culture, three months of living under an American military presence has brought about a basic shift in attitude.


Restaurants
Walk in, past the dim bar where pretty people sit on chic stools, past the Malaysian stilt houses with their rope windows, to the waterfall in the back of the room.
Tropical plants hug the walls, and music throbs as tall men wrapped in sarongs weave through the tables with feline grace.
The room is dim, and the sultry air is perfumed with the mingled aromas of ginger, lemongrass and curry.
When the owners of Penang Malaysia Cuisine, a wonderfully authentic Malaysian restaurant in Flushing, decided to take their act to SoHo, they left behind the harsh storefront lighting, the plastic tablecloths and the cash-only policy.
They also abandoned the fish-head soup.
Clearly, June and Stanley Cheah had more in mind than just opening an ethnic restaurant in an upscale area of Manhattan.
They seem to have edited their menu to introduce their country's little-known cuisine in the most appealing fashion.
Penang is the opposite of those Chinatown restaurants where hopeful diners are invariably told "You won't like that" when they order exotic dishes.
The Cheahs want you to love their food, and since opening in early November they have done everything they can to see that you do.


Dessert Lovers Find Heaven on Earth
DESSERT was once the children's course, the sweet nothing at the end of the meal, the reward for a clean plate.
Sophisticated diners were reluctant to acknowledge a passion for sugar, and a loud chorus of "Oh, I rarely eat dessert" was heard nightly in restaurants across New York City.
That was before the dessert revolution put explosive herbs and spices into dishes that had never known anything more powerful than cinnamon, transformed demure pieces of cake into edible sculptures and claimed a whole new territory for the final course.
Dessert, which was once content to amuse people with the occasional pulled-sugar bird or the fanciful frosting of a birthday cake, has changed.
Young pastry chefs are cooking up original desserts that stretch the form far beyond the usual repertory of pies, cakes, puddings and ice creams.
The new desserts are not so sweet and certainly not nothing; they have become the big surprise at the end of the meal.


What Can Be Done About the Scourge of Violence Among Juveniles? The Experts on Different Fronts of the Battlefield Discuss Strategies
Reuben Greenberg  Chief of police Charleston, S.C.
During the daytime, according to state law, children from ages 6 to 17 have got to go to school.
The truancy law gives us the right to stop them whether or not they're engaged in criminal activity.
We pack them up and deliver them to school.
We've delivered 3,200 kids back to school in the three years we've been doing this, some from as far as 50 miles away.


Russia Delivers Mixed Signals on Its Military Campaign
Russian bombers blew up an oil depot near the capital of the secessionist Chechen republic today, but the advance on the city remained gradual, and the Defense Minister said Russian troops would not storm it "in the classical sense."
Although the Defense Minister, Gen.
Pavel S. Grachev, was the first to say that Russian forces would occupy Grozny, the Chechen capital, rather than blockade it, he altered his approach to conform with President Boris N. Yeltsin's promise to spare civilians and limit casualties.


President of Johns Hopkins Planning to Quit Post
The president of Johns Hopkins University, William C. Richardson, will resign next summer to become the president and chief executive officer of the W. K. Kellogg Foundation, the nation's second-largest philanthropic foundation.
Dr.
Richardson, whose academic specialty is health care organization and financing, is leaving Johns Hopkins, a university in Baltimore with a reputation as one of the nation's leading medical and research centers, for a foundation in Battle Creek, Mich., with more than $5 billion in assets that awards most of its grants in higher education, youth development, health care and rural development.
He became the university's president in 1990.


In Skirmish With Unions, Fiat Is Victor
Out away from the sea, where the old town's narrow lanes gradually give way to square high-rises, a splash of graffiti scrawled on a highway overpass reads, "Berlusconi, King of the Thieves."
Silvio Berlusconi once was popular in this Adriatic port in south-central Italy.
In the national elections last March that put Mr.
Berlusconi into office, Termoli voted overwhelmingly for his Forza Italia movement.


New York Bar Avoids Death Penalty Cases
Long a leader in dispatching volunteer lawyers to handle death penalty appeals cases in the Deep South -- known by some as the Death Belt -- the New York bar has slackened off in recent years while the need remains as pressing as ever.
In Texas, for example, the number of condemned inmates without lawyers has dropped in recent months to 46.
But even those who have lawyers may be getting perfunctory representation at best, says Steve Hall, a spokesman for the federally financed Texas Resource Center, which recruits and assists private lawyers in death penalty cases.


Campaign Ad in California Attorney General's Race Had It Right
To the Editor:
Re "How to Clean Up Gutter Politics" (Op-Ed, Dec. 27): Reginald K. Brack Jr. is right about the need for more responsible and informative campaign advertisements.
But it is unfortunate, and instructive, that he mischaracterizes one of the ads he criticizes.


Cult Of Despair
Over the last few years, a distinctive sensibility has cut across American culture -- a fascination with the abject, with the down and out.
This sensibility is not new.
There is nothing more basic to popular notions of bohemia than the romance of the wretched.
But it is more pervasive and more various than ever before.
A primary trait of this cult is a celebration of the masochistic man.
This type is most prominent in popular fiction and film, where he often appears with his sadistic double.
In the last few years, a new "Boy Lit" has emerged, full of stories of damaged men who switch from kindness to killing and back again as if they were channel surfing.
In "Jesus' Son," the writer Dennis Johnson follows addicts, drifters and brawlers; in "Pugilist at Rest," Thom Gunn profiles guys battered by war and boxing.


Art in Review
'Still Life'  Barbara Gladstone Gallery  99 Greene Street SoHo Through Jan. 28


Holiday on Monday
New Year's Day, which falls on Sunday, will be legally observed on Monday.
NEW YORK  GOVERNMENT OFFICES Closed.
POST OFFICE Express Mail and special delivery only; main post office, 33d Street and Eighth Avenue, open.
BANKS Closed.
PARKING Sunday rules in effect.
SANITATION No pickups, street cleaning or recycling.
SCHOOLS Closed.
FINANCIAL MARKETS Closed.
TRANSPORTATION Subways and buses on holiday schedule.
Long Island Rail Road on regular weekday schedule.
Metro-North Railroad on combined Saturday and Sunday schedule.
NEW JERSEY
GOVERNMENT OFFICES Closed.
POST OFFICES Closed.
BANKS Closed.
SCHOOLS Closed.
TRANSPORTATION Rail service on holiday schedule.
Buses on Saturday schedule.
CONNECTICUT
GOVERNMENT OFFICES Closed.
POST OFFICES Closed.
BANKS Closed.
SCHOOLS Closed.
TRANSPORTATION Metro-North on combined Saturday and Sunday schedule.


Pataki Picks Advocate of Managed Care
Governor-elect George E. Pataki yesterday nominated the current health director for Rhode Island, who began a program there to enroll poor people in managed-care programs, to be his health commissioner.
The nominee, Dr.
Barbara Ann DeBuono, 39, who grew up in the Bronx, said Mr.
Pataki was interested in expanding New York's own initiative to enroll some Medicaid recipients in managed-care plans, which generally try to hold down health costs by emphasizing preventive care and assigning patients to a list of selected doctors.
Mr.
Pataki says he expects the approach to save hundreds of millions of dollars in the state's huge Medicaid budget.


Corrections
An article yesterday about a new high-tech bullet misspelled the name of an expert on gunshot wounds who doubted the manufacturer's claims about its effectiveness.
The expert is Dr.
Martin L. Fackler, not Fracker.


Tobacco Acquisition Prompts Brand Shift
The Brown &amp; Williamson Tobacco Company said yesterday that it had reassigned the advertising responsibilities for the American Tobacco Company's brands it acquired last week, withdrawing them from LCF&amp;L in New York, which had handled them for 23 years under their previous owner, American Brands.
The billings were estimated at $35 million to $40 million.
Tom Fitzgerald, a Brown &amp; Williamson spokesman in Louisville, Ky., said the brands would be reassigned to two agencies that handle Brown &amp; Williamson's brands like Capri and Kool: Grey Advertising in New York and Tatham Euro RSCG in Chicago.


Chronic Fatigue Reality
To the Editor:
In announcing a revised definition of chronic fatigue syndrome, the Federal Centers for Disease Control did not question the syndrome's existence (Health page, Dec. 21).


COMPANY BRIEFS
LANDMARK GRAPHICS CORP., Houston, a provider of geoscience information systems, has signed a contract valued at $3.8 million to deliver geocomputing products and services to Gazprom, Russia's largest natural gas company.
MIDLAND CO., Cincinnati, said its transportation unit had completed the sale of 8 towboats and 314 barges to Ingram Ohio Barge Co., a unit of Ingram Industries, for $47 million.


Whistleblower, Out of Job, Wins $4 Million Settlement
A whistleblower who has been unemployed since he quit a $470-a-week job as a New York State social services trainee four years ago and accused his department of misusing Federal funds has won more than $4 million as part of a settlement in which the state has agreed to pay the Federal Government $27 million.
The whistleblower, George Denoncourt, 48, filed the unusual lawsuit -- and won 15 percent of the settlement -- under the Federal False Claims Act, a Civil War statute originally intended to combat war profiteering, but amended in 1986 to encourage whistleblowers to expose modern skulduggery against government.


CHRONICLE
Japan's royal family is producing a lot of potential debutantes -- but no baby prince to carry on the male-only imperial line.
PRINCESS KIKO, the wife of Emperor Akihito's younger son, Prince Akishino, gave birth to her second daughter Thursday, The Associated Press reported.
The baby is the eighth girl in a row to be born into the extended royal family.


Rival Bids for Big H.M.O. In California
Topping off a year of mergers in managed health care, two big California health maintenance organizations have started a billion-dollar bidding war to acquire Health Systems International, which operates one of the biggest publicly owned H.M.O.'s in the West.
Shares of Health Systems jumped 39 percent yesterday, gaining $8.50, to $30.375, in heavy trading on the New York Stock Exchange.


Advanced Micro Devices Wins Round in Intel Fight
The California Supreme Court handed Advanced Micro Devices Inc. a big victory today in its long-running legal dispute with the Intel Corporation over a 1982 technology cross-licensing agreement between the two companies.
The Supreme Court reversed an appeals court decision and upheld an arbitrator's ruling in February 1992 that gave Advanced Micro the rights to all Intel intellectual property needed for the manufacture of microprocessors compatible with the Intel 386 series of chips.


Thai Fire Wasn't Fault Of U.S. Toy Makers
To the Editor:
Bob Herbert, in "Terror in Toyland" (column, Dec. 21), uses the tragedy of a disastrous factory fire in which 188 workers died in Thailand in May 1993 to smear America's toy makers.
The fire that swept through the Kader Industrial Toy Company near Bangkok was a catastrophe, but it was not the fault of the American companies that bought Kader's products.


Empowerment Zone Will Spur South Bronx
To the Editor:
The designation of part of the South Bronx as one of three Federal Empowerment Zones in New York City (news article, Dec. 27) is more than just a chance for improvements at Yankee Stadium or an attempt to keep the Yankees in New York.
The South Bronx empowerment zone will provide employment opportunities for a population desperate for jobs.


Abortion Providers Attempt To Handle Growing Threat
Several years ago, during a wave of anti-abortion protests, Reproductive Health Services, an abortion clinic in St.
Louis, stationed an armed guard at its door.
Last summer, after Paul J. Hill shot and killed Dr.
John Bayard Britton and his escort as they entered an abortion clinic in Pensacola, Fla., the St.
Louis clinic began checking identification to make sure that every visitor was expected.


76ers' Bradley Is Fined
Center SHAWN BRADLEY of the Philadelphia 76ers was fined $4,000 by the National Basketball Association yesterday for hitting KENDALL GILL with a flagrant elbow during Wednesday's game against the Seattle SuperSonics at Tacoma, Wash.


Agony of Chechen Conflict Is Felt Across Border
This two-street town has always been barren.
Just a mile from the border with Chechnya, it has a mosque, a couple of barns and about 30 mud-and-wattle huts.
Until two weeks ago, 300 Dagestani peasants lived here in the bleak flatlands east of Grozny, the capital of the secessionist Chechen republic.


10 Years After: Marino and Montana
It was a different Dan Marino who blew into the West Coast 10 years ago as a brash young man, self-absorbed and brimming with cockiness for Super Bowl XIX.
When the Miami Dolphins' chartered jet touched down on the runway at San Francisco late that January night in 1985, Marino peered into the darkness, flipped his Gargoyle shades down over his eyes and announced, "The Terminator has arrived."
He was just 23 years old, coming off the greatest passing season a pro quarterback has ever had: 5,084 yards, 48 touchdowns, surreal numbers that marked a supernatural season.


INSIDE
Pilot Describes Korea Crash
The pilot released by North Korea described how his co-pilot died, clearing the way to deal with political fallout from the episode.
Page 3.


COMPANY BRIEFS
CIBA-GEIGY A.G., Basel, Switzerland, a chemical and drug company, has completed its purchase of the North American over-the-counter drug business of Rhone-Poulenc Rorer Inc., Collegeville, Pa., for $407 million.
OCCIDENTAL PETROLEUM CORP.,California, completed its acquisition of Placid Oil Co., Dallas, for approximately $250 million.


Freed Pilot Tells How He Was Downed by North Koreans
The pilot who was released by North Korea today has told American investigators that he pulled his co-pilot away from the burning wreckage of their helicopter but that the co-pilot was already fatally injured, Administration officials said today.
The information given by the freed pilot, Chief Warrant Officer Bobby Hall, dispels any notion that the North Koreans captured and then killed the other pilot, Chief Warrant Officer David Hilemon, after their helicopter went down.


RESULTS PLUS
HOCKEY Selanne Scores Winner  Teemu Selanne of the Winnipeg Jets, the National Hockey League's leading scorer in the 1992-93 season, had the clinching goal as the Finnish champion, Jokerit of Helsinki, beat Lada Togliatti of Russia by 4-2 yesterday to win the European Cup in Helsinki, Finland.
It was the second straight year that a Finnish team won Europe's premier club tournament.
TPS of Turku beat another Russian team, Dynamo Moscow, in last year's final.
TPS took third place yesterday, beating Olomouc of the Czech Republic, 8-1.
Selanne, playing on a line with Jari Kurri of the Los Angeles Kings, scored on a power play to foil a comeback attempt by Lada Togliatti in the final period. (AP)
SKIING Schneider Defeated  Urska Hrovat of Slovenia took advantage of a slow second run by Vreni Schneider and handed the Swiss star her first World Cup slalom defeat of the season yesterday in Meribel, France.
It was the second career victory for Hrovat, who was timed in 1 minute 20.15 seconds, for the two runs.
Schneider, who won the first two slaloms of the season, was second at 1:20.24.
Hrovat had the best time of the second heat, 41.01. (AP)


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy  The Internet has made hoaxes and frauds more insidious because of the reach and immediacy offered by the network.
The growing use of unsigned messages over computer networks has spawned a debate about how to prevent abuses without stifling the right to speak freely -- even anonymously.
"Anonymity is power," says a specialist in intellectual-property law, "and I think it will be abused on the Net."  [ Page 1. ]  One cyberspace prank that was widely circulated was a faked Associated Press report asserting that Microsoft was acquiring the Roman Catholic Church.  [ 53. ] Sales of new homes fell 2.5 percent in November.
The housing market is being weakened by higher mortgage rates.  [ 42. ] Markets  Wall Street rang out the year humbler, and perhaps wiser.
A market year that began with traders and analysts confidently predicting that the Dow Jones industrial average would rise above 4,000 ended with the Dow up 1.01 point, at 3,834.44.
The Standard &amp; Poor's 500 index fell 1.89 point, down 1.3 percent for the year.  [ 41. ] Treasury prices declined in a light trading session.
Prices were little changed in the municipal bond market.  [ 51. ] Pork prices rose sharply after a report indicated that hog farmers were planning to reduce the size of their herds.  [ 52. ] The dollar slipped against the German mark and the Japanese yen in thin, preholiday trading.  [ 52. ] International  The United States is threatening China with trade sanctions in an effort to force Beijing to halt abuses of copyright and patent protections.
The proposed sanctions will be disclosed today.  [ 41. ] Mexico's new Finance Minister lacks the political ambitions of his predecessor, which may prove to his advantage as he seeks to regain the confidence of investors.
The new minister, Guillermo Ortiz Martinez, is known as a bulldog administrator, and he takes the helm of an economy battered by the plunge in the peso.  [ 41. ] Companies  Health Systems International is a billion-dollar takeover target.
FHP International has offered $1.69 billion in stock, and Foundation Health has offered $1.55 billion in stock.
Other bids are expected for Health Systems, which has one of the biggest publicly owned health maintenance organizations in the West.  [ 41. ] Advanced Micro Devices won a victory in its long-running legal dispute with Intel over a 1982 licensing deal.  [ 41. ] Merry-Go-Round Enterprises outlined a reorganization plan that would get it out of bankruptcy by the middle of next year.
For those who won't be seeking personal service at Bessemer's oak-paneled offices, the firm has outlined its investment suggestions for the coming year.  [ 39. ] Real estate investment trusts -- REIT's -- have been on an upturn after a roller-coaster year.
Real estate mutual funds, which buy REIT's, were the best-performing fund sector in December.  [ 39. ] Some brokerage firms are lowering fees on wrap accounts, but investors may need to ask for the lower prices to get them.  [ 39. ]


Illness Cancels 'Vita'
Two performances of "Vita and Virginia" were canceled yesterday because Vanessa Redgrave was ill.
A spokesman for the play, at the Union Square Theater, said that Ms.
Redgrave was suffering from bronchitis and might not be able to perform today either.
Ticketholders are asked to call the box office to confirm today's performance.
The number (212) 505-0700.


Agassi Pops the Cork
Besides ringing in 1995 with a career-best ranking of No. 2 in the world and embarking on a world-beating tennis agenda that includes his debut at the Australian Open, the first of the year's four Grand Slams, ANDRE AGASSI is celebrating a contract extension with Nike that links him to the sponsor well into the 21st century.


Police Officers Play Santa


For Deal On Wrap Accounts, Just Ask
They are not advertising it, but brokerage firms are lowering the fees on their popular wrap accounts.
Generally open to people with $100,000 to invest, a wrap account is overseen by a brokerage consultant who analyzes the client's needs and then places the money with an outside money manager.
The lure is the prospect of a top-notch manager who would not normally bother with an account of less than $1 million.


Dogged Doctor for Mexico's Morass
After being passed over for Finance Minister and being forced to watch the man who got the post send the Mexican peso into a tailspin, Guillermo Ortiz Martinez finally has the job he wanted, and all the worries that go with it.
With the resignation on Thursday of Jaime Serra Puche, Mr.
Ortiz, a Stanford-trained economist who was Mexico's under secretary of finance for six years, takes control of an economy battered and thrown off course by the 30 percent devaluation of the peso.


GIULIANI RELIEVED OF AN OBLIGATION ON THE HOMELESS
In a parting favor to Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo yesterday relieved New York City of an 11-year-old obligation to shelter homeless families immediately.
During the last decade, the Koch, Dinkins and Giuliani administrations have all maintained that the requirement was unreasonable and that they could do a better job given more flexibility.
If the new state rule withstands court challenges, it will mean the city can legally leave families to sleep for two nights or more on tables, chairs and the floors of city offices while they wait for shelter and services.


Gunshots Bring Chaos to a Suburban Street
On the sidewalk of Beacon Street on a frigid morning that should have been the carefree start of a holiday weekend, suddenly there was screaming.
The only doctor on duty at the Planned Parenthood clinic today had just given a teen-age patient a local anesthetic in preparation for an abortion when he heard the cries for help.


Yankees Are Stuck With the Tightest Cap of All for Next Season
If the Yankees want to try to sign any major free agents, a pitcher the caliber of John Wetteland, for example, they will have to shed one or more players from their roster to make room under the salary cap.
According to figures compiled by the clubs' Player Relations Committee, the Yankees have only $1,037,388 to spend out of their allotted total of $41,784,133 for player wages under the new salary cap.
That puts them closer to their limit than any of the 27 other clubs.


Gaylord to Sell Cable TV Unit
In a deal that will enable it to charge more for its cable television programming, the Gaylord Entertainment Company announced yesterday that it would sell its cable television systems for $370 million to a joint venture controlled by Charter Communications Inc. and the investment firm Kelso &amp; Company.
The Gaylord systems have 180,000 subscribers in Southern California, North Carolina and South Carolina, giving the deal a value of approximately $2,000 per subscriber, the average price in recent cable deals.
The deal will place Charter, a privately held company based in St.
Louis, in the top 20 of the largest American cable systems, with 850,000 subscribers.
"It was a strategic decision on our part, to refocus our management time on our core business, our cable networks," said Alan Hall, a spokesman for Gaylord, which is based in Nashville.
Gaylord's networks include TNN: The Nashville Network; CMT: Country Music Television, and CMT International.
The company also owns Z Music, three television stations and three radio stations as well as the Grand Ole Opry, Opryland Hotel and the Opryland Theme Park.
Gaylord, which owns 97.1 percent of the cable systems, suffered a loss in the transaction, since it bought the systems for $418 million in 1989.
"But we will have a large book gain, thanks to the amortization and depreciation" of the systems, Mr.
Hall said.
Given Gaylord's 97 percent ownership, the sale price will equal $2,111 a subscriber, said Sharon Armbrust, a telecommunications analyst with Paul Kagan Associates.
"It's an attractive cable price, given the tax-oriented structure of the deal," she said, referring to one of the sale terms, a $170 million note, which has a 10-year maturity, giving Gaylord a tax deferral.
"Charter has risen very quickly to become a major player," she said.
By selling its cable systems, Gaylord will be able to charge other cable operators higher fees for its cable programming.
Under new regulations of the Federal Communcations Commission, the owners of cable-television systems that also produce entertainment must provide it at a uniform rate, which in the case of Gaylord equalled the discounted rates of high-volume, larger cable companies.
The transaction "will eliminate the negative revenue impact on our cable networks, TNN and CMT, from the cable vertical integration rules," said E. W. Wendell, president and chief executive of Gaylord Entertainment.
"We'll be able to charge more in the future," Mr. Hall said.
Gaylord had revenues of $643.6 million in 1992.
Gaylord's balance sheet was restated in 1993, after the company indicated that it was looking for a buyer for its cable systems, which came off the books.
The 1993 income statement showed that revenues in that year were $622.6 million, exclusive of the cable systems.
The deal was announced after the stock market closed.
Earlier, Gaylord's shares ended at $22.75, up $1.25.
Kelso &amp; Company, Charter's partner in the Gaylord deal, is a Manhattan-based leveraged-buyout company.
Kelso and Charter will pay $200 million in cash and a 10-year, $170 million note with an initial interest rate of 12 percent.
In addition, Gaylord will get 15 percent of the net proceeds of the Kelso-Charter joint venture if it is sold, "so that Gaylord will be able to share in the potential upside of this deal," said Jerry Kent, one of the three managing partners of Charter.
Mr.
Kent said Charter has no current plans to sell.
Mr.
Wendell, the Gaylord president, said that the structure of the deal with Charter will "give the company the potential for participating in the growth of a larger, more geographically diverse cable operation," he said.


Author Gingrich Sees the Light
It took him awhile to get there, but Newt Gingrich finally found the right course.
The incoming Speaker of the House announced yesterday that he was giving up a $4.5 million advance for two books from a publishing company owned by Rupert Murdoch, whose enterprises have a huge stake in decisions yet to be made by Federal regulators.
Instead, Mr.
Gingrich will accept a $1 advance and take his chances on the book sales.
Mr.
Gingrich's decision followed complaints from, among other prominent Republicans, the next Senate majority leader, Bob Dole.
According to Mr.
Gingrich, however, the most telling complaint came from an elderly precinct worker in Lancaster, Pa., who said that a lot of people had worked hard for the Republican Party's midterm Congressional victory and that Mr.
Gingrich, one of the main beneficiaries, "should not take advantage of our efforts."


Corrections
The "Answer to Previous Puzzle" published with the crossword puzzle yesterday was erroneous in some editions.
The correct answer for the puzzle published on Thursday, together with the answer for the puzzle published yesterday, appears on page 18.


N.A.A.C.P. Plans to Rehire Most of Staff in Early '95
Seeking to make their way back from the financial brink, the leaders of the N.A.A.C.P. said today that they were extending a staff furlough for another two weeks.
But the officials promised to rehire most of the laid-off workers after the first of the year.
William F. Gibson, chairman of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People, announced that all but 14 of the 88 workers who were furloughed in September would be rehired.
They were told at the time that they would be laid off for two weeks, but, because of the organization's continued financial problems, the September furlough has been extended several times.
The last time it was until Dec. 16.


Repatriation in the Nick of Time
With its belated release of a captured U.S. pilot shot down over its territory, North Korea has defused a crisis that threatened to erode political support in Washington for its just-concluded nuclear agreement with the U.S.
The Clinton Administration displayed admirable restraint in its handling of the case, applying just enough private and public pressure to make Washington's concerns clear, while avoiding the kind of shrill rhetoric that might have scored domestic political points for the President but undercut diplomatic efforts to resolve the crisis.


A Humbler Market Is Cautious About '95
As Wall Street finished its worst year since 1990, stock traders and investors looked to the new year with far less certainty and optimism than they did last New Year's Eve.
And that may be a good thing, analysts say.
Last January, Wall Street professionals were blithely confident that the Dow Jones industrial average would climb to 4,000.
Then the stock market was blindsided by one of the biggest reversals ever in the bond market in February, when the Federal Reserve Board started raising short-term interest rates.


In Speaking of Movies, Is Mr. Gingrich Mixing Up His Metaphors?
Can "Boys Town" really be a favorite movie of Newt Gingrich?
You can understand why, just sticking with the late 1930's, he might not care for "The Adventures of Robin Hood" and that business of taking from the rich and giving to the poor, or "You Can't Take It With You," which could be an argument for a capital-gains tax.
But what about "Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs," with its snappy musical number, "Whistle While on Workfare"?
Give the man credit for a little taste.
Something else must have prompted him to go on the TNT cable network on Thursday night, accompanied by an American flag, to front this creaky weepie about a refuge without bars or guards for clean-cut lads from Central Casting.
Something consequential, like the image of Newt Gingrich.
But he may have miscalculated.


Hailing a New Monarch In the Land of Sweets
The Land of Sweets gained a new monarch on Thursday night when Margaret Illmann made a guest appearance as the Sugarplum Fairy in the New York City Ballet's production of "The Nutcracker" at the New York State Theater.
Last season, Ms.
Illmann's acting and dancing provided the ill-fated Broadway musical version of "The Red Shoes" with some of its few memorable moments.
But this Australian-born ballerina of the National Ballet of Canada is also an admirable exponent of the purely classical repertory.


No Link Found to Connect Abortion Clinic Violence
Four months after Federal authorities opened a broad conspiracy investigation into the deadly violence at abortion clinics, law-enforcement officials said today that they had uncovered no solid evidence of a nationwide plot against clinic workers.
Nor was there any evidence, they said, to link today's killings in Brookline, Mass., to any conspiracy.


Jets' Haley Concentrates On Talent, Not on Size
For the next few days, if not years, Dick Haley, who helped the Steelers build a dynasty in the 1970's, will have a major impact on the direction of the Jets.
Haley, well known and well respected around the National Football League, is the behind-the-scenes Jets player personnel director who has suddenly been given virtual general manager's status because of Dick Steinberg's illness.


Corrections
An article yesterday about civil rights activism by conservative law firms incorrectly described a 1992 decision by the United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia.
The court ruled that the Government could not give preference to women in the granting of radio licenses.
It did not strike down a Federal policy giving preference to members of minorities for these licenses.


Colts Drop Coordinator
NICK NICOLAU became the first off-season casualty of the Indianapolis Colts when he was dismissed yesterday as offensive coordinator.
"We felt a change was necessary," said BILL TOBIN, vice president of football operations.
Nicolau, 61, came to the Colts in 1992 with Coach TED MARCHIBRODA from the Buffalo Bills, where he coached the receivers. (AP)


Felix P. Biestek, 82, Priest and Professor
The Rev.
Felix P. Biestek, a retired professor of social work at Loyola University of Chicago, died last Saturday at the university's Jesuit Residence in Chicago.
He was 82.
Father Biestek, a priest for nearly five decades, spent more than 30 years on the Loyola faculty.
He also was chairman of the committee on accreditation of the National Commission on Social Work.


Pistons' Medical Report
Detroit center OLIVER MILLER underwent surgery yesterday for a fractured right hand and is expected to be out four to five weeks.
Miller had a pin inserted in his right hand.


And the Spoof Begat a News Release, and Another
In the beginning, there was the spoof, and the spoof was good.
"Microsoft Bids to Acquire Catholic Church," read the headline of an authentic-looking Associated Press news wire story that quickly became one of the most widely circulated practical jokes yet in cyberspace.


Small Groups From Each Side To Resume Negotiations Today
Talks to end the hockey lockout are expected to resume today, with small subcommittees from both sides to meet at an undisclosed site.
It will be the first negotiation in the dispute since Dec. 17, when the two subcommittees met for the fourth time of that week.
Neither side would officially announce its bargaining lineup yesterday, the 91st day of the shutdown, which was ordered by Gary Bettman, the commissioner of the National Hockey League, in an effort to win concessions from the union in order to hold down salary inflation.


Too Many Marxisms Mean No Marxism
To the Editor:
As a political activist for more than 40 years and one who is familiar with the thinking and practice of Gus Hall, chairman of the Communist Party, U.S.A., and others mentioned in your Dec. 21 news article on the party's 75th anniversary, permit me to make a few observations.


Volunteers Have Cleaned Vacant Lots for Years
To the Editor:
Re your Dec. 23 news article on Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani's plan to allow corporations to advertise in vacant lots owned by New York City if they pay to clean the lots and turn them into parks and playgrounds:


Greeting 1995 Minus the Ball
For New Yorkers who want to go out on New Year's Eve (and not to Times Square), here is a sampling of activities.
FIRST NIGHT NEW YORK '95 Music, magic, skating, dancing, 11 A.M. to midnight, at various locations in midtown Manhattan. $20; $7 for children 3 to 12; free for children under 3; (212) 922-9393.
PEACE CONCERT Cathedral of St.
John the Divine (Amsterdam Avenue at 112th Street, Morningside Heights).
Lukas Foss is to conduct the Brooklyn Philharmonic tonight at 7:30 in the annual New Year's Eve Peace Concert.
Free; (212) 316-7564.
BRANDENBURG CONCERTOS Barge music, under the Brooklyn Bridge, Brooklyn.
Bach's Brandenburg Concertos Nos. 3, 5 and 6. 7:30 P.M. $100; (718) 624-4061.
FIREWORKS AT SOUTH STREET SEAPORT 19 Fulton Street, financial district. Midnight. Free.
FIREWORKS AT PROSPECT PARK, Prospect Park Grand Army Plaza. 11:30 P.M.
Free; (718) 965-8999.
MIDNIGHT RUN AND FIREWORKS, Tavern on the Green, Central Park West at 66th Street. 11:30 P.M.
Free; (212) 860-4455.


CHRONICLE
ERIC CLAPTON, the rock musician, and a conscientious street cleaner were among 1,200 Britons QUEEN ELIZABETH II recognized today in her New Year's Honors List, Reuters reported.
The honors -- knighthoods, peerages and medals -- are announced in the queen's name, but are made by the government.
Reflecting Prime Minister JOHN MAJOR'S drive to break down Britain's class barriers, the list includes hundreds of ordinary people.


Pataki to Freeze Nonessential Hiring
On the eve of the inaugural festivities in Albany, Governor-elect George E. Pataki yesterday made another round of appointments to the top level of state government and announced that, as one of his first acts as Governor, he would freeze "nonessential" hiring for the rest of the state work force.
Mr.
Pataki said the state's fiscal condition -- made worse by what he said is a $100 million hole in this year's budget -- prompted the need for the freeze.
He said he planned to issue an executive order covering the 230,000-person work force in the first few days of his administration and could not predict when the state would begin hiring again.


We'll Take a Cup of Kindness Yet


Aircraft Maker Offers New Proposal for Lifting Ban on Planes
After proposing a flight change that some safety experts considered inadequate, the maker of a commuter plane that crashed last October in Indiana surprised Federal aviation officials yesterday with a new proposal for lifting a ban on flying its aircraft in icy conditions.
The manufacturer, Avions de Transport Regional, proposed enlarging the de-icing mechanism on the leading edges of the wings of the two planes it makes, the ATR-72 and the ATR-42.
It was an ATR-72 operated by American Eagle that crashed in October, killing all 68 people aboard.


Giuliani's Wall Street Plan Worries Brooklyn Officials
The Giuliani administration's new plan to revitalize the real estate fortunes of Wall Street has provoked concern among political leaders and developers in Brooklyn that an enhanced market in lower Manhattan could imperil Brooklyn's downtown development.
Despite the successful development that has taken place in downtown Brooklyn in recent years -- the $1 billion commercial and academic complex known as Metrotech Center is largely completed and what is done is fully occupied -- nearly half a dozen major development sites in the area remain vacant.
In addition, the project to construct a hotel and office tower remains delayed, and the hope of developing more than 1.2 million square feet of office space at the proposed Atlantic Center has been placed on hold.


French Solo Sailor in Radio Contact


More Colonialism in D.C.
Imagine your outrage if the state where you live were suddenly stripped of representation in Congress, even as that very same Congress dictated how local tax dollars were spent and ran local policy -- right down to garbage collection.
The taxpayers of Washington D.C. don't need to imagine.
Taxation without representation is an insult they live with every day.
The incoming Republican Congress wants to add to this indignity by revoking the District's largely symbolic vote in the House of Representatives' Committee of the Whole.
That is a colonialist idea.
Washingtonians and their Congressional Delegate, Eleanor Holmes Norton, are right to be fuming.


Heralding the New Year, in the TV Age


Quarterback at Miami Finishing a Bumpy Ride
The late-night ride of Frank Costa does not inspire many memories.
There was the constant pain from all those demands and all that frustration.
This was last season, and Costa had inherited the quarterback position at the University of Miami from Gino Torretta, a Heisman Trophy winner.
Miami had lost at Florida State, and Costa had lost both his starting job and membership in an exclusive club.
He had to get away.
"I just took off in my car for no reason," Costa said.
"Just to get out of the house and get some air. I ended up driving and not really thinking about it."


Gingrich Gives Up $4 Million Advance On His Book Deal
Responding to criticism from both Republicans and Democrats, the incoming House Speaker, Newt Gingrich of Georgia, today announced that he would forgo a $4.5 million book advance to avoid the appearance of cashing in on his party's victory in the November elections.
Mr.
Gingrich, who had earlier dismissed criticism of the advance for two books on conservative ideas as "silly," today defended the legality and ethics of the proposed contract.
But he said he did not want to do anything that might detract from the historic Republican electoral gains and harm his party's ambitious legislative agenda.


Gunman Kills 2 at Abortion Clinics in Boston Suburb
A gunman dressed all in black stalked into two abortion clinics on the same street here this morning and started shooting, killing two receptionists and wounding five other people.
"Is this the Preterm clinic?" the gunman asked calmly at the second abortion center, stunned witnesses said.
Then he reached into a duffel bag, pulled out a rifle and opened fire.


Rebound Bolsters Investors In REIT's
INVESTORS in real estate stocks have developed a case of whiplash this year.
On top of three years of double-digit gains -- fueled largely by record low interest rates -- the stocks cruised upward in the first half of 1994 even when rates began to rise.
Their strength belied the conventional wisdom that the category was sensitive to interest rates.


The Italian President Rules Out Elections
In a setback to Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi, President Oscar Luigi Scalfaro today ruled out early elections to resolve the Government crisis created by Mr.
Berlusconi's resignation.
Reporting on consultations with political leaders this week, Mr.
Scalfaro said a majority of the parties in the present Parliament said "no to immediate elections."


UConn Has Little Trouble In Battle of the Huskies
Two minutes before the game began, Connecticut Coach Jim Calhoun walked down the side court to say hello to Dave Leitao, his Northeastern counterpart.
Leitao hugged Calhoun, his mentor the previous 15 seasons when he was a star player and later an assistant coach.
Then this occasion became all business and the Connecticut Huskies (7-0) made short work of the Huskies (5-4) from Boston and the North Atlantic Conference.
A blizzard of steals, turnovers and breakaways, almost all in UConn's favor, led to an 88-70 victory for the home team, which is ranked No. 8 nationally in this week's Associated Press poll.


Bond Prices Off on Mixed Economic News
Treasury prices fell in a shortened session yesterday, bringing down the curtain on one of the market's worst years in decades.
A report indicating strong economic growth, coupled with a weak dollar, prompted investors to sell yesterday.
The price of the 30-year bond fell 12/32 , to 9524/32 .
Its yield, which moves in the opposite direction from its price, rose to 7.87 percent, from 7.84 percent Thursday.


Beliefs
For Eva Schwartz, the biggest event of 1994 was that the world did not end in September.
Ms.
Schwartz, a chipper lady with a well-developed taste for Hungarian blintzes, appeared in this column last Aug. 20, describing her unwavering confidence in Harold Camping, a radio evangelist whose book "1994?" marshaled 500 pages of calculations to demonstrate that God had almost certainly scheduled the Day of Judgment for sometime between Sept. 15 and Sept. 27.
Three months past that deadline, Ms.
Schwartz has lost none of her chipperness, none of her faith in the imminent coming of Jesus and none of her admiration for Mr.
Camping.


Poor Schools Avert Seizure By New Jersey
In November, Atlantic City became the newest member of a seemingly ever-expanding club: New Jersey school districts at risk of being seized by the state.
Every district on the list is urban, as are the two school systems already under state control -- Jersey City and Paterson.
And with Newark on the verge of being taken over, New Jersey might seem to be moving steadily toward the day when Trenton will pilot every urban system in the state.


Corrections
An article yesterday about President Clinton's advisers misidentified the home state of Dick Morris, a political consultant and pollster who worked on Mr.
Clinton's campaigns for governor.
He is based in Connecticut, not Arkansas.


No Headline
Rabbi Samuel J. Fox, a former president of the Massachusetts Council of Rabbis and of the Orthodox Rabbinical Council of Greater Boston, died on Monday in Beth Israel Hospital in Boston.
He was 75 and lived in Lynn, Mass.
He died after a long illness, said his son, Joseph.


Corrections
An obituary on Dec. 20 about Peter Hebblethwaite, a British Vatican scholar, papal biographer and former priest, misidentified the American publication to which he contributed.
It was the National Catholic Reporter, not the National Catholic Register.
The obituary also misstated the date of his ordination.
He was ordained in 1963, though he joined the Jesuit novitiate in 1948.


No Headline
"He just started shooting and shooting and shooting. He was very angry." -- DEBBIE GAINS, describing one of the abortion clinic attacks in Massachusetts.  [ 1:5 ]


Syria and Israel Said to Conduct Talks in Private
Syria and Israel have held private, high-level peace negotiations under American sponsorship in Washington for the last six months in an effort to break their deadlock, senior American and Middle East officials said today.
The face-to-face talks shifted to an even higher level last week, when the Army Chiefs of Staff of both countries met for the first time in publicly announced meetings in Washington, capped by a private 40-minute session at the White House with President Clinton.


TRANSACTIONS
Basketball National Basketball Association  NBA -- Fined Philadelphia 76ers center Shawn Bradley $4,000 for hitting Seattle SuperSonics guard Kendall Gill with an elbow during a game Wednesday night.
DETROIT PISTONS -- Placed Oliver Miller, center, on the injured list.
Signed Negele Knight, guard, and Mike Peplowski, forward.
SAN ANTONIO SPURS -- Acitvated Willie Anderson, guard, from the injured list.
Placed Chris Whitney, guard, on the injured list.
Football National Football League  INDIANAPOLIS COLTS -- Fired Nick Nicolau, offensive coordinator.
JACKSONVILLE JAGUARS -- Signed Dexter McNabb, fullback.
NEW ENGLAND PATRIOTS -- Signed Leonard Ray Jr., defensive end, to the practice squad.


Rebel in Caucasus Said to Offer Cease-Fire if Russians Withdraw
The president of the rebellious Chechen republic reportedly sent a telegram today to President Boris N. Yeltsin proposing a New Year's Eve cease-fire from 8 P.M.
Saturday if Russian troops begin withdrawing from the region at the same time.
"I am confident that your acceptance of this proposal will open constructive possibilities to settle the most complicated problems," the Postfactum and Itar-Tass news agencies quoted the secessionist leader, Dzhokhar M. Dudayev, as saying.


CHRONICLE
Debutantes may be scarce in Palm Beach, Fla., where the Palm Beach Opera Debutante Cotillion was canceled this year, but they were out in force in New York on Thursday night.
Before 600 guests in the Waldorf-Astoria's Grand Ballroom, 27 young women continued the custom of being "introduced" to so-called society at the 41st annual International Debutante Ball, which benefits the Soldiers', Sailors' and Airmen's Club.


New Year's Eve: Sizzle and Fizzle; Adding Strobe Lights And Confetti Cannons In Times Square
Miami lowers an orange, Atlanta drops a peach, Cleveland raises something (actually, a bicentennial ball).
And it's all on television, crowding in on the granddaddy of New Year's Eve celebrations, at Times Square, U.S.A.
Five years ago, the organizers of New York's party decided that competition was cutting in on their turf: cameras just didn't seem to dally long enough on the crossroads of the world; crime was a problem, and so was image.
The celebration had become a spectacularly besotted event.
In the mid-80's, some Times Square buildings were threatening to drop their own balls to jumpstart the flagging celebration.


State Assails Mistreatment By Hospital In Rape Case
The New York State Health Department has criticized Woodhull Medical Center in Brooklyn for a failure to provide "considerate and respectful care" to a rape victim who was left unattended for two hours in October, wearing only a hospital gown, in an emergency room where handcuffed male prisoners were also awaiting treatment.
The report by the department comes just days before a state law goes into effect setting new standards for the way hospital staffs treat victims of sex crimes.


British Answer to Rap
For decades, popular music has often evolved through a strange cultural exchange between America and England.
Beginning with the Beatles and the British invasion and on through punk, new wave and techno, English musicians have picked up on an underappreciated style of music in America, taken it home, reshaped it and brought it back to the United States as something new and influential.
But in the more than 15 years since America's first hip-hop single, England has yet to produce a significant rapper.
It has, however, recently produced its own version of hip-hop: a popular inner-city music known as jungle, which was performed live on Wednesday night at the Cooler in Greenwich Village.
Top English M.C.'s like U.K.
Apachi, Gunsmoke and M.C.
Det performed alongside vanguard disk jockeys at the party, a celebration of the start of Jungle Sky, which claims to be the first jungle label in the United States.
The result was a bit of confusion, as is always the case when an audience is presented with something new, and a lot of interesting music.


Drumheller Journal; Rapturous Over Raptors at Canada's Jurassic Park
With a practiced eye, Dr.
Philip J. Currie negotiates the eroded hills, halts at a clearing of weathered sandstone and picks up what appear to be several stones.
In fact, they are the fossilized bone fragments of a dinosaur.
Dr.
Currie thinks the shards -- brittle, lightly striated, too small to be of any scientific value -- probably came from the vertebrae of a duck-billed, plant-eating hadrosaurus.


Mother's Love and Science Dispel a Black Cloud
FOR Connie Lessoff, who is 61, and her son David, who is 35, this has been the best of years, one without the depressions that had tormented the young man for so much of his life.
"It's a miracle," Mrs. Lessoff said. "It was hell and now both of us are out of hell."


Romance Getting in Trouble, In Blunt and Adamant Punk
The songs that Slant 6 performed on Tuesday night at the Knitting Factory were pared to the bone.
A single line from Myra Power's bass, a parallel one on Christina Billotte's guitar and a terse thump and rumble from Marge Marshall's drums framed vocals by Ms.
Billotte or Ms.
Power.
When Ms.
Billotte switched to quick-strummed punk power chords, the songs seemed almost overflowing with musical information.
In the current punk-rock revival, most bands have picked up punk's rambunctious noise.
But punk also had an Apollonian wing that tried to distill the music down to essentials: bands like Wire and early Talking Heads, who wanted their songs incisive rather than overpowering.
Slant 6 is closer to Wire; the tone is blunt and adamant, and the songs don't bother with such luxuries as choruses or guitar solos.
But the songs are epigrammatic and crisply memorable, with melodies in both vocal lines and guitar riffs.


Learning Too Late the Cruelty of the Streets
Rudy Meinecke was a nice kid, a quiet, somewhat gullible middle-class teen-ager, say those who know him -- too nice for the grungy world of the homeless street youth he fell in with.
Three months after descending into that world, Mr.
Meinecke, 17, is lying in the intensive-care unit of a hospital here, in poor but stable condition.


New Coach at Navy Comes From Utah State
CHARLIE WEATHERBIE, who led the Utah State football team to its first bowl victory ever, is the new head coach at Navy, officials at the academy said yesterday at Annapolis, Md.
Weatherbie will replace GEORGE CHAUMP, dismissed this year after going 14-41-0 in 5 seasons, including 2 straight 1-10 years.
Chaump was discharged the day after the Midshipmen lost to Army, 22-20, Navy's third loss in a row to its archrival.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 2-5  MISSING BOSNIANS  The question of the missing in Bosnia has long been overshadowed by the war itself, but now it is coming to the forefront in negotiations.
A special report tells the story of one family's struggles.  1


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.50
8.50
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
4.75
4.75
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
5.50
5.49
2.85
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.54
5.45
2.99
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
6.19
6.17
3.19
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.82
7.79
5.79
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.87
7.84
6.34
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.78
8.73
7.32
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.92
6.91
5.52
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Surely, We Can Improve on Trial by Jury
To the Editor:
Dec. 23 letters by Gerry E. Feinberg and Benjamin Brafman, both lawyers, point out two flaws in our system of trial by jury -- hardship to jurors and lengthy trials.
These are not the only problems, nor the worst.


Claims for New Bullets Need a Lot of Testing; Civilized Alternative
To the Editor:
"Why My Right to Own a Gun Must Endure" (letter, Dec. 27) by Thomas J. Snow is based on two absurd and fallacious propositions.


At Rowland Inaugural, A Grab Bag of Politics
When John G. Rowland takes the oath of office as Governor of Connecticut on Wednesday, the state will continue an era of mix-and-match politics begun by the election of Lowell P. Weicker Jr. as an independent four years ago.
Like Mr.
Weicker's swearing in in 1991, Mr.
Rowland's will follow those of several Democratic officials, for the only other Republicans to win statewide offices besides Mr.
Rowland and his Lieutenant Governor, Jodi Rell, is the new State Treasurer, Christopher Burnham.


Holiday on Monday
New Year's Day, which falls on Sunday, will be legally observed on Monday.
NEW YORK  GOVERNMENT OFFICES Closed.
POST OFFICE Express Mail and special delivery only; main post office, 33d Street and Eighth Avenue, open.
BANKS Closed.
PARKING Sunday rules in effect.
SANITATION No pickups, street cleaning or recycling.
SCHOOLS Closed.
FINANCIAL MARKETS Closed.
TRANSPORTATION Subways and buses on holiday schedule.
Long Island Rail Road on regular weekday schedule.
Metro-North Railroad on combined Saturday and Sunday schedule.
NEW JERSEY  GOVERNMENT OFFICES Closed.
POST OFFICES Closed.
BANKS Closed.
SCHOOLS Closed.
TRANSPORTATION Rail service on holiday schedule.
Buses on Saturday schedule.
CONNECTICUT  GOVERNMENT OFFICES Closed.
POST OFFICES Closed.
BANKS Closed.
SCHOOLS Closed.
TRANSPORTATION Metro-North on combined Saturday and Sunday schedule.


Extra Effort By Ewing Puts Knicks Over Top
It has come to this for the injury-depleted Knicks: They have to struggle to beat the Minnesota Timberwolves.
They'll take it, though.
With power forward Charles Oakley (toe surgery) and the backup center Herb Williams (finger surgery) out for at least the next month, Patrick Ewing stepped up again tonight, just as he did Wednesday at Madison Square Garden during the Knicks' victory over Detroit.


New Year's Eve: Sizzle and Fizzle; Partying at Home If Partying at All: Who Needs Crowds?
Just last year, Jed Feuer had fistfuls of invitations for New Year's Eve parties where the guests stayed until well into the new year, huffing and puffing on noisemakers, hurling confetti at each other and guzzling glass after glass of champagne.
This year, he has received not a one. And tonight, he will welcome 1995 at home, alone.


Lost in War: A special report.; One Bosnian Family, Torn Apart and Scattered
The John P. Fisk fish restaurant here is a bustling place where herring is served with brisk Scandinavian efficiency.
Its clientele is affluent, its waiters good-humored.
So when the uncontrollable sobbing of Ermin Sestovic begins, his anguish is doubly shocking.
Mr.
Sestovic is a Bosnian Muslim, a refugee in Sweden.
At a recent lunch, he was recalling his father, Ruzdija Sestovic, who has disappeared.
This disappearance, after arrest by Serbian nationalists more than two years ago, has spawned a terrible grief, more intractable than bereavement, because it is tinged with a tenuous hope.


Without Big Guns, The Nets Go Quietly
The Nets have been vulnerable even with Kenny Anderson and Derrick Coleman in the lineup this season.
Without both All-Stars tonight against the Indiana Pacers, they were downright overmatched.
Anderson was sitting on the bench in civilian clothes nursing an assortment of ailments.
Coleman was sitting at home in New Jersey nursing his injured shooting hand.
And the Nets were sitting ducks as they suffered their fourth consecutive setback, 96-79, their lowest point total of the season.


METRO DIGEST
CUOMO LIFTS RULE ON HOUSING HOMELESS In a parting favor to Mayor Giuliani, Governor Cuomo relieved New York City of an 11-year-old obligation to immediately shelter homeless families.
If the new state rule withstands court challenges, it will mean the city can legally leave families to sleep for two nights or more on the tables, chairs and floors of city offices while they wait for shelter.
In the last four years, the city has routinely failed to place thousands of families as quickly as the state required, and as a result, state courts have fined it more than $5 million.
Page 1.
NEW YORK CITY  BROOKLYN WORRIES ABOUT DEVELOPMENT The Giuliani administration's plan to revitalize the real estate fortunes of Wall Street has provoked concern among political leaders and developers in Brooklyn that an enhanced market in lower Manhattan could imperil Brooklyn's downtown development.
Despite successful development in recent years, nearly half a dozen major development sites in the area remain vacant.
Page 29.
STATE CRITICIZES HOSPITAL IN RAPE CASE The New York State Health Department has criticized Woodhull Medical Center in Brooklyn for failing to provide "considerate and respectful care" to a rape victim who was left unattended for two hours in October, wearing only a hospital gown, in an emergency room where handcuffed male prisoners were also awaiting treatment.
Page 29.
REGION  PATAKI HIRES MORE OFFICIALS On the eve of the inaugural festivities in Albany, Governor-elect George E. Pataki made another round of appointments to the top level of state government and announced, as one of his first acts as Governor, a freeze on nonessential hiring for the rest of the state work force.
Page 28.
CUOMO: SELF-CONTRADICTORY TO THE END Mario M. Cuomo left the governor's office much as he arrived 12 years ago, delivering a homily about the "family of New York" and displaying the contradictory impulses that made him both the most inspiring and most exasperating of state leaders.
Page 28.
ASSURANCES SOUGHT ON DEATH PENALTY A group of lawyers asked Governor-elect Pataki to insure that New York's death penalty legislation will exempt the mentally retarded from execution, guarantee a competent defense for the indigent and minimize the influence of racial discrimination.
Page 28.
A TRADITION CONTINUES IN CONNECTICUT When John G. Rowland takes the oath of office as Governor on Wednesday, Connecticut will continue an era of mix-and-match politics begun by the election of Lowell P. Weicker Jr. as an independent four years ago.
Page 30.
FOUR SLAIN AT HARTFORD HOUSING PROJECT Four people were found slain in two apartments at opposite ends of a Hartford housing project.
Page 30.
HOUSE WHERE 9 DIED HAD SMOKE ALARMS The house where nine people died in a fire in Orange, N.J., had operable smoke detectors, city officials said.
Page 30.
About New York by Michael T. Kaufman...29  Neediest Cases...29  Holiday schedule...31


Computer Jokes and Threats Ignite Debate on Anonymity
The news release carried a startling announcement: the Microsoft Corporation had agreed to acquire the Roman Catholic Church in exchange for "an unspecified number of shares of Microsoft common stock."
The release, distributed in the guise of an Associated Press news article to thousands of computers around the world, was a prank, its anonymous mastermind untraceable.
But soon after Rush Limbaugh read it on his national television program, the company found itself fielding calls from outraged viewers.


Cuomo Ends an Era With a Message
Mario M. Cuomo left the Governor's office today as he arrived 12 years ago, delivering a homily about the "family of New York" and displaying the contradictory impulses that made him both the most inspiring and most exasperating of state leaders.
As in his first gubernatorial inaugural on Jan. 1, 1983, Mr.
Cuomo used a news conference today to emphasize the concepts of inclusiveness and interdependence, ideas that he clearly feels are threatened by the ascendancy of Republicans in Albany and Washington.


Corrections
The Pop Life column on Thursday misstateed the sales of the recording "For the Cool in You" by the musician Babyface.
It has sold more than two million copies, not 200,000 copies.
The column also misstated the former affiliation of a musician who sampled the work of Negativland in a recording of his own.
Holger Hiller used to be a member of Palais Schaumburg, not Gong.


New York's Courts, Still in Disarray
Three weeks ago the Justice Department declared that three New York City boroughs were choosing their judges in a racially discriminatory way, in violation of the Voting Rights Act.
Now a contrary -- and overriding -- finding has been issued by a three-judge Federal District Court in Washington.
That gives the new Governor and Legislature time to formulate fundamental changes in the deeply flawed process by which judges are elected throughout the state.
The basic flaw in the elective system is that it falsely pretends to let the people choose their trial judges.
The real choices are made by boss-driven nominating conventions, and voters must choose among candidates whose qualifications they cannot know.
On top of that the Justice Department, empowered to pre-clear voting changes in Manhattan, the Bronx and Brooklyn, found that minorities were especially hurt because their access to the nominating process was even more restricted than that of whites.


The Neediest Cases; Picking Up Change, and Maybe Somebody's Future
When she roams the city streets and subway stations, Arline M. Rubin keeps her head down and her eyes fixed on the ground.
As she walks, Ms.
Rubin is not ducking a biting wind or entertaining deep thoughts.
She is combing the pavement for coins to send to The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund.


Judge Rejects Computer-Crime Indictment
Declining to prosecute a computer-age crime with telegraph-era law, a Federal judge in Boston on Thursday dismissed an indictment against a student at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology who had been accused of operating a computer system used for distributing pirated software.
The student, David LaMacchia, 21, an electrical engineering and computer science major from Rockville, Md., was indicted in April.
He was accused of using two of the university's computers as electronic bulletin boards where computer users connected to the Internet could trade illegally copied software.


Strict Rules on Death Penalty Are Urged by Lawyers' Group
A coalition of prominent lawyers, some of them fierce opponents of capital punishment, asked Governor-elect George E. Pataki today to insure that New York's death-penalty legislation will exempt the mentally retarded from execution, guarantee a competent defense for the indigent and minimize the influence of racial discrimination on convictions and sentencing.
The request, issued in a letter sent to Mr.
Pataki and to legislative leaders, is significant because it demonstrates that many opponents of the death penalty have abandoned hope that the death penalty can be defeated once Mr.
Pataki takes office on Sunday.
Rather than arguing against capital punishment, they are fighting to amend the legislation to insure that it will be administered fairly to minorities, the poor and the disabled.


Rape Victim's Care In Hospital Assailed
The New York State Health Department has criticized Woodhull Medical Center in Brooklyn for a failure to provide "considerate and respectful care" to a rape victim who was left unattended for two hours in October, wearing only a hospital gown, in an emergency room where handcuffed male prisoners were awaiting treatment.


Claims for New Bullets Need a Lot of Testing
To the Editor:
David Keen, inventor of the Black Rhino, a fragmenting polymer bullet that he claims can pierce armored vests, has announced that the company he heads will delay production of the bullet "until some of the controversy can settle out" (news article, Dec. 29).
He did not say whether or not he would delay manufacture of the Rhino-Ammo, a similar but non-armor-piercing bullet.


Bridge
Tournament players rarely bestir themselves early in the morning, but they must do so today at the conclusion of the Winter Regional Championships of the Greater New York Bridge Association at the Vista Hotel.
Play in a variety of Swiss Teams -- Open, Stratified and Senior -- begins at the unaccustomed hour of 10 A.M., allowing plenty of time for New Year's Eve festivities.
Winners of major events played Wednesday and Thursday were:


Marriage Laws Protect Israel's Jewish Identity
To the Editor:
Using incendiary and wholly inaccurate terms like "religious untouchables" to describe Jews prohibited by Jewish law from marrying certain other Jews (news article, Dec. 23) smells of malice.
Jewish law has, for millenniums, limited marriages between certain people, no less than most societies do for incest and bigamy.
While many may opt out of adherence to those restrictions, the strength of the Jewish people is rooted in our adherence to the Torah, difficult as its immutable laws sometimes seem.


End of an Era


Desk Jobs End in Violent Death for 2 at Clinics
Shannon Lowney, the Planned Parenthood clinic receptionist who was killed in one of the two abortion clinics attacked here today, was "just a terrific 25-year-old kid," one of her colleagues said.
Susan Newsom, a vice president of Planned Parenthood of Massachusetts, called Ms.
Lowney "sweet and smart and attractive, a wonderful person."


Transfusions for Jockey
ARCO CASTANEDA, a jockey who suffered multiple skull fractures in an accident Monday at Bay Meadows, was listed in serious but stable condition yesterday at Mills Hospital in San Mateo, Calif.
Castaneda also broke his left clavicle and left ankle.
Castaneda is conscious and alert, but he is partly paralyzed on the right side of his face.
Castaneda was being checked for internal bleeding, because he has needed repeated transfusions since arriving at the hospital, according to a track spokesman.


Creditors Accept Plan On Retailer
Merry-Go-Round Enterprises Inc., the troubled retailer of trendy fashions, said yesterday that its creditors had reached an agreement in principle on a reorganization plan that would get the company out of bankruptcy protection by the middle of next year.
Analysts were surprised by the proposed plan.
Thomas C. Shull and James Kenney, the two turnaround specialists who have been serving as acting chief executive and chief operating officer, respectively, had previously indicated that they thought Merry-Go-Round would not be prepared to emerge from bankruptcy until early 1996.


With Hope and Caution, U.N. Is Trying to Extend the Cease-Fire in Bosnia
Warring factions in the conflict that has convulsed Bosnia and Herzegovina for 33 months continued today to inch toward a four-month cessation of fighting, which United Nations mediators hope will be a prelude to a political settlement of the war.
Seeking to conclude the accord by this weekend, the senior United Nations commander, Lieut.
Gen.
Sir Michael Rose, met in Sarajevo with the Vice President of Bosnia, Ejup Ganic, then traveled to nearby Pale for talks with Bosnian Serb leaders.


Terpsichore Graces a Rare Cantata
Another modest New York tradition may have been born on Thursday evening, when the Artek Baroque Orchestra presented a staged version of Alessandro Stradella's Christmas cantata "Ah! troppo e ver," at the Kaye Playhouse.
Coupled with concertos by Arcangelo Corelli and Giuseppe Tartini, it made for perhaps the most enterprising seasonal concert of the year.
Artek, a 10-year-old period-instrument group directed by Gwendolyn Toth, a keyboardist, gave a good, solid account of the cantata.
The singers were familiar from its past performances, notably Jennifer Lane as the Virgin Mary, Jessica Tranzillo as an Angel and Paul Shipper as Lucifer. (This Christmas tale covers all the bases.)


In South Korea, Uneasiness Over U.S. Dealings with North
While formally welcoming his release, many South Koreans expressed skepticism today at assertions by the United States that no bargain was struck with North Korea to win the freedom of a captured helicopter pilot.
Always uneasy when the United States deals directly with the North, several South Korean policy experts and commentators suggested that North Korea had exploited the downing of an American helicopter to open a new channel of communications with the United States to the exclusion of the South.


Sports of The Times; An Attempt To Foul Out Underclass
DURING the University of Arkansas's drive to the national championship last spring, Coach Nolan Richardson used the winners' podium as a pulpit.
He extolled the virtues of opportunity, and condemned college presidents bent on passing regulations he felt would have a disastrous impact on some women, many minority group athletes and low-income whites.
Eight months later, as college football enters its final weekend and college basketball shifts into high gear, the fierce tug-of-war over access to higher education by athletes has intensified.
On Jan. 9, at the National Collegiate Athletic Association convention in San Diego, the membership will vote to adopt, rescind or modify new academic standards for athletes.


