THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Press; At a Meeting of Minority Journalists, Two Starting Points on Political Correctness
ON a hot topic at the convention of minority journalists here last week, there were two ways of looking at the way news organizations cover the world.
View No. 1: The news media are paralyzed by political correctness and can no longer tell the truth.
Robert L. Bartley, the conservative editor of The Wall Street Journal, who runs its editorial page, said political correctness "is peer pressure to enforce a certain mindset among the educated classes."


Results Plus
SOCCER Akers-Stahl Shows Why She's the Finest The best female soccer player in the world gets tired walking to her car.
So 32 minutes of play in yesterday's Chiquita Cup match in Fairfax, Va., felt like amarathon to Michelle Akers-Stahl.
"I'll probably sleep 12 hours tonight," shesaid after the United States beat Germany, 2-1, in a game that shouldn't havebeen that close.
Thirty-two minutes was enough for Akers-Stahl to score whatproved to be the game-winning goal, a perfectly placed 28-yard direct kick shetook in the game's 29th minute.
Akers-Stahl is afflicted with the Epstein-Barrvirus, which gives her constant flu-like symptoms and makes her constantlytired.
"I'm so used to feeling bad, I can get through it," she said.
TheChiquita competition is a warm-up for the United States women as they preparefor qualifications in Montreal leading to the FIFA women's world championshipnext year in Sweden.


Bally Gaming International (BGII,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Arnold Industries Inc.(AIND,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


U.N. Resolution for Invasion of Haiti
Following is the text of Security Council Resolution 940 adopted today, which clears the way for the United States to lead an invasion intended to topple Haiti's military leaders and restore President Jean-Bertrand Aristide, who was ousted in a coup in September 1991.
The resolution was adopted 12-0 with Brazil and China abstaining and Rwanda absent.
THE SECURITY COUNCIL,
REAFFIRMING its Resolutions 841 (1993) of 16 June 1993, 861 (1993) of 27 August 1993, 862 (1993) of 31 August 1993, 867 (1993) of 23 September 1993, 873 (1993) of 13 October 1993, 875 (1993) of 16 October 1993, 905 (1994) of 23 March 1994, 917 (1994) of 6 May 1994 and 933 (1994) of 30 June 1994,


U.N.  AUTHORIZES INVASION OF HAITI TO BE LED BY U.S.
The United Nations Security Council voted today to authorize a United States invasion and occupation of Haiti if sanctions fail to remove its military Government.
The approval, by a vote of 12 to 0 with abstentions from China and Brazil, and with Rwanda absent, opens the way for American forces, now stationed just north of Haiti, to move in to restore democracy there.


Topics of The Times; The Battle of the Bridge
Senator Frank Lautenberg wants a quarter-mile bridge from Ellis Island to New Jersey, where he happens to be seeking re-election this year.
Two years ago he inserted language in a National Park Service funding bill to withhold all money for park roads until the service got going on that crossing.
The requisite environmental impact study is not yet finished, and neither is the battle of the bridge.
The Park Service is unenthusiastic about any link other than ferries.
New York State, which has civic jurisdiction over the island, is downright hostile.
The idea that huddled masses of tourists might arrive by bus from New Jersey horrifies anyone who respects the island's place in history, as the port of entry for millions of immigrants who came by ship.


FFP Partners (FFP,A) reports earnings for Qtr to June 26


Whitewater Talks Troubling, Not Unethical, Agency Says
A nonpartisan Federal ethics agency concluded today that Treasury officials violated no ethics regulations when they briefed White House officials about an investigation into a savings and loan with ties to President Clinton and his wife.
But the agency found the meetings troubling and said that some senior officials did not fully understand the ethics rules.
The report was prepared by the Office of Government Ethics, the main executive branch agency for handling ethics issues, which is staffed by career civil servants.
It was released at a news conference today by Treasury Secretary Lloyd Bentsen, as he and other senior Treasury officials were preparing to be questioned by members of the House and Senate banking committees this week on the Administration's handling of the Whitewater investigation.


Patents; Making an Answering Machine Work Just Like an Electronic Telephone-Address Book and More
THE man who gave the world electronic date and address books in 1978 will see his patent expire next year.
So, Judah Klausner is applying the technology behind his computerized organizer to telephone answering machines.
Under a patent granted to Mr.
Klausner and his co-inventor, Robert Hotto, a machine full of messages will offer more than just a blinking red light.
Instead, a list of callers' names and phone numbers will appear.
The messages can be heard in any order, and as each is played, a directory of numbers will appear so a call can be returned by touching a button.


Hitler Plot Had No Bearing on War's Outcome; Morality Drove Them
To the Editor:
In "Germans Need Their Martyrs" (Op-Ed, July 19), Donald Koblitz describes the key members of the resistance, among whom was my grandfather, Ulrich von Hassell, as a "group of reactionary German aristocrats." He also states that "these men had not been enraged by the seizure of Poland and Czechoslovakia or the extermination of European Jews," and that they joined the opposition "only when the army could see the tide turning."


Executone Information Systems Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Lesco Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


CHRONICLE
THOMAS B. MORGAN, former president of WNYC and a writer, has become president and chief executive of the United Nations Association of the U.S.A.
He succeeds Edward C. Luck at the helm of the organization, which works to strengthen the United Nations and the role of the United States in it.
The timing for his new job couldn't be better, Mr.
Morgan said recently.
"The United Nations was in the doldrums for years but the end of the Cold War gave it the chance to re-establish itself," he said.
"It does not have to be obsessed with world war anymore but can work on national and regional peacekeeping and cooperation.


Host Marriott Corp.(HMT,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 17


Abroad at Home; The Absolute Truth
When Americans hear about fundamentalist zealotry in another culture than our own, we have no trouble recognizing the danger it presents.
The suicide car bomb, the Ayatollah Khomeini's fatwa against Salman Rushdie, the marchers in Bangladesh demanding the death of another writer, Taslima Nasrin: We shudder at such terror in the name of God.
But fanaticism in our midst we take less seriously.
When a nicely dressed American preaches that absolute revealed truth justifies extremist action, most of us do not see the menace to civilized life.


Topics of The Times1; The Last Bookshop
When the doors closed this weekend at the Pageant Bookshop at 109 East 9th Street, they also closed an era in which Fourth Avenue proclaimed itself "the Book Row of America."
The avenue's cluttered secondhand bookshops, once numbering a score or more, with bins lining the sidewalk from 15th Street south to Astor Place, provided the New York equivalent of the Parisian bookstalls on the banks of the Seine.
But Book Row has now gone the way of such nearby landmarks as the Academy of Music, Klein's clothing store ("On the Square") and Luchow's, once the city's premier German restaurant.


Valhi Inc.(VHI,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


TRANSACTIONS
Auto Racing  WALKER MOTORSPORT -- Signed Robby Gordon, Indy-car driver, to a two-year contract extension through the 1997 season.
Baseball  American League  CHICAGO WHITE SOX -- Optioned Scott Ruffcorn, pitcher, to Nashville of the American Association.
Purchased the contract of Atlee Hammaker, pitcher, from Nashville.
KANSAS CITY ROYALS -- Activated Mike Magnante, pitcher, from the 15-day disabled list.
Sent Chris Haney, pitcher, to Omaha of the American Association.


Dollar Plunges, Then Steadies Against Yen
The failure of the United States and Japan to resolve a longstanding trade dispute sent a jolt of disappointment through the foreign exchange market today, putting the dollar into a temporary freefall against the yen and dashing any optimism that its long slide would end soon.
After a plunge as the market opened, the dollar leveled off at 98.55 yen in early trading here then rose slightly to 98.78 yen, well below the rate in New York late Friday of 100.1 yen but still a way from its historic low of 96.60 yen.
An earlier decline had put pressure on the Federal Reserve to raise interest rates as a means of bolstering the dollar, pressure that may be renewed once again.


Value Health Inc.(VH,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Report Expresses Concern on Pentagon Budget
Congressional investigators and some senior military planners are expressing growing concern that the Pentagon cannot afford its ambitious long-term strategy of being prepared to fight two regional wars at the same time.
The General Accounting Office says in a report to be issued on Monday that the Defense Department may have overstated savings and underestimated costs by more than $150 billion in its $1.2 trillion budget for 1995 to 1999.


NBC Takes Aim at Tuesday Nights
It will be the most anticipated face-to-face confrontation on television since Tonya vs.
Nancy.
But for the networks involved, the stakes will be much higher next month when "Frasier" takes on "Roseanne."
"Frasier," an NBC series about a radio psychiatrist and his dysfunctional family, was the strongest new comedy on network television last year; "Roseanne," ABC's chronicles of the blue-collar Connor family of Lanford, Ill., has been the most consistently popular television program of the last six years.
When both return for a new season next month, they will battle each other on Tuesdays at 9 P.M.


Magma Copper (MCU,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Holy Bull At Head of Field and His Class
Jimmy Croll celebrated Holy Bull's 1 3/4-length victory in today's Haskell Invitational at Monmouth Park by watching videotapes.
He viewed the tapes of his magnificent gray colt's commanding performance here and Tabasco Cat's second-place finish in the Jim Dandy at Saratoga.


METRO DIGEST
SEEKING ALTERNATIVES TO STRAITJACKETS
For decades, the seclusion room and straitjacket have been part of the arsenal that mental hospitals have drawn on to control violence among patients.
But state mental health officials began moving last week to reduce the use of physical restraints, a directive that poses several challenges for hospitals like the Bronx Psychiatric Center.
Partly in response, the hospital is easing overcrowding and training staff members in ways to catch agitation before it turns to violence.
It has also begun to reward patients for good behavior and has started a daily review of any use of seclusion and restraint.
A1.


Sybron International(SYB,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Read-Rite Corp.(RDRT,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Here's the Jets' Football, Guard It With Your Life
Aaron Glenn makes sure the ball is hidden from the veterans.
Even Saturday, an off day at the Jets' summer camp, Glenn told his fellow rookie Ryan Yarborough to hide it.


Clinic Had Sought Arrest Of Man Accused in Killing
The director of the abortion clinic where a doctor was shot to death on Friday sought to have the accused killer arrested several weeks ago for violating the new Federal law that punishes those who block access to clinics, clinic officials and the F.B.I. said today.
The director, Linda Taggart, complained to the Federal Bureau of Investigation that the suspect, Paul J. Hill, had repeatedly screamed at people entering the clinic and had been peeking through the clinic's windows.
A spokesman for the F.B.I. in Jacksonville, Fla., George Wisnovsky, confirmed today that the agency had investigated the complaint and forwarded the results of its investigation to the United States Attorney's office in Jacksonville, which declined to prosecute Mr.
Hill.


Modern Interpretations of Ancient Dialogues
Satie's symphonic drama "Socrate," a setting of passages from the Dialogues of Plato, stands as the composer's most earnest and emotionally pointed work, devoid of satire or kitsch.
Although the dynamics are low and the texture is unvarying, the music has a certain monumental aspect suited to performance outdoors, at least the fairly intimate surroundings of the Sculpture Garden at the Museum of Modern Art.
At an exceptionally well-attended Summergarden concert there on Friday night, Joel Sachs drew a polished performance from a group of Juilliard players, with Nan Hughes and Renee Santer singing solos in lovely, haunting fashion.
One is accustomed to annoying distractions at outdoor concerts, but during the first scene of "Socrate," Alcibiades' monologue at the banquet, there was a rather magical visual accident that might have been devised by Satie himself.
Shortly after the music began, a film at the Modern's theater ended, and moviegoers began to issue from the escalator on the other side of the plate-glass windows.
The slow, sad stepping motion of the music matched this long, silent procession to an almost uncanny degree.


Sonat Inc.(SNT,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Reinsdorf Sounds Hopeful, But Then He Adds the 'But'
An owner who usually sounds and acts like a hard-liner made a remarkable admission yesterday.
With players prepared to strike in 11 days if they don't have a new labor agreement, Jerry Reinsdorf of the Chicago White Sox said he was prepared to continue playing baseball under the existing economic system.
But, he cautioned, he is in the minority among the owners, so his position can't be viewed as potentially instrumental in averting a strike.


Methanex Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Lobbying


Pilgrim's Pride (CHX,N) reports earnings for Qtr to July 2


Hong Kong Journal; The Clothier's New Line: He's 'Selling Freedom'
Two things changed Jimmy Lai's life forever: half a chocolate bar that he ate in 1957 and the massacre at Tiananmen Square in Beijing 32 years later.
"When I was 9, I was in Canton, just selling things on the street, stealing things," he said, recalling the young Lai Chi Ying.


CCL Industries reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Bozell Acquires Stricevic/O'Connell
Bozell Worldwide said that it had acquired Stricevic/O'Connell, a food marketing agency in Chicago.
The terms were not disclosed.
The agency, with 16 employees, will operate as an independent unit within the Bozell organization under its own name.
Dan Stricevic, 31, and Dan O'Connell, 35, co-presidents at Stricevic/O'Connell, will continue to head the shop as senior vice presidents.
Stricevic/ O'Connell brings in billings estimated at $14 million from clients like the American Dairy Association, the Keebler Company and the National Pork Producers Council.


Computer Data Systems Inc.(CPTD,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Accounts
*
Gentry Men's Clothing Inc., Cincinnati, to Romann &amp; Tannenholz Advertising, New York, to handle the retail chain's account, previously at R.M.A.
Advertising, Bala Cynwyd, Pa.
Billings were estimated at $5 million. *
TV Guide, Radnor, Pa., to Castle Underwood, New York, to handle advertising and strategic positioning for its N.F.L.
Preview and Fall Preview issues, previously handled by various agencies on a project basis.
Billings were not disclosed.


4 Men Shot After Prospect Park Barbecue
Four men were shot last night in Prospect Park, leaving one of them near death, the police said.
A large group left over from a barbecue earlier in the day was in the park, drinking and dancing, when at about 10:11 P.M.
"one guy just started shooting for no apparent reason," said Sgt.
Christopher Cincotta, a detective who was investigating the shooting.
The shooting took place on the East


Pentagon Chief Visits Rwanda to Review the U.S. Relief Effort


Buying Unit for Schools Forced to Alter Inventory Procedures
The Bureau of Supplies, the unit at the New York City Board of Education that purchases everything from pencils to desks, was forced by Schools Chancellor Ramon C. Cortines to change its inventory procedure after brushing aside repeated criticisms of the procedures from city and private auditors, a report released by the City Comptroller yesterday says.
The reversal came in June, when Mr.
Cortines stepped in to overrule the bureau's director, Kevin Gill, after Mr.
Gill again resisted recommendations, this time in a preliminary report from the City Comptroller following an audit.


INSIDE
Clinic Sought Man's Arrest
The director of the abortion clinic where a doctor was killed on Friday said that several weeks ago she had sought the arrest of the man being held in the killing.
Page A10.
When Trade Talks Fail
In a largely symbolic step, the Clinton Administration formally accused Japan of discriminating against American companies in awarding Government contracts.
Page D1.
Scooter's Day
Phil Rizzuto drew cheers and laughter yesterday as he was inducted into the Baseball Hall of Fame along with Steve Carlton and the late Leo Durocher.
SportsMonday, C1.


China Human-Rights Tactic Spreads
After years of trying unsuccessfully to quiet criticism of human-rights records, Asian nations have found powerful allies: American businesses eager to invest in their growing markets and the Clinton Administration, with its emphasis on economic interests in post-cold-war foreign policy.
The Clinton Administration's spring decision to continue China's favorable trade status gave some of the largest and fastest growing countries new confidence that their influence is now strong enough to have an effect on American policy.
And from India and Indonesia to smaller nations like Singapore, Vietnam, Thailand and Malaysia, they are showing it.


Vulcan Materials Co.(VMC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Bridge
Two strong teams won their semifinal matches in the Spingold Knockout Team Championships at the American Contract Bridge League's Summer Nationals here Saturday night.
The defending champions, Nick Nickell of Raleigh, N.C., Dick Freeman of Atlanta, Bob Hamman and Bob Wolff, both of Dallas, Jeff Meckstroth of Tampa, Fla., and Eric Rodwell of Naperville, Ill., lost some ground in three of the four quarters but still won by 27 imps, thanks to a 61-imp surge in the second quarter.
Their opponents were led by Seymon Deutsch of Laredo, Tex.


&gt;2 Towns Hoping Woodstock '94 Is a Revival for Them, Too
Saugerties, a largely blue-collar river community, doesn't seem temperamentally suited for a rock festival.
Neither does Bethel, little more than a spot on the map west of Monticello, in a rural, hilly region noted for its poultry and game and its summer bungalow colonies for Orthodox Jews.
But so what.
In a perverse spirit of commercialism and convenience, the two towns, 60 or so miles apart with the Catskill Mountains between them like the filling of a hearty sandwich, will each play host to a 25th anniversary version of the famous Woodstock concert the weekend after next.
And if there's both nervousness and curiosity afoot, with residents hoping the festivals will bring economic windfall and not riotous discord, well, the places themselves are of the type that are used to hardship, if not uproar.


Marshall Industries(MI,N) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Iraq Sanctions Cannot Be Forever
Every two months, sanctions against Iraq are reviewed by the United Nations Security Council.
Baghdad has begun scrupulously living up to its U.N. arms control obligations, which -- according to the terms laid down by the U.N. -- should entitle it to relief from the international embargo on its oil sales sometime next spring.
But the United States and Britain are refusing to acknowledge Saddam Hussein's compliance with the U.N.'s stated terms for lifting sanctions.
They insist that other infractions -- such as persecution of the Kurds -- demand that Mr.
Hussein continue to be punished.
In effect, Britain and the U.S. are changing the rules.


Universal Health Services Inc.(UHS,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Ex-Guard for Serbs Tells Of Grisly 'Cleansing' Camp
There were, according to the 1991 Yugoslav census, 18,699 Muslims living in and around this eastern Bosnian mining town.
Dead now, or dispersed, they have all gone.
Their fate was determined by a Serbian concentration camp that lay concealed in a pine-clad valley about a mile from the city center.
A former military depot surrounded by barbed wire, it is called Susica.


Dividend Meetings


Greenfield Industries INc.(GFII,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Essay; A Chorus Line
"Shut up!" hollered Representative Maxine Waters, Democrat of California, at a Republican who dared ask embarrassing questions about White House intrusion into a criminal investigation.
For her "demeanor" in thus obstructing Congressional oversight, Representative Waters's speaking rights were suspended for all of 30 seconds by the Speaker.
The dismaying spectacle of House Democrats trying to protect Clinton Administration wrongdoers from public exposure was further heightened by "The Chorus Line": 10 White House aides, all in a row, piously chorusing "no" to a Democrat asking if they were all villains.


Logicon Inc.(LGN,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


CHRONICLE
MARTIN SHORT, the comedic actor, has been tapped for Canada's highest honor: he will be inducted into the Royal Order of Canada in October.
The equivalent of British knighthood, the appointment is a rare distinction accorded to Canadian citizens for achievement or service.
So far, the comedian, who was born and raised in Hamilton, Ontario, is not letting it go to his head.


Auto Club Is Putting Trip-Planning Information on Disks
The American Automobile Association plans to announce today that its extensive data base of travel-related information is available for use on personal computers.
The association has put all its trip-planning information on CD-ROM.
The disks has "the same information members now get in AAA Tourbooks," said Graeme Clarke, vice president of the association's travel, marketing and financial services.


Hitler Plot Had No Bearing on War's Outcome; When Bomb Went Off
To the Editor:
It was good to see your Op-Ed articles on Count Claus von Stauffenberg, who tried to assassinate Hitler on July 20, 50 years ago.
I well recall my excitement in Berchtesgaden in early May 1945 listening to Heinz Buchholz, one of Hitler's military stenographers, telling what happened on that fateful day in Rastenberg, East Prussia, when the bomb went off.
While he gave vivid details of the explosion and its aftermath, he knew nothing of the forces behind it.


Enquirer/Star Group Inc.(ENQ,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 27


Hitler Plot Had No Bearing on War's Outcome; Bonhoeffer and Kolbe
To the Editor:
In "Germans Need Their Martyrs" (Op-Ed, July 19), Donald Koblitz identifies Dietrich Bonhoeffer as "a pastor who traded places with a condemned man in a Nazi concentration camp," confusing him with the Rev.
Maximilian Kolbe, who had volunteered to take the place of a Polish farmer selected to die in Auschwitz.


GenCare Health Systems Inc.(GNCR,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


No Headline
"Every year they release two liberal Democrats in the wild here so they don't become an endangered species. If Bill Clinton came into the district, he probably would not see the light of day again." -- MITCHELL KAYE, from Cobb County, Ga.  [ A1:2. ]


American Bankers Insurance Group Inc.(ABIG,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Ex-Mayor Barry Rises From Ashes
At first glance they seem the most improbable of scenes: crowds hailing Marion S. Barry Jr. as a savior of the city, cheering him on as he seeks a fourth term as mayor.
After all, this is the same man whose third term effectively ended four years ago when Federal agents videotaped him smoking crack.
He was convicted on a misdemeanor charge of cocaine possession and served six months in prison.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-9  WAY CLEARED FOR HAITI INVASION  The United Nations Security Council authorized a proposal for an invasion and occupation of Haiti led by the United States , but officials said a decision on whether to use force to try to dislodge the military government is still weeks away.
A1


Courts in Jordan: A Fugitive's Prospects
An American who killed his wife in New Jersey and was captured in his native Jordan has said that he would prefer to stand trial there.
While Jordanian justice lacks some rights that Americans take virtually for granted, it may also offer him legal opportunities not available here.
The defendant, Mohammed Ismail Abequa, was given nothing that resembled a Miranda warning informing him of his rights before he confessed to Jordanian authorities that he had strangled his wife last month at her apartment in Parsippany-Troy Hills, N.J., and then fled with their two children to Jordan.


Results Plus
SOCCER Akers-Stahl Shows Why She's the Finest The best female soccer player in the world gets tired walking to her car.
So 32 minutes of play in yesterday's Chiquita Cup match in Fairfax, Va., felt like amarathon to Michelle Akers-Stahl.
"I'll probably sleep 12 hours tonight," shesaid after the United States beat Germany, 2-1, in a game that shouldn't havebeen that close.
Thirty-two minutes was enough for Akers-Stahl to score whatproved to be the game-winning goal, a perfectly placed 28-yard direct kick shetook in the game's 29th minute.
Akers-Stahl is afflicted with the Epstein-Barrvirus, which gives her constant flu-like symptoms and makes her constantlytired.
"I'm so used to feeling bad, I can get through it," she said.
TheChiquita competition is a warm-up for the United States women as they preparefor qualifications in Montreal leading to the FIFA women's world championshipnext year in Sweden.


Belden Inc.(BWC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Quiet Heroes: Popular Books Not on the Best-Seller Lists
Last year, when the country's best-seller lists were dominated by flashy titles from the likes of Robert James Waller, John Grisham and Tom Clancy, a 1984 work, "The Book of Runes" (St. Martin's Press), quietly sold more than 50,000 copies.
At the same time a 1981 book, "Getting to Yes: Negotiating Agreement Without Giving In" (Penguin), sold 195,000 copies.
And a 1987 book that describes how to fashion wreaths for holidays and other occasions, forthrightly titled "The Wreath Book" (Sterling), sold 75,000.


Shakespeare Troupe In a Stage Duel
Strollers, some with cigarettes dangling from their lips, others licking ice cream cones, paused under the towering trees of Bryant Park.
They noticed a small stage, framed by rather tattered crimson curtains.
Actors in T-shirts and modern gowns and white shirts and ties were speaking in Elizabethan English.
Some paused and walked on.
But others plopped down on the folding green lawn chairs and watched with visible fascination, becoming around 300 by the time Hamlet finished his first soliloquy.
It was free Shakespeare, and the honking cars of midtown Manhattan were not an insurmountable distraction.


Corrections
An article yesterday about a meeting on Thursday to discuss a proposed United Nations resolution on Haiti included a name erroneously among those attending.
Madeleine K. Albright, the chief United States delegate, was not at the meeting.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; A pledge of low prices by the troubled Vons supermarkets does not convince everybody.
'FINALLY, a store that works," was once the proud boast of Bill Davila, the television pitchman and president emeritus of the Vons Companies, the largest supermarket chain in Southern California.
It hasn't been working for a while.
So far, neither is Vons Values, the regional chain's new low-price merchandising strategy that is aimed at halting eroding profits and sales -- and touted in a vigorous print and broadcast advertising campaign.
Vons is struggling to lure customers back to its stores without giving up service and selection, which analysts said had made the chain a step above most rivals.


Central Maine Power Co.  (CTP,N) reports earnings for 12mo to June 30


People
*
Neal Howard was named the creative director at Wilson, Horne, McClelland &amp; Gray Inc., Atlanta, succeeding Alex Wilson, who left to open Ad Options, Atlanta.
Mr.
Howard previously held a similar position at Knoll, Dodge &amp; Partners, Atlanta. *
Stephen Scherer was named to the new position of associate creative director at Eric Mower &amp; Associates, Rochester.
He was previously a senior art director at Corea &amp; Eibl Inc., Rochester.


A Suburban Eden Where the Right Rules
It is a long way culturally and politically from Roslyn, L.I., to conservative Cobb County.
But Mitchell Kaye, who two years ago became the first Jewish Republican in Georgia history ever elected to the State Legislature, seems to have made the transition.
"Every year they release two liberal Democrats in the wild here so they don't become an endangered species," said Mr.
Kaye, a 36-year-old, first-term State Representative who grew up on Long Island and moved to Georgia after going to college in Florida.
"If Bill Clinton came into the district, he probably would not see the light of day again."


When Worlds Collide: A Threat To the Earth Is a Joke No Longer
The Chicken Little crowd, which once drew smiles by suggesting that Earth could be devastated by killer rocks from outer space, is suddenly finding its warnings and agenda taken seriously now that Jupiter has taken a beating in recorded history's biggest show of cosmic violence.
No one suggests that there is any imminent threat, the political fallout from the Jovian fireworks is still developing, and the test of whether it will translate into a Federal program may be a year or more away.
But Federal plans are being laid to create a $50 million network of early warning telescopes that one day might help save Earth from collision with an icy intruder.


Central Louisiana Electric Co.  (CNL,N) reports earnings for 12mo to June 30


BBDO New York Chosen for G.E. Job
The General Electric Company has selected BBDO New York to handle the consolidated media planning and buying portion of its account, which had been handled by more than 30 agencies.
The account involves more than 30 company activities, including the corporate, appliances, lighting and financial services divisions, but not the NBC unit.
Although billings were not disclosed, Advertising Age estimated them at $50 million.


Carlton Can Be Heard Over Cheers For Rizzuto
Steve Carlton, a man of few words who let his slider do his speaking during a 24-year career as the dominant left-handed pitcher of his era, found voice today, if only long enough to accept induction into the Baseball Hall of Fame with Phil Rizzuto and the late Leo Durocher.
"This will probably be the most talking I've done for a while," Carlton told some 15,000 fans gathered in a field a mile south of the Hall in this village from which baseball derives its psychic and rustic origins.


Peoples Energy Corp.(PGL,N) reports earnings for 12mos to June 30


When Thin Is In, Disaster Can Strike
At a time when more female athletes are playing sports at a younger age, the problems associated with weight control, growth and conditioning are threatening their health and joy of competition.
The death last week of Christy Henrich, a former nationally ranked gymnast, once again focused attention on the problem of eating disorders among athletes.
The problem is heightened by the increasing popularity of certain sports where thin is in and the recent trend of girls starting organized sports even earlier than boys.


Modine Manufacturing Co.(MODI,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 26


A Brickyard Jam, in Stands and on Track
The traffic jams at the inaugural Brickyard 400 in Indianapolis next weekend will be nightmarish: a mass of cars trying to squeeze into a space only big enough for half of them, a rush hour lasting several hours in the morning and again in the afternoon, and drivers with frayed nerves coming close to losing control.
And those are just the race cars.


A Simplified Theme: Mozart, Piano and 1784
Mostly Mozart's attempts at theme concerts last summer had a thrown-together quality.
Making music against a background of wider artistic, literary and social contexts needs the preparation and thought these events did not receive.
This year the festival has lowered its sights.
Ideas of time and place remain but in simpler terms.
This past week at Avery Fisher Hall, for example, has centered on Mozart's extraordinary outburst of piano concertos in 1784.
On Thursday, the Mostly Mozart Festival Orchestra under Gerard Schwarz offered three of the six.
Under Armin Jordan on Friday, a fourth was played.
The concept works: one notes both astonishing variety and shared tendencies.
Each of the four was a world to itself, yet in the piano detail and harmonic gestures lay a recognizable mind.
The performers were as various as the pieces.
All professional pianists learn music's vocabulary of expression, but Helene Grimaud, who played the F-major Concerto (No. 19, K. 459) on Thursday, showed emotions of her own, her heart speaking acutely and specifically with every depression of the keys.
Miss Grimaud's quiet playing is especially effective, yet paradoxically, it is slimness of sonority that creates her principal problem: a sound so slight that it almost disappears within the orchestra around her.


At Disease-Ravaged Camps, a Battle to Bury the Dead
A yellow bulldozer scooped up a bundle of bodies today from a pile nearly the length of a football field and dumped them 50 yards up the slope.
The machine, operated by a French soldier, swung around, trying with each methodical maneuver to move more than 1,000 cloth-wrapped bodies under a dirt ledge so they could finally be covered after days in the sun.


Southern New England Telecom (SNG,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


South African TV Drama Angers Zulu Party
Despite death threats against the producers and cast, South African television broadcast a program on Saturday night unlike anything ever seen in this country.
It was a gritty soap opera of political violence featuring Zulu terrorists, rogue police, township vigilantes and what most South Africans would recognize as real life.
The airing of the three-hour dramatic series, called "The Line," was widely viewed as an important test of the South African Broadcasting Corporation (S.A.B.C.), which in recent years has evolved from a crude propaganda machine for the apartheid Government to a fainthearted institution bent on offending nobody, and is now trying to win respect as an independent public broadcaster.


Books of The Times; All Feline Creatures, Great and Small
The Tribe of Tiger Cats and Their Culture By Elizabeth Marshall Thomas Illustrated by Jared Taylor Williams. 240 pages.
Simon &amp; Schuster. $20.
In many ways, cats are not as easy as dogs for people to make friends with, which may explain why Elizabeth Marshall Thomas's new book, "The Tribe of Tiger: Cats and Their Culture," does not have quite the warm appeal of her best-selling book of last year, "The Hidden Life of Dogs."
But cats, too, have their considerable allure, as Ms.
Thomas makes clear in her introductory reference to Christopher Smart, the 18th-century English poet, who found during his eight-year solitary confinement in a madhouse that his only relief from loneliness and despair was provided by the presence of his cat, Jeoffry.
Smart devoted 75 radiant lines to Jeoffry in an otherwise endless, rambling poem.
Three of these lines read:


Standard Register Co.(SREG,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to July 3


Portland General Corp.(PGN,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


ElectroCom Automation (ECA,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


U.S. Move on Haiti May Be Weeks Away
Despite the Security Council's authorization of an invasion to oust Haiti's military rulers, a decision on American military action there is still weeks away, Administration officials said today.
The White House hopes that United Nations endorsement of the use of force will give credibility to the months of American threats, which Haitian military leaders have appeared to belittle.
Some American officials say a combination of tighter economic sanctions and a strong show of international resolve may still force the leaders to quit.


Dorothy Hodgkin, 84, Is Dead; Briton Won Nobel in Chemistry
Dorothy Hodgkin, a British scientist who won the Nobel Prize in Chemistry for 1964, died on Friday in her home at Shipston-on-Stour, in Warwickshire in central England.
She was 84.
She died after suffering a stroke, her family said.


Hospitals Seek An Alternative To Straitjacket
The seclusion room on Ward 9 at the Bronx Psychiatric Center is intentionally spare: naked pale peach walls; a worn mattress on the terrazzo floor, and a heavy door with a wire-mesh window.
It is here that patients have frequently been brought -- sometimes kicking and yelling, other times walking calmly -- after growing violent and endangering other patients or staff members.
If patients are determined to hurt themselves -- through scratching, say -- the seclusion room has been passed over for the straitjacket, or camisole, as the state delicately calls it: a cream-colored canvas jacket with sleeves that wrap behind the back, immobilizing the arms.


Friday's Wall Street Rally May Be Less Than It Seems
After Friday's impressive rally in the stock market and sensational increases in the bond market, Wall Street traders may be tempted to pinch themselves to see if they are dreaming.
If they do, they will find that they are, say those who have studied the Government's report on second-quarter economic growth that prompted Friday's buying of stocks and bonds.
The lean months are yet to pass and the fat ones in the financial markets are not yet here, these analysts say.


ACX Technologies Inc.(ACXT,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Cabot Oil &amp; Gas Corp.(COG,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Comerica Selects McKinney &amp; Silver
Comerica Inc., the bank holding company based in Detroit, named McKinney &amp; Silver in Raleigh, N.C., to handle its account, which had been at W. B. Doner &amp; Company in Southfield, Mich., since January 1992.
Billings were estimated at $10 million.


Datascope Corp.(DSCP,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Equity Issues This Week
The following equity and convertible debt offerings are expected this week:
ARCO, Los Angeles, 35 million exchangeable notes due in 1997, 30 million in the United States are exchangeable into Lyondell Petrochem Company common stock or cash.
Goldman, Sachs.


Giants' Radio Failed, Quarterbacks Did Not
On the first play of the Giants' exhibition game against the Miami Dolphins, the radio transmitter in Dave Brown's helmet went dead.
So much for modern technology.
At least Brown didn't pick up transmissions from pilots flying into Newark airport.
When the radio failed, the Giants went back to old-fashioned hand signals.
They probably could have gone to smoke signals and Brown still would have had a good night.
The temporary confusion with the radio -- something teams can use this season to combat crowd noise -- was about the only thing that went wrong for Brown.
The Giants lost the game, 20-19, but they may have found peace of mind at the quarterback position.
This doesn't mean Brown has won the job, but it appears there won't be the disaster many around the league thought might occur when Phil Simms was cut.


Nalco Chemical Co.(NLC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Many Mets Help Draw Road Map To Success
Before this all began, Rico Brogna resembled a decent player with an aversion to left-handed pitching.
Jeromy Burnitz had more game-winning hits in Norfolk than in New York.
A hot closer like the Pirates' Mike Dyer on the mound?
Good luck.
Before this all began, the Mets had as much chance of getting to a right-hander charged with only one run in his last 10 outings as they did going, oh, say 5-1 on a road trip.


More Revamping At DDB Needham
DDB Needham Worldwide said it had promoted several top executives and formed an executive committee as part of a reorganization at its flagship New York office.
Ken Kaess, one of three executive vice presidents and managing partners at DDB Needham New York, was promoted on Friday to the vacant position of president.
That post was last filled by Andy Berlin, who left last August to head DDB Needham New York's spinoff shop, Berlin, Wright &amp; Cameron in New York.
Before joining DDB Needham's New York office in December, Mr.
Kaess, 40, had been president of DDB Needham's Los Angeles office for two years.


Unifi Inc.(UFI,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 26


Sports of The Times; Whew! Scooter Talks Circles Around the Hall


Pacific Telecom Inc.(PTCM,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Colin M. Turnbull, 69, Anthropologist and Author
Colin M. Turnbull, a British-born anthropologist whose reports on African societies could be admiring, fond or searing, died on Thursday at Rappahannock General Hospital in Kilmarnock, Va.
He was 69 and lived near Kilmarnock.
The cause was pneumonia, The Associated Press reported.


A Comic on the Edge at $7 Million a Movie
Jim Carrey removes a check for $10 million from his wallet.
It says: "For acting services rendered by Thanksgiving, 1995."
It's a joke, of course.
The star of the weekend's No. 1 film, "The Mask," wrote it to himself years ago when he was unknown, barely eking out a living and seized with fantasies of earning a ton of money.


20th Century Industries(TW,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


And in Bronx, Future Famers Keep Winning
The Yankees are so good at playing baseball, then downplaying their good play, that every victory is becoming just another day at the old ball park in the Bronx.
Take yesterday, for instance.


Revelations On Simpson In a Release Of Testimony
In releasing the transcript of the aborted grand jury inquiry in the O. J. Simpson case, the trial judge has provided not only an intriguing, even titillating, peek at previously undisclosed investigative material but has also given an insight into what is normally a secretive legal process.
The 460-page transcript, made public over the weekend by Judge Lance A. Ito after pieces of the testimony were publicized by some news organizations, includes testimony that suggests that prosecutors may try to portray Mr.
Simpson as a scorned, possessive man whose jealous rage turned to violence, resulting in the bloody slayings of Nicole Brown Simpson and her friend Ronald L. Goldman.


Robert Half International(RHI,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


U.S. Can Corp.(USCN,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to July 3


A Crash in Mexico Hurts And Helps a Candidate
Doctors here say the opposition party candidate for governor of the southern state of Chiapas has a good chance of making a complete recovery from the injuries he suffered in a highway crash last week.
But as he has been catapulted to the center of Mexico's turbulent political debate amid accusations that the crash was a result of an assassination attempt, it is a safe bet that the candidate's life will never be the same.
In Chiapas, where tensions are still simmering in an uneasy cease-fire between the Mexican Army and the rebel Zapatista National Liberation Army, thousands of people have demonstrated in support of the candidate, Amado Avendano, and to denounce what they describe as Government complicity in the crash.
The rebel command said it had put its troops on alert, and in a faxed statement, the rebel leader, Subcommander Marcos, said: "The last hope for a just and rightful peace in Chiapas lies in the life of this man. Save him."


It's Mission Accomplished For Switzer and Cowboys
You think you've got it all set.
You've worked through 27 practices and through the sweltering heat of training camp at Austin, Tex.
You've worked through the countless interviews and read the ugly mail and the sweet mail and survived all the comparisons with the old coach.
You're Barry Switzer.
It's your Dallas Cowboys ready to make their '94 preseason debut with you.
Their first appearance since the Super Bowl.
Your first on the sidelines in six years.
It is against the Minnesota Vikings and it is a night affair in steamy Texas Stadium.


Western Resources Inc.(WR,N) reports earnings for 12mos to June 30


This Week's Treasury Sales Are Confined to Bill Auction
The Treasury's schedule of financings this week is confined to today's regular weekly auction of new three- and six-month bills.
According to traders, by the close of the New York cash market on Friday, the rate on the outstanding three-month bill was 4.26 percent and the rate on a six-month bill was 4.67 percent.


Big Russian Fund Is Still Selling Shares
Russia's largest investment company, MMM -- which soared, then plummeted under a giant pyramid scheme -- continued selling its shares today.
In the country's biggest financial scandal, the company almost collapsed last week when criticism by the Finance Ministry caused panicked investors to sell, driving the price of shares from the high in mid-July of $50 to less than 50 cents, half of what the first shares sold for in February.


Wisconsin Public Service Corp.(WPS,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


A Tale of Two Congregations; Church's Sale Reflects Shifting Influences In Protestantism
The First Baptist Church here was built 83 years ago for the Rev.
Harry Emerson Fosdick, a liberal preacher who doubled its membership, drawing in men and women eager to hear his views.
But within a few years, the church and the minister took separate paths.
Mr.
Fosdick went on to national fame, later becoming the pastor of Riverside Church in Manhattan and rallying fellow modernists with a sermon titled "Shall the Fundamentalists Win?" First Baptist, meanwhile, began a long, slow decline that is to culminate on Monday in the sale of its imposing Romanesque building, with its Tiffany stained glass, painted stucco walls and soaring sanctuary ceiling.


Kaneb Services (KAB,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Corrections
A picture caption on Thursday referring to an article about new enterprise zones in New York State misspelled the name and misstated the employment status of a woman who presented Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo with the resumes of people left unemployed by the closing of the Staten Island Homeport.
She is Catherine Bottaro, not Bottero.
She is an employment specialist with the Workers Opportunity Employment Center, not unemployed.


J&amp;L Specialty Steel (JL,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Yesterday the Cup, Today a Cool Farewell
CARLOS ALBERTO PARREIRA resigned yesterday as coach of Brazil's national team after leading it to the World Cup title and agreed to coach Valencia in the first division of the Spanish League.
"I've performed my mission for Brazil by helping in the fourth world title conquest, and I have no desire to manage Brazil again," Parreira was quoted in yesterday's editions of Jornal do Brasil.
Parreira was constantly criticized and second-guessed by the news media, and even by President ITAMAR FRANCO and Parreira's mother.
Parreira was booed by a mostly pro-Brazil crowd before the World Cup final against Italy.
"At least I won't have 150 million people down my back," Parreira said. (AP)


At Tanglewood, Creating Links Between Arts
Karen McLaughlin leaned forward in her seat, pacing the opening music for a television program being billed as the modern successor to Leonard Bernstein's "Young People's Concerts." "Three, two, one," the music associate said into her headset, as a camera approached the big red barn.
"Open the doors," said Terry Rohnke, an associate director.
The doors slid apart to reveal Wynton Marsalis bopping in a way that looked like conducting and Seiji Ozawa conducting in a way that looked like bopping.
The camera scanned Mr.
Marsalis's Liberty Brass Band and the Tanglewood Music Center Student Orchestra as they played Mr.
Marsalis's "Fiddle Bow Reel." It floated up the steps, over youngsters who resisted the urge to smile at the lens and fixed their gazes on the musicians.
All looked well, until a handful of children scattered along the upper railing came across as a sparse audience on television monitors.
The verdict came swiftly from George Tsypin, the production manager.


Taking Jennifer Ireland's Daughter
Like all too many young Americans, Jennifer Ireland became a mother when she herself was not much more than a child.
In 1991, when she gave birth to her daughter, Maranda, she was 16 years old.
But she struggled hard, with measurable success, to improve her circumstances.
Last week she got her reward -- a judge ordered her daughter taken away from her.
Maranda's father, Steve Smith, was also 16 when his daughter was born.
For the first year of her life, he had little or no contact with her.
He lived with his parents; Ms.
Ireland lived with her mother and sister, both of whom helped take care of the baby.
In 1993 Ms.
Ireland graduated from high school, with honors, and won a full scholarship to the University of Michigan.


Genzyme Corp.(GENZ,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


G.E. Succeeded With Hungary Venture; Seed Deal in Ukraine
To the Editor:
"A Bitter Harvest for Ukraine From an American Seed Deal" (front page, June 19) portrays the transaction as an unethical get-rich-quick scheme by United States suppliers.


Energen Corp.(EGN,N) reports earnings for 12mo to June 30


Bow Valley Energy (BVI,A) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


India Imposes Fines on 10 Big Foreign Banks
The central bank of India has issued fines of roughly $42 million to 10 foreign banks, including Citibank, Bank of America, American Express Bank Ltd. and Standard Chartered Bank, accusing them of involvement in India's worst securities scandal.
Both Indian and foreign banks were accused of misreporting millions of dollars in their books in 1991 and 1992 and illegally diverting Government bonds to make funds available to selected stockbrokers for quick speculation and to feed a stock boom.
A Reserve Bank official said the fines announced this week were for evading cash reserve requirements.


2 Ulster Protestants Slain
Masked I.R.A. gunmen ambushed and killed two Protestants today.
The victims were said to belong to an outlawed guerrilla movement.
Witnesses said the police firing shots chased the killers as they sped off by car toward a Catholic area of Belfast.
The car was later found abandoned, a police spokesman said.


World Economies


Betz Laboratories Inc.(BLT,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Green Forest reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Alliant Techsystems Inc.(ATK,N) reports earnings for Qtr to July 3


Exchanging Ideas


G.E. Succeeded With Hungary Venture
To the Editor:
"G.E. Finds Tough Going in Hungary" (Business Day, July 25), which describes the birth pains when General Electric bought Tungsram, Hungary's largest industrial company, in 1989 after the Iron Curtain fell, does not reflect today's Tungsram.


China Halts Listing of New Stock
China's Securities Regulatory Commission has ordered a halt to all new share listings in an effort to brake steep drops in the value of issues on the nation's two stock exchanges.
The decision, announced late Friday as the markets in Shanghai and Shenzhen were closing at sharply lower levels, barred new listings for the rest of the year and left open the possibility that new listings would be suspended next year, as well.


Moments when the Orchestra Won
New York City's parks may have been comparatively idyllic places in 1905, when the Naumburg Orchestra began giving outdoor summer concerts.
Today an orchestra fights against the residual hum of the city and the intrusions of air traffic.
But the Naumburg Orchestra battled valiantly on Saturday evening at Damrosch Park, and during the concert's best moments a listener could almost put the park's acoustical shortcomings out of mind.
Almost, but not entirely.
The orchestra was amplified, and the idea seems to have been to support the ensemble discreetly rather than to blast it through the speakers.
But the balances were very peculiar: the brass came through loud and clear against a distant, barely audible string sound.


Santa Fe Pacific (SFX,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Deceptively Slapdash, Just Like Grifters
The Grifters' music is predicated on the accidental.
It's not just in their lyrics about automobile collisions ("Corolla Hoist") and drunken mishaps ("Just Passing Out").
It's also in every note they play.
Although the Memphis quartet has been together nearly five years, the Grifters pride themselves on not sounding together.
They are one of the few alternative rock bands that has retrogressed over the years: between their first album and their third, the sound fidelity actually worsens.
But this is part of the Grifters' appeal: they are sloppy but artfully so.
When the Grifters performed on Saturday night at CBGB, they sounded as if they had tuned their instruments after drinking themselves silly.
The guitars and bass clanged stridently against one another, chasing after impossible harmonies.
The band itself was in beautiful disarray: no instrument responded on cue and few notes were in place.
The Grifters not only changed the tunes but also the words on their best known discordant rockers, "She Blows Blasts of Static" and "Soda Pop." During duets, the guitarists Dave Shouse and Scott Taylor didn't sing together; they simply sang at the same time.


Review Board for Police Setting Off Sharp Debate
Two years ago Rudolph W. Giuliani stood with thousands of raucous officers as they rallied against creation of an independent civilian board to review complaints of police misconduct.
Mayor David N. Dinkins created the panel anyway, greatly reducing police influence on the board, which convened a year ago in July.
Now, Mr.
Giuliani is Mayor and he has given the board a reprieve, at least, pledging not to decide its future until he monitors its effectiveness for a year.


Timken Co.(TKR,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Woman Tells Police of Central Park Rape
A Bronx woman who was walking through Central Park early Saturday afternoon told the police that she was dragged into a row of bushes and raped by two men after she refused the drugs they offered her, the police said.
The woman, 33, whose name was not released by the police, said that she was walking through a tunnel at West 102d Street near the West Drive about 1 P.M.
Saturday when she encountered two men who were smoking crack, said a Police Department spokesman.


Tyco Toys Inc.(TTI,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Trevino Takes Edge and Runs With It on Long Island JERICHO, L.I., July 31
As the dominant player on the PGA Senior Tour, Lee Trevino hardly needs an edge -- not with far more victories and prize money this year than anyone on the 50-and-over circuit.
But Trevino got a big edge today before the third and final round of the $650,000 Northville Long Island Classic began when a stroke was deducted from the score of Jay Sigel, who had been tied for the lead with Trevino.


PacificCorp (PPW,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Despite Losing Effort, The Cat Feels Dandy
Tabasco Cat returned to the races today as the star of the Triple Crown but sustained a setback on the road to racing's 3-year-old championship when he was outrun by one length by Unaccounted For in the Jim Dandy Stakes.
But Tabasco Cat was still firmly fixed on the major target, the Travers Stakes here at Saratoga on Aug. 20, when he will tangle with his archrival Holy Bull, who kept burning along the same road today when he won the $500,000 Haskell Invitational at Monmouth Park.
And if Tabasco Cat needed any excuse for not quite completing his part of the assignment, he had one: He carried 126 pounds, 12 more than Unaccounted For.


NWNL Cos.(NWN,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Slam Could Be Comiskey's Final Highlight
White Sox 8, Mariners 1
Lance Johnson cannot envision the rest of the summer without baseball.


Consumers Packaging reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Economic Calendar
Listed below are the scheduled release dates for major economic indicators this week.
Monday  Personal Income-Consumption . . .
June  Construction Spending . . .
June  Tuesday  New-Home Sales and Prices . . .
June  Wednesday  Leading Indicators . . .
June  Factory Orders . . .
June  Auto Sales . . .
July  Thursday  Weekly Jobless Claims  Friday  Employment . . .
July  Consumer Borrowing . . .
June


Abex Inc.(ABE,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Carlisle Plastics Inc.(CPA,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Digital Equipment Narrows Its Review
The Digital Equipment Corporation said on Friday that it had further narrowed the review on its search for a worldwide lead strategic agency to two finalists from four.
The account, with billings estimated at $35 million, had been handled by five primary agencies in the United States and one in France, all of which were eliminated from the review.


Market Place; Aetna is a reminder of the dark side to Cigna's outlook.
SHARES of Cigna fell sharply on Friday in sympathy with the stock of another insurer, Aetna Life and Casualty, which announced a drop in profits because of losses stemming from policyholder claims for cleaning up hazardous wastes.
While Cigna does not announce second-quarter earnings until today, Aetna's announcement was a reminder of a dark side to the outlook for Cigna.
Cigna's stock had been a stellar performer since the Philadelphia company reported earnings on May 2 that were better than expected.
The stock reached a 52-week high of $74 just last Monday.
Before Friday, when the stock dropped $3.875, to $68.375, investors had focused more on the company's bright prospects for rapid growth and high profits from its health care business rather than its unprofitable property and casualty business.


A Glint in Those Hills: A Natural Rarity
The first thing you have to say, advised Bud Franklin, is that Herkimer diamonds are not real diamonds.
They are doubly terminated quartz crystals -- true, among the most beautiful on the planet, water-clear, found all over this dolomite limestone ridge near the center of New York State and just about nowhere else -- but they are not real diamonds any more than the baseball diamonds in Cooperstown, 35 miles due south.
The second thing, said Mr.
Franklin, sweating under the sun at the Ace of Diamonds Mine, is, "You've got to earn them."


Eastern Utilities Associates (EUA,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Mitchell Urges Action on Health Now
Seeking to rally organizations behind his unfinished national health insurance bill, Senator George J. Mitchell of Maine is warning them that "if this effort goes down, it's going to be a long time before any American President takes this issue on again."
Mr.
Mitchell dismissed as insincere appeals by Senator Bob Dole of Kansas, the minority leader, and other Republicans for time to study the bill.
"What they want is time to generate opposition to the bill, of course," he said in an interview today.
Earlier he said on the CBS News program "Face the Nation" that the Senate vote on his bill would be "very close."


CHRONICLE
It started out for MARYLOU WHITNEY, the former actress and the widow of Cornelius Vanderbilt Whitney, as a pretend visit to the Emerald City.
Then she lost a very real 40-carat emerald.
But the tale had a storybook ending when the finder of the $250,000 gem returned it to Mrs.
Whitney on Saturday in Saratoga Springs, N.Y.


Greenbrier Cos. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Alberta Natural reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Waging War on Drugs in a Dragster
Roger Comstock drove at 135 miles per hour past police officers who did absolutely nothing to stop him.
But then, this was the East Coast Cop Car Nationals, a drag-racing championship that gives law-enforcement officers bragging rights to the fastest vehicles over a quarter-mile strip while speeding the war against drug and alcohol abuse by the young.


Women-in-Prison Data Tell a Different Story
To the Editor:
A July 18 article on mothers in prison is accompanied by a misleading chart.
According to the Bureau of Justice Statistics, the study of female inmates was based on a total of 38,658, not the 13,986 suggested.
The second figure is the total of white female inmates.
The study was also based on 17,754 black and 5,521 Hispanic female inmates.


South of the Border Music in the South Bronx


2 Ulster Protestants Slain
Masked I.R.A. gunmen ambushed and killed two Protestants today.
The victims were said to belong to an outlawed guerrilla movement.
Witnesses said the police firing shots chased the killers as they sped off by car toward a Catholic area of Belfast.
The car was later found abandoned, a police spokesman said.


Rape and Murder Aren't Consentual Acts
To the Editor:
I found offensive the headline "Rough Sex Led to Boy's Death, Officer Says" on a July 19 report from Valhalla, N.Y., of a preliminary hearing in the strangling of a 12-year-old by a classmate at a school for emotionally disturbed children.
The article indicates that the police officer said 13-year-old Brian Edwards told him he was fighting with the younger boy, wrestling with him and hitting him, then forcibly sodomized him and strangled him as he continued to resist.
That is not "rough sex." It is assault, battery, rape and murder.


Borg-Warner Security Corp.(BOR,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


A C.I.A. Too Many
To the Editor:
Melvin A. Goodman's "We Need Two C.I.A.'s" (Op-Ed, July 21) has an Alice in Wonderland logic.
After admitting that the Central Intelligence Agency failed in its analyses of Russia and China, Mr.
Goodman wants to give us two C.I.A.'s.
Perhaps we can then have twice the disasters the C.I.A. has already given us: a fanatical, murderous ayatollah regime in Iran, genocide in Guatemala, killer military dictators in Chile and Haiti.


Elsag Bailey Process Automation N.V. (EBY,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Bruncor Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Hitler Plot Had No Bearing on War's Outcome
To the Editor:
Re "The Making of a Tragedy" by Thomas Fleming (Op-Ed, July 19): The Allies had many good reasons for not paying much attention to the German military's tardy resistance to Hitler, but the underlying reason showed that the lessons of history can sometimes be properly applied.


Giant Industries Inc.(GI,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Imperial Holly Corp.(IHK,A) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Lemieux Reported Retiring Temporarily
MARIO LEMIEUX will meet with HOWARD BALDWIN, the owner of the Pittsburgh Penguins, this week and likely will tell him he isn't healthy enough to play this season, the Associated Press reported last night.
Lemieux, who is only 28 but missed nearly three-quarters of the 1993-94 season following his second back operation in four years, has missed at least 25 games over each of the last five seasons due to a bad back and Hodgkin's disease.
The Penguins would not confirm reports that Lemieux has decided to temporarily retire or will sit out the first half of the season before deciding whether to return in the 1994-95 season.


SIEGFRIED; Bayreuth 'Ring' Is Embracing Stylistic Diversity
Now that the second and third chapters have been added to the new production of Wagner's "Ring des Niebelungen" here, it is clear that "Das Rheingold" was a form of false advertising.
It led one to expect both too much and not enough from this interpretation of this tetralogy, conducted at the Bayreuth Festspielhaus by James Levine, directed by Alfred Kirchner and designed by the singularly named Rosalie.
Too much was expected because that opening performance gave the impression that this "Ring" was going to have a coherent if misguided interpretation.
With all the initial consistencies, it seemed as if it was going to be a coy polemic, deliberately undermining "The Ring" itself, finishing what the avant-garde Bayreuth productions by Patrice Chereau and Harry Kupfer began.


Wolverine Tube Inc.(WLV,N) reports earnings for Qtr to July 2


Couple Killed By Gunmen In Their Home
Two gunmen forced their way into the home of a Queens family last night and shot both parents to death and wounded their 14-year-old son, while their two daughters screamed for help.
While they would not rule out robbery as a motive, police officers at the family's home at 111-37 38th Avenue in the Corona said they were baffled by the crime.
Huddled around police cars in the street, neighbors, friends and relatives of the dead couple, Toribio and Maria Marmol, were no more able to offer an explanation, and described the victims as good people of modest means.


Kuhlman Corp.(KUH,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Corrections
An article yesterday about the changing South misstated the location of two cities in some copies.
Jacksonville, N.C., is near Camp Lejeune, not Fort Bragg; Smithdale, Miss., is in the southwest part of the state, not the northeast.


Wheeling-Pittsburgh (WHX,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Bosnians Urge Tougher Response to Serb Rejection of Accord
Bosnian Government leaders today criticized the United States and four other major powers for failing to take decisive action against the Bosnian Serbs for rejecting a peace plan.
In Belgrade, President Slobodan Milosevic of Serbia recommended that Bosnian Serb leaders reverse their rejection of the peace proposal, which would require the Serbs to acknowledge Bosnia's sovereignty, at least temporarily, and hand back a third of the territory they have captured and "ethnically cleansed."


At Time Inc., Two Fountains of Titles
New publications are coming from all directions at Time Inc.
Indeed, the company's new approach to start-ups has become a sort of East Coast-West Coast shootout over which part of Time Inc. is developing magazines more aggressively.
Two of the new publications, In Style and Makeover, are spinoffs of People magazine.
In May, the company gave the go-ahead to In Style, a celebrity magazine, after a market test of three issues.
And three weeks ago, the company published -Makeover as a mass-market magazine for women, although its future depends on the success of its first issue.


UST Inc.(UST,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Hall of Fame Call and Response


Major Benefits Are Foreseen In Crime Bill
From the streets of Brooklyn to new jail yards upstate, from after-school programs in Atlantic City to police training in New Haven, the Federal crime bill could bring hundreds of millions of dollars to the New York region to pay for thousands of new police officers, prisons, prevention and keeping criminal immigrants in jail.
Members of Congress from New York, New Jersey and Connecticut, and their Governors, are still sorting out the fine print in the sweeping $30 billion bill that House and Senate negotiators settled on this week.
They agree that the bill -- which is going back to both houses for expected passage -- would give many benefits to a region especially burdened by crime, though there is uncertainty just how many, or where, or when.


Is Nicotine Addictive? It Depends on Whose Criteria You Use
When heavily dependent users of cocaine are asked to compare the urge to take cocaine with the urge to smoke cigarettes, about 45 percent say the urge to smoke is as strong or stronger than that for cocaine.
Among heroin addicts, about 38 percent rank the urge to smoke as equal to or stronger than the urge to take heroin.
Among those addicted to alcohol, about 50 percent say the urge to smoke is at least as strong as the urge to drink.


President Takes His Opponents to Task
Pounding his lectern so hard that its Presidential seal popped off, President Clinton today gave a bristling dressing-down to a handful of protesters who sought -- with evident success -- to disrupt a rally on behalf of the Democrats' health care legislation.
The President had come to Liberty State Park across from the Statue of Liberty and lower Manhattan to greet one of the four "Health Security Express" bus caravans that are taking supporters of national health insurance to Washington.


Syms Corp.(SYM,N) reports earnings for Qtr to July 2


A U.N. License to Invade Haiti
If it persuades Haiti's military leaders to leave on their own, then Sunday's U.N.
Security Council resolution authorizing a U.S.-led invasion will have done some good.
The resolution contains no deadline, and the Clinton Administration has no plans for an imminent military strike.
Perhaps only the threat of force will convince Haiti's top soldiers they should depart.
They viscerally oppose the social and economic changes they believe President Jean-Bertrand Aristide would make if he returns.
And they are reportedly profiting handsomely from the status quo.


Amid Ethnic Wars, Psychiatrists Seek Roots of Conflicts
WHEN Vamik Volkan was growing up in a Turkish family on the island of Cyprus, he heard rumors that each knot in the local Greek priest's cincture stood for a Turkish child the priest had strangled.
Young Vamik also heard, in tones of dismay, that his Greek Cypriot neighbors ate pigs, considered too dirty to eat in Islamic culture.
Now a psychiatrist at the University of Virginia, Dr.
Volkan, who came to the United States in 1957, cites these Turkish Cypriot attitudes as examples of how ethnic hatreds can be kept simmering from generation to generation.
Dr.
Volkan proposes that a reservoir of hostile biases like these, as well as bitter memories of historical grievances, are shared by members of an ethnic group, and can set off active antagonism in times of group hardship or under the prodding of ambitious leaders.


Yangon Journal; She's the Junta's Friend (and That's Not in Vogue)
Her two-tone Chanel pumps were not made for wading through puddles.
But there was Miriam Marshall Segal, a white smock pulled over her couture-clad frame, touring her new shrimp-packing plant in a warehouse district in this most dilapidated of Asian capitals.
"Now this, this to me is human rights," Mrs.
Segal said, admiring the work of her young, stern-faced Burmese workers as they cleaned and packed handfuls of the morning's catch of meaty Black Tiger shrimp.
"We are giving jobs to 200 people here. These people have pride in their work. And that is what human rights is all about."


Seaman Furniture Co.(SEAM) reports earnings for Year to April 30


Bryan Murray Named Panthers' G.M.
Florida Panthers President BILL TORREY yesterday gave up his duties as general manager, added in May when BOBBY CLARKE left for the Flyers, and selected the former Detroit general manager BRYAN MURRAY to fill the vacancy.
Murray, 51, coached for 12 years in the N.H.L. and was Detroit's coach and general manager for three years before SCOTTY BOWMAN took over as coach last season.
Murray, fired June 3, said the Red Wings wanted to "clean the table" in preparation for hiring Coach MIKE KEENAN, who instead left the Rangers for St.
Louis. (AP)


Have No Fear: Trudeau Is Glad to Be Jet's Second Fiddle
After five games last season, the Indianapolis Colts made Jeff George their starting quarterback again and put Jack Trudeau on the bench.
After 11 games last season, the Jets kept Boomer Esiason, stiff neck and all, as their starting quarterback and left Browning Nagle on the bench because they did not think Nagle could do the job.
The worm turns.
In the off season, the Colts signed Jim Harbaugh as an unrestricted free agent, traded the still-sullen George to the Atlanta Falcons and made Trudeau happy by releasing him.
The Jets released Nagle and replaced him as the backup with Trudeau.
To complete the circuit, Nagle caught on with the Colts.


Krushelnyski Signs With Red Wings
The free agent MIKE KRUSHELNYSKI, 34, a defensive forward who can play center or left wing, signed a one-year contract today with the Detroit Red Wings.
He played with Toronto the past four seasons, but the Maple Leafs offered him only a termination contract. (AP)


The Health Care Debate Comes to Liberty Park


Power Corp. Canada reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


LTV's Weld of Worker and Manager
When new production workers are needed at an LTV Corporation plant here, a committee reviews applications, then decides whom to hire.
Not so unusual, except that the committee is made up entirely of unionized plant workers -- not managers -- who have been given the authority to decide who their co-workers will be.


Power Financial reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


New Rochelle Man Is Acquitted In Rape of a Visiting Pen Pal
A New Rochelle man has been acquitted of raping his pen pal, a Colombian woman who later bore his child, during the woman's trip to the United States in October 1992.
A jury here on Friday found the man, Joseph Macri, a 44-year-old house painter, not guilty of first-degree rape.
During the weeklong trial, the defense argued that the woman had stayed with Mr.
Macri for six days and that she said she had been raped only after she discovered that she was pregnant.


Transportacion Maritima Mexicana S.A.(TMM,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Long Island Bancorp Inc.(LISB,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Avondale Industries (AVDL,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


LDDS Buying Provider of Global Phone Service
LDDS Communications, the nation's fourth-largest long-distance telephone company, said today that it had reached an agreement to acquire the IDB Communications Group, a telecommunications company with an international network, in a stock transaction.
The acquisition was announced after the markets closed.
LDDS shares were unchanged today at $19.50 in Nasdaq trading.
IDB shares rose 12.5 cents, to $9.50, also on Nasdaq.


Chiquita Brands International Inc.(CQB,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Textbook Senate Race
Senator Lautenberg of New Jersey is using a classic rose-garden strategy in his re-election effort.
But analysts say his race against Chuck Haytaian, the speaker of the State Assembly, is a tossup.
Article, page B1.


A Semblance of Normality Returns to Rwandan City
Within mortar range of a hillside that rebel soldiers overran to capture the city, overthrow the Government and end one of the worst mass killings the world has known, one of the favorite night clubs in Kigali -- Kigali Night -- has reopened.
It seems none the worse for wear, except that its neon sign now reads: K I G A L I T.
There is no running water in Kigali.
Local generators provide the only power, and it is rationed by the hour.


Giants' Strahan Proves Tough for the Toughest
When the Giants' Michael Strahan pulled his hamstring early last week, the defensive line coach, Earl Leggett, diagnosed the problem as "Webb-itis." The term, which has yet to make its way into any medical dictionaries, does not mean Strahan is afraid of spiders.
It refers to the 6-foot-6-inch, 300-pound Miami Dolphins offensive tackle Richmond Webb, a four-time Pro Bowler whom Strahan was then scheduled to line up against.
Leggett was joking that maybe Strahan's hamstring had more to do with Webb than any real physical problems.
The "Webb-itis," however, must have been one of those 24-hour strains because in Saturday's exhibition game against Miami, it was Strahan who looked like the Pro Bowler.
He beat Webb over and over, chasing the backup quarterback, Bernie Kosar, all around the field.


BOK Financial Corp.(BOKF,NSC) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Detroit Diesel Corp.(DDC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Glendale Federal Bank (GLN,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Poor Ticket Sales Force Cancellation Of a 'Woodstock'
Dreams of a weekend of fun and profit in celebration of the 25th anniversary of Woodstock faltered yesterday, as the backers of one of two competing concerts withdrew, complaining of poor ticket sales.
Meanwhile, the organizers of the other concert extended their deadline for ticket sales and relaxed their cumbersome parking rules.
But they said that although tens of thousands of tickets were still available for next weekend, they were pleased with sales so far.


Return of Refugees to Rwanda Slows, Frustrating U.N.
The flow of refugees back into Rwanda has slowed greatly, and United Nations personnel remain divided over whether this is good or bad, and over what should be done next.
The United States and many relief agencies have repeatedly said that the quick return of the million refugees from Zaire was critical.
They have suggested that an organized start should get under way immediately before the onset of heavy seasonal rains next month, when conditions in the camps will become even more nightmarish.


Early Amphibian Fossil Hints of a Trip Ashore Earlier Than Thought
IT was a real fish-eat-fish world 365 million years ago.
That is the way Dr.
Neil H. Shubin, a University of Pennsylvania paleontologist, characterizes the competitive conditions in which fish were evolving bigger teeth, larger bodies and tougher armor, a fitness program for survival in the fierce marine world.
But some clever fishes chose escape as the better part of valor, becoming the first amphibians and being able to feed in the water and flee to safety on land.


INSIDE
Enjoying Nature at a Price
With voluntary contributions averaging just $1 a visitor, the New York Botanical Garden has decided to impose a $3 admission price.
Page B1.
Defiance From Haiti
After the United Nations vote authorizing an invasion, Haiti ordered a state of siege and told residents to prepare for a fight.
Page A3.
Citadel Means a Haircut
A judge ruled that the South Carolina military college may require its only female cadet to have her head shaved as all male cadets must do.
Page A14.
Michael Jackson Is Wed
After weeks of rumors, Lisa Marie Presley, Elvis's only child, confirmed that she and Michael Jackson were married 9 weeks ago.
Page A15.


Alliance Entertainment Corp.(CDS,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


G.E. Picks Berlin For Credit-Card Ads
The General Electric Company selected Berlin Wright Cameron in New York yesterday to handle advertising for its G.E.
Rewards credit-card account, which had been at Hal Riney &amp; Partners of New York and San Francisco for the last two years.
Berlin Wright was awarded the account, with billings estimated at $10 million, without a review.
A campaign is expected to begin in the fall.


Haitian Military Greets Invasion Vote With Defiance
The Haitian military leadership responded with public defiance today to the United Nations authorization of an American-led invasion, ordering a state of siege and urging the Haitian people to prepare for what it predicted will be a "tough, implacable" fight for survival.
The action, announced by the director of the state television network in a brief broadcast that began just after 3 A.M., permits the government to formally suspend constitutional guarantees and transfer much of its nominal authority to the military.


COMPANY BRIEFS
EXXON CORP., Irving, Tex., completed the sale of two of its chemical operations -- Callaway Chemical Co. and Comcor Chemicals Ltd. -- to Vulcan, a division of Vulcan Materials Co., Birmingham, Ala., a construction materials concern.
Terms of the deal were not disclosed.


Chinese Stock Markets Bounce Back, Rising 30%
Chinese stock prices surged more than 30 percent yesterday after the Government's announcement late last week that it had halted the listing of new stock issues.
On the Shanghai stock market, an index of class A shares, meant for domestic investors, rose by 36 percent.
And on the smaller exchange in the southern city of Shenzhen, across from Hong Kong, the A share index increased by 34 percent.
Both markets had fallen by more than 75 percent from their highs last year.


Kelly Services Inc.(KELYA,NMS) reports earnings for 13wks to July 3


Old National Bancorp (OLDB,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Former First Lady Visits Boston


Investors Group reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Wheat Pact By Canada And U.S.
Embracing the kind of trade restrictions it has sought to eliminate in foreign markets, the Clinton Administration today struck a deal with Ottawa to sharply reduce Canadian wheat shipments to the United States for one year.
The reduction fulfills a promise the Clinton Administration made last November to help win votes for the North American Free Trade Agreement from wheat-state lawmakers who said that Canadian imports held down wheat prices.


Eastern Utilities Associates (EUA,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


American Water Works Co.  (AWK,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Montana Power Co.(MTP,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Talk-Show Diplomacy Won't Settle the Issue
Richard Ravitch and Donald Fehr stood in front of the mirror in Dressing Room 1 outside a Channel 13 studio, removing makeup from their faces.
They had just finished taping the Charlie Rose PBS television program, the third episode in "The Dick and Don Show." Last Monday they appeared together on "Nightline" and on Sunday they popped up as a duet on David Brinkley's show.
"I have to leave town later," said Fehr, referring to a trip he was taking to Washington.


Bosnian Camp Survivors Describe Random Death
He has been described as a tall slim figure with a nasal voice, a Serb in his mid-30's named Dragan Nikolic, and he appears to have displayed a singular brutality as the orchestrator of the proceedings at Susica, the Serbian concentration camp just outside this eastern Bosnian town.
Each night throughout the summer of 1992, witnesses say, Mr.
Nikolic would come into the barracks and point to men or read out a list of names.
Shortly afterward, people inside the building would hear shooting.
The men selected never returned.
According to Pero Popovic, a former guard at the camp, they were generally lined up against an electricity pylon just outside the barracks and shot.


Giuliani Says Redeployment of Municipal Workers Is on Schedule
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani said yesterday that the redeployment of workers to soften the blow of budget cuts was moving on schedule despite reports to the contrary.
Under an agreement between the city and municipal employee unions, city workers can be transferred to other agencies to fill critical positions left vacant under a voluntary severance program in which more than 6,000 workers left their jobs.


Rush to the Moos Left Us Nowhere to Go; Mere Mortals, Not
To the Editor:
Re "Crash of the Comet" (editorial, July 16): You cannot but "marvel when a comet set in motion billions of years ago reaches a long-ordained collision with our largest planet." But then you offer a non sequitur: "It's enough to make mere mortals seem puny and temporary."


Some Familiar Terrain After 'American Psycho'
The Informers  By Bret Easton Ellis  226 pages. Alfred A. Knopf. $22.
After three earlier novels ("Less Than Zero," "The Rules of Attraction" and "American Psycho"), readers pretty much know what to expect from Bret Easton Ellis's fiction: shallow, cynical young people with empty, meaningless lives; lots of drugs, designer clothes and fancy cars; perfunctory, sometimes violent sex, and some sort of sensationalistic crime (gang rape, torture and mutilation).


MascoTech Inc.(MSX,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Jacome Finds Out Why Maddux Is No. 1
Jason Jacome watched Greg Maddux carefully from the dugout last night at Shea Stadium, and the Mets rookie pitcher learned a few things about the Atlanta starter considered the best in the National League.
Maddux is fearless, he throws strikes and he is difficult to beat -- no matter how well you pitch against him.


United Cities Gas Co.(UCIT,NMS) reports earnings for 12mos to June 30


Rwanda's Wounds Won't Heal Any Time Soon; World's Police Officer?
To the Editor:
Must all the wrongs of the world and all the blame for not solving them be laid at the feet of President Clinton and his Administration?
"Did U.S. Err on Rwanda?", your July 23 news analysis, tries to answer its own question with the subhead "Some Say Slow Action May Have Cost Lives." The United States is guilty, it appears, for not responding "more aggressively to appeals for intervention" by the United Nations.


Anti-Smoking Spray Helps but Is Addictive
In testimony to a Food and Drug Administration advisory committee, officials at a Swedish pharmaceutical company today described a nicotine nasal spray that they say has been successful in helping people quit smoking.
But the testimony also disclosed that some smokers become addicted to the spray itself.
The spray has just gone on the market in five European countries, and a drug concern is seeking permission to market it in the United States.
The panel made no recommendation today on whether to approve it.


Sounding Off at an Early Age


Results Plus
EQUESTRIAN American Rider Wins Silver Medal Kerith Lemon has focused most of the past year on vaulting in an effort to bringhome a medal at the World Equestrian Games in the Hague.
Today, she fulfilledthat goal when she won the individual silver in the women's competition.
It was the third medal for United States riders, who have also captured a dressage teambronze and a three-day event individual silver.
Germans Tanja Benedetto andMieke Lorentz took the gold and bronze.


Romario's Absence Irks Barcelona Coach
Barcelona Coach JOHAN CRUYFF is angry with the Brazilian World Cup star ROMARIO for taking an unauthorized vacation and refusing to join the rest of the team as it prepares to seek a fifth straight Spanish league title.
The season begins the first week of September.
"This demonstrates a lack of respect towards his teammates," Cruyff told reporters. (AP)


Letting a Monteverdi Masterpiece Speak for Itself
Since Glimmerglass Opera does not play safe, its productions tend to live in the memory, for good or ill.
Two of the presentations this season -- Jonathan Miller's sublime rendering of Monteverdi's "Incoronazione di Poppea," seen on Saturday evening, and Keith Warner's ridiculous travesty of Rossini's "Barbiere di Siviglia," seen this afternoon -- are sure to do so.
Mostly Monteverdi's "Incoronazione," that is.
Alan Curtis, in his 1989 edition of the opera, ascribed authorship of the final scene to Monteverdi's contemporary Francesco Sacrati.
It is sobering to think that if Mr.
Curtis's theory had received wide circulation, say, 8 or 10 years earlier, when authenticity mania was at its height, the concluding "Pur ti miro," which the Monteverdi biographer Denis Stevens called "the most beautiful of all Monteverdi's duets," might have fallen into disrepute.


METRO DIGEST
SCALED-BACK PLANS FOR THE WESTWAY Rejecting more ambitious and costly proposals for a roadway that would dip under and rise over intersections, transportation officials have chosen to reconstruct the West Side Highway as an enhanced version of what is there today.
The $380 million plan is a drastically scaled-back successor to the Westway project, an Interstate highway proposed in 1974 that was to tunnel through landfill and under new real-estate development along the Hudson River shoreline of Manhattan.
A1.
WOODSTOCK CELEBRATION SHRINKS Dreams of a weekend of fun and profit in celebration of the 25th anniversary of Woodstock appeared to falter as the backers of a concert in Bethel, N.Y., one of two competing festivals, withdrew, complaining of poor ticket sales.
Meanwhile, the organizers of the other concert, in Saugerties, N.Y., extended their deadline for ticket sales and relaxed their cumbersome parking rules.
A1.
NEW YORK CITY  GIULIANI CITES JOB-SHIFT GAINS Mayor Giuliani said that the redeployment of workers to soften the blow of budget cuts was moving on schedule despite reports to the contrary.
Under an agreement between the city and municipal employee unions, city workers can be transferred to other agencies to fill critical positions left vacant under a voluntary severance program.
B3.
SLAYINGS IN QUEENS LINKED TO GAMBLING The slaying of a Queens couple who were shot in front of their young daughters on Sunday night may have resulted from their son's illegal sports-betting operation, the police said.
B3.
REGION RAGE IS CITED IN CHILD SLAYING The defense attorney for a 14-year-old boy standing trial for the murder of a 4-year-old camper last summer told a Steuben County jury that the defendant was in an uncontrollable rage when he choked and bludgeoned the child.
The baby-faced teen-ager, Eric Smith, listened without expression as the attorney said that an unprovoked urge to hurt the little boy had quickly escalated into a vicious series of death-dealing blows.
B5.
AUNT GOES TO JORDAN TO GET CHILDREN The sister of a New Jersey woman whose husband strangled her and then fled to Jordan arrived in the capital, Amman, seeking to return to the United States with the couple's children.
B5.
LABORERS, WILLING BUT UNWANTED Every morning, 60 to 75 Central Americans gather on bus stops and corners along Broad Avenue, the main drag in Palisades Park, N.J., waiting for contractors to pick them up.
It is not the kind of scene the tidy little blue-collar town has been able to accept.
Our Towns, B5.
PATAKI UNVEILS A TELEVISION AD CAMPAIGN State Senator George E. Pataki unveiled two television advertisements aimed at defining who he is for a public that knows little about him or his qualifications to become governor.
B4.
Prosecutors said that a Hamilton Township, N.J., man accused in the sexual assault and murder of his 7-year-old neighbor had signed a statement admitting to the crime.
B2.
A New Rochelle man has been acquitted of raping his pen pal, a Colombian woman who later bore his child, during the woman's trip to the United States.
B4.
Chronicle B4


GP Financial Corp.(GNPT,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Chess
The Palladienne Tournament, a confrontation of the best young women in chess and a selection of senior male grandmasters, was won this year by the women in mid-June in Monaco.
The women's team triumphed by 37 to 35 in the double-round competition, in which each player meets every player on the other team.
This was the third in the series sponsored by Joop van Oosterom of the Netherlands and the second in a row won by the women.
Last year they won in Vienna; the year before the men won on the Caribbean island of Aruba.


OFFICIALS APPROVE PLANS TO REBUILD WEST SIDE ARTERY
Rejecting more ambitious and costly proposals for a roadway that would dip under and rise over intersections, transportation officials have chosen to reconstruct the West Side Highway as an enhanced version of what is there today.
The $380 million plan is a drastically scaled-back successor to the Westway project, an Interstate highway proposed in 1974 that was to tunnel through landfill and under new real-estate development along the Hudson River shoreline of Manhattan.
When the Westway project was abandoned in 1985, its cost was estimated at $2 billion.


Switzer Has a Fan Club, and a Cowboy Is Its President
If Dallas safety James Washington never makes another tackle, never swipes another pass or never even plays another down, he will forever be part of National Football League history and Super Bowl lore.
It was his recovery of a fumble by the Buffalo Bills' Thurman Thomas and 46-yard return for a touchdown early in the second half that was the spark for the Dallas Cowboys' second straight title in Super Bowl XXVIII.


Upjohn to Repay 8 States Over Drug Plan
The Upjohn Company has agreed to pay New York and seven other states $650,000 to reimburse them for their costs in investigating a controversial Upjohn drug marketing plan, Attorney General G. Oliver Koppell of New York announced yesterday.
Upjohn had paid pharmacists to induce patients to switch from one diabetes drug to another.
Both drugs are made by Upjohn, but one of them, Micronase, lost its patent protection two years ago and other companies have entered the market with cheaper generic competitors, which pharmacists would frequently recommend to their customers.
The other drug, Glynase PresTab, is still protected by a patent, so no generic version is available.


Survival of the Big Cats Brings Conflict With Man
THE tiger and the cheetah appear to be on their last legs.
The grizzly bear and the wolf are struggling desperately to hang on in the Rocky Mountains.
But biologists say the resourceful and mysterious cougar, alone among the world's big endangered carnivores, has sprung back spectacularly from the brink of extinction and now reigns as the king of wild predators in North America.
As cougars repopulate much of their former range, however, they are also encountering humans more frequently.
Sometimes there are tragic consequences, as when, in April, one of the big cats ambushed and killed a mother of two children in northern California.
The incident raised with special intensity the issue of whether and how expanding populations of cougars and people can coexist.


Bank United of Texas reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Donohue Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Coherent Inc.(COHR,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to July 2


Nine West Is Adding to Its Footwear Empire
The Nine West Group Inc., the shoe company that is fast becoming the Gap of the footwear industry, surprised Wall Street yesterday by disclosing a proposal to buy the U.S.
Shoe Corporation's footwear business for $425 million in Nine West stock.
Nine West went public with its proposal after U.S.
Shoe spurned its advances last week.
In an interview yesterday, J. Vincent Camuto, the co-chairman and president of Nine West, said his company decided to alert U.S.
Shoe shareholders that their board had rejected its offer.
"It really gets down to whether the shareholders have some say when they get a legitimate offer like this, or whether the board can just reject it out of hand," Mr.
Camuto said.


Marine Midland Banks Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Associates Corp. of North America reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Army Routed From Rwanda Now Intimidates Its Refugees
At the refugee camp here and on a stretch of road beyond, one immediately notices something different about the people: among the throngs of weak and sick, women and children in tattered clothes and dirty, there are great numbers of men in uniform, the camouflage combat uniform of the Rwandan Army, the Government troops who were routed last month by the Rwandan Patriotic Front.
These are also the troops, mostly Hutu, who are widely accused by the United Nations and human rights groups of massacring hundreds of thousands of Tutsi in Rwanda.
Some of their officers talk freely about their standing on a list of accused killers drawn up by the new Tutsi-dominated Government in Rwanda.


Stocks Rally Despite Trading Disruption
It was another day of crosscurrents in the financial markets yesterday.
Despite a computer mishap at Nasdaq, the stock market as a whole rallied for the third consecutive day, amid further evidence that the economy might be slowing.
Meanwhile, bond prices fell but then recovered in the afternoon to close essentially unchanged.
The rebound in bonds, which started around 11 A.M., appeared to heighten and accelerate the rise in stocks.
The bond surge was probably aided by European investors who appeared to buy back a dollar weakened by the latest chapter in trade friction between the United States and Japan.


Protective Life Corp.(PL,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Pataki Unveils a Television Ad Campaign
In his first major advertising blitz, State Senator George E. Pataki unveiled two television advertisements today aimed at defining who he is for a public that knows little about him or his qualifications to become governor.
Mr.
Pataki's campaign would not say how much he spent but called the amount "substantial." The 30-second commercials for Mr.
Pataki, a Republican, will be broadcast around the state starting on Tuesday.


Tyson Foods Inc.(TYSNA,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to July 2


Big Brother Carefully Coaches Writers
WE all want to write stories.
Admit it.
That prize-winning novel, short story, stage or screenplay is trying to get out.
When he is not writing novels (his 10th, "Animals," should be published next year) Sol Stein gives lessons in the writing of fiction.
These lessons have been distilled into two software series, first Writepro and now Fictionmaster.


Cheevers Sentenced for Tax Evasion
GERRY CHEEVERS, the former coach and star goalie of the Boston Bruins, was sentenced in Concord, N.H., yesterday to three years' probation and 500 hours of community service for income tax evasion.
The United States District Court also ordered him to pay back $10,000 in back taxes, interest and penalties.
In court in May, Cheevers blamed gambling for his problems. (AP)


Corrections
Because of a production error, an article yesterday about a concentration camp in Bosnia omitted a passage in some copies.
The affected paragraphs should have read:
"Mr. Popovic estimated that on the basis of individual and mass executions he personally witnessed, close to 3,000 Muslims from around Vlasenica (pronounced vlah-seh-NEET-sah) lost their lives at Susica after the Bosnian war began in April 1992. 'In all, about 3,000 were killed,' he said. Those that survived lost their homes and possessions.


Potomac Electric Power Co.(POM,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


A Prodigy Prepares to Seize His Moment
Marbury.
It is a storied name in high school basketball in a city with a rich tradition.


Where Profit and Tradition Mingle; Oneida Nation's C.E.O. Runs New York's First Indian Casino
The blackjack tables are crammed as the Indian leader enjoys a risk-laced, bountiful day, the kind of day he envisioned when he applied to Harvard Law School, the better to get inside the C.E.O. world of the white man.
"An exclusive club," said Ray Halbritter, the New York Oneida Nation's representative and chief executive, who did indeed get his Harvard law degree on top of a business degree four years ago and has gone on to operate his own exclusive club.
He runs New York's first Indian gambling casino, Turning Stone, which has just begun its second year netting a sudden fortune in tribal profits and the respect of its job-depressed neighbors here, 30 miles east of Syracuse.


Rouge Steel Co.(ROU,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Penguins Wait to Hear It From Lemieux
The Pittsburgh Penguins' superstar center, MARIO LEMIEUX, has talked about sitting out the next National Hockey League season, and the team chairman, HOWARD BALDWIN, said yesterday he will soon meet with Lemieux concerning the 1994-95 season.
"Some discussions have taken place with Mario concerning the possibility of his taking a year off, but at this point, Mario has not informed us of anything definite," said Baldwin.
The cable television sports network ESPN reported Sunday that Lemieux, who has come back from Hodgkin's disease and has had recurring back problems, will take a year off and then plan a return to the Penguins.
The 28-year-old Lemieux, a four-time N.H.L. scoring champion who led the Penguins to Stanley Cups in 1991 and 1992, played in only 22 regular-season games and 6 playoff games last season because of back pain. (Reuters)


Van Cliburn Decides To Perform After All
Van Cliburn said late on Sunday evening that he would perform at the Metropolitan Opera House tonight despite the announcement by his spokesman on Sunday that the performance would be postponed because of illness in his family.
Mr.
Cliburn, who was in New York last week, returned to Fort Worth on Thursday after his mother, Rildia Bee Cliburn, had a stroke.
Mrs.
Cliburn, who is 97, remains hospitalized, and Mr.
Cliburn described her condition as grave.
"This has been a very sad, very disturbing time," he said.
"But I'm going to try to do the concert at the Met, because I have a feeling that she would want me to do it. There are certain times when you have to set aside personal feelings and come to terms with them later."


Slayings in Queens Linked to Gambling
The slaying of a Queens couple who were shot in front of their young daughters on Sunday night may have resulted from their son's illegal sports-betting operation, the police said yesterday.
Investigators are looking for two suspects in the killing of the couple, Toribio and Maria Marmol of Corona, Detective Kim Royster, a police spokeswoman, said.
The couple's son Daniel was apparently running a sports-betting operation that he disguised behind a legitimate long-distance telephone business, she said.


Transco Energy (E,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Observer; The Heart of Darkness
In response to the pleas of many serious but baffled people, here is a digest of a few of the more trenchant passages in my "Key to the Inner Meaning of 'Forrest Gump.' "
1.
What the feather tells us: The common interpretation arises from the feather's long history as a symbol for lightness.
Appearing at the very beginning of the film, it seems to be a device for letting the more cerebral reviewers know they might as well go see another movie since "Forrest Gump" will simply be light entertainment unlikely to enrich their grasp of the meaning of things.


Elvis Presley's Daughter Confirms She Wed Michael Jackson
Lisa Marie Presley, the daughter of the late Elvis Presley, released a statement yesterday saying that she and the singer Michael Jackson had married.
After announcing a union that might have been conceived in supermarket-tabloid heaven and proclaiming a need for privacy, the world's most famous newlyweds were holed up last night in a place not known for its isolation: Trump Tower.


LeMond, Tested for Lead Poison, May Quit
GREG LeMOND, a three-time Tour de France winner, said he's undergoing tests in Minneapolis for lead poisoning and is considering retirement.
LeMond was accidentally shot in a hunting accident in 1987, and 35 lead pellets remain in his body.
Four of them are in his liver and lungs and two in his heart lining.
"The first couple of years (after the accident), I performed fairly well," LeMond said Sunday.
He won the Tour de France in 1986, 1989 and 1990, but said his ability decreases every year.
He dropped out of this year's Tour de France in July when he became exhausted in the sixth stage.
"I'm not trying to make excuses," he said.
"I want to come back and be on top, but it has been impossible. Unless I can come back, I won't race." (AP)


Bayreuth Sturm und Drang, On the Stage and Off
What a peculiar production of Wagner's "Ring des Niebelungen" this has been at Bayreuth!
It wasn't until "Gotterdammerung" was performed on Sunday night that the director, Alfred Kirchner, and the designer, billed only as Rosalie, gave the slightest inkling that they had any knowledge of how to design a coherent evening of opera.
This was the only work in the tetralogy that had a focus and style, and the only one that worked without swerving into gimmickry and miscellany.
And it did so not by being avant-garde but by finally settling on one of the intermittent virtues of the production so far: using an abstract, simple set -- a domed floor and black background -- against which the characters play out their fates.
The one innovation was having Hagen (menacingly sung by Eric Halfvarson) become a passive lump of a man as his dream image of Alberich spurred him to villainy.
Otherwise convention ruled, starkly and strikingly executed.


Day 5 on a Sinking Stock Pyramid: Blame Moscow
"Nobody knows anything," the policeman pleaded into a megaphone. "Especially here."
Under a hot, haze-filtered sun, thousands of angry shareholders ignored him, milling and pressing and pushing outside the gates of MMM, Russia's largest investment company, on Day 5 of a continuing Russian pageant of hope and despair.


United Insurance Cos.(UICI,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Rwanda's Wounds Won't Heal Any Time Soon; Our National Interest
To the Editor:
Three months ago, with the outbreak of violence in Kigali, the international community panicked and pulled out of Rwanda.
Against the urging of the Secretary General, the United States and others crippled the ability of a United Nations peacekeeping force of 2,500, which had been in Rwanda since 1990, to curtail the killing rampage.


Women Who Survived The Allure of Suicide
"All these years I've wanted to tell people where I was when Kennedy was shot," a weathered-looking, bushy-haired woman in her 50's confides to the camera.
"I was always so afraid someone would ask me, and I'd have to say I was in a mental institution."
This is the film maker Allie Light, and she is among the seven women who tell the stories of their bouts with depression and other forms of suicidal madness in Ms.
Light's latest documentary, "Dialogues With Madwomen." Ms.
Light's personal recollections and omniscience lend piquancy to what is overall a gravely sympathetic portrait of women we are meant to see as heroic survivors, though it doesn't quite work out to be as uplifting as all that.


Judge Allows Head Shaving Of a Woman At The Citadel
In a hearing that explored the isolation Shannon Faulkner may experience as the only female cadet in a military college of 2,000 men, a Federal district judge ruled today that college officials might shave her head.
The judge, C. Weston Houck, also challenged the wisdom of assigning Ms.
Faulkner to sleep in an 80-bed infirmary with no ability to lock her door, but he stopped short of ordering the college to provide a lock, saying, "I don't want to tell you what to do."


Let's Look Closer at the Rising Birthrate for Single Mothers; Count Gay Families
To the Editor:
Your July 20 front-page article omits that lesbian and gay parents are a growing portion of those the Census Bureau calls "single parents." In New York City, for instance, the 1993 Voter Research and Survey poll found that 8 percent of the electorate identified themselves as gay, lesbian or bisexual and that they had children in the schools in the same percentages as nongay people.


Are Hugs the Solution to Violence?
Just when you thought that the three-strikes-and-out, crackdown-on-crime spirit had taken over, here comes evidence that the old softhearted liberal attitude toward the wayward is alive if not exactly well.
"Gang War: Bangin' in Little Rock" presents a picture of young gang members who are helping keep up the record murder rate of Little Rock, Ark., as losers in need of understanding and help from the society that has made them what they are and is now paying for it.
The camera tracks Steve Nawojczyk, the Little Rock coroner, on his mission to persuade inner-city youths to put away their guns.
He goes from turf to turf, showing photographs of children and teen-agers who have been killed, on purpose or because they just happened to be in the way of the sort of drive-by shooting that he is seen stepping into as the camera rolls.
"We've got to reach out and hug those kids," he says.


McDermott International (MDR,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Pretty? No. Effective? Absolutely, Positively.
Sometimes slowly, sometimes quickly, the Yankees usually score a wealth of runs.
Sometimes impressively, sometimes sluggishly, the Yankees usually wrest control of games before nine innings expire.
They were slow and sluggish tonight, but, as usual, it did not matter in the end.
The Yankees defeated the Brewers, 8-3, for their sixth straight road victory after overcoming a 3-1 deficit and an erratic beginning by Melido Perez.
The dominance continued, the victories continued and the Yanks continued soaring toward the strike date like a team scrambling for one more run in the bottom of the ninth.


Meredith Corp.(MDP,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Rosa Chacel, 96, A Spanish Novelist Exiled for 36 Years
Rosa Chacel, a Spanish writer of complex, intellectual novels and poetry, who was in exile during most of the Franco era, died on Wednesday in the Ramon y Cajal Hospital in Madrid.
She was 96 and lived in Madrid.
The cause was heart and lung failure, hospital officials said.


Results Plus
EQUESTRIAN American Rider Wins Silver Medal Kerith Lemon has focused most of the past year on vaulting in an effort to bringhome a medal at the World Equestrian Games in the Hague.
Today, she fulfilledthat goal when she won the individual silver in the women's competition.
It was the third medal for United States riders, who have also captured a dressage teambronze and a three-day event individual silver.
Germans Tanja Benedetto andMieke Lorentz took the gold and bronze.


U.S. Arms Merchants Fatten Share of Sales to Third World
The United States increased its leading share of arms sales to the third world last year, but overall sales to those countries continued a decline that started at the end of the cold war, the Congressional Research Service reported today.
Sales from the United States to third-world countries increased slightly to $14.8 billion in 1993 from $14.6 billion in 1992.
But the share of America's sales in that period jumped to 73 percent from 56 percent of all weapons sales and sales agreements.


Treasury Prices Regain Most of Early Losses
Interest rates were flat yesterday as Treasury prices regained most of their early losses that came after a morning spurt of data showed glimpses of economic strength.
But traders said it was the dollar's performance in the currency market that contributed to much of the bond market's weakness and later to its near comeback.
Over all, the market was quiet and only mildly influenced by reports on construction spending and personal income and the National Association of Purchasing Management index.


Eljer Industries Inc.(ELJ,N) reports earnings for Qtr to July 3


Amerada Hess Corp.(AHC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Murder Trial Begins for Teen-Ager
The defense attorney for a 14-year-old boy standing trial for the murder of a 4-year-old last summer told a Steuben County jury today that the defendant was in an uncontrollable rage when he choked and bludgeoned the child.
The baby-faced teen-ager, Eric Smith, his aviator glasses perched on a freckled nose, listened without expression as the attorney, Kevin Bradley, said in his opening remarks that an unprovoked urge to hurt the little boy had quickly escalated into a vicious series of death-dealing blows the defendant was powerless to stop.


Indiana Energy Inc.(IEI,N) reports earnings for 12mo to June 30


Accounts
*
Martin Paint Home Decorating Centers, Queens, to J. Richard Smith Advertising, Melville, L.I., to handle its account, previously at Sid Paterson Advertising, New York.
Billings were estimated at $2 million. *
American Express Travel Related Services Co., Arlington, Va., to Abramson Ehrlich Manes, Washington, to handle the account of its Government Travel Management Services division, previously divided among various agencies.
Billings were not disclosed.


One More Victim in Argentina: Vast Judaica Library
Ancient Yiddish and Hebrew books, salvaged from the ashes of European synagogues and libraries burned by the Nazis, were secretly shipped during World War II to faraway South America for safekeeping.
Now, half a century later, many of these works -- and a major part of the largest Judaica library in Latin America -- have been obliterated by the truck bomb that leveled the Jewish community center here.


KCS Energy Inc.(KCS,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Onbancorp Inc.(ONBK,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Haytaian Trying Senate Campaign Blitz Against Lautenberg
It is still high summer, the season for sweet corn and shore trips, and the fall election is 100 days off.
But Chuck Haytaian, the Republican speaker of the New Jersey State Assembly, has already burned the tread off one set of tires on his van in a race for the United States Senate that sometimes sounds more like a campaign for invasion than for election.
"I'd like to shake up the Senate," Mr.
Haytaian exclaims at his five or six campaign stops each day.
"We've seen the status quo for too long."


Alexander &amp; Alexander Services Inc.(AAL,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Grey Is Chosen For Kool Account
Brown &amp; Williamson said yesterday that it had selected Grey Advertising of New York to continue to handle creative work for its Kool cigarette brand, the company's largest brand.
Though billings on the national account were not disclosed, Adweek estimated them at $25 million.
Grey, which was awarded the Kool account five months ago, defended its position after being challenged by B.&amp; W.'s other agency, Tatham Euro RSCG in Chicago, in a creative presentation.
Tom Fitzgerald, a B.&amp; W. spokesman in Louisville, Ky., said a campaign from Grey would begin later this year.


New York Haitians Split Over Use of Force
From their living rooms to the barber shops, New York's Haitians spent yesterday passionately discussing the United Nations Security Council resolution authorizing a United States-led invasion of Haiti if the country's military leaders do not leave voluntarily.
While voicing some misgivings, supporters of the ousted President, the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide, said that they would back any action if it unseated the junta, which seized power in September 1991.


Pistons Get West From Suns  Mark West, the Phoenix Suns' aging center, was traded yesterday to the Detroit Pistons for second-round draft picks in 1996 and 1999. West, 33, gives the Pistons a legitimate center, something they lacked all season. The Suns are close to signing free agent Danny Manning, making West expendable. At .592, West is the National Basketball Association's all-time field goal percentage leader among active players, second to Artis Gilmore's .599 on the all-time list. And with 501 consecutive games played, he trails only A. C. Green among active players. (AP)


Wackenhut Corp.(WAK,N) reports earnings for Qtr to July 3


Nintendo Is Ordered to Pay $208 Million in Patent Case
In a stunning defeat for the video game manufacturer Nintendo, a Federal jury awarded $208 million in damages yesterday to a bankrupt computer company in a patent infringement lawsuit.
The award in favor of the Alpex Computer Corporation, which filed for bankruptcy in 1985, appears to be the third- or fourth-largest single patent infringement award ever granted by a jury in the United States.


Way Off Broadway, a Theater Where Art and Celebrity Mix
As Sybil Christopher tells it, she was sitting in an outdoor cafe in this low-key tourist town on the south fork of Long Island when the idea first took hold.
It was the summer of 1991.
With her was Tony Walton, the scenic designer; his wife, Gen LeRoy; his daughter Emma, an actress and director, and Emma's husband, Stephen Hamilton.
They were looking across the road at a warehouselike building that had recently housed a disco.
"And somebody said, 'Wouldn't that make a nice theater?' " Ms. Christopher recalled.


Janis Carter, 80, Actress and TV Host
Janis Carter, an actress in film and theater, and the co-host of the television quiz show "Feather Your Nest," died on Saturday in Durham, N.C.
She was 80 and had homes in Longboat Key, Fla., Durham and Manhattan.
The cause was a heart attack, said her husband, Julius Stulman.


OG&amp;E Services (OGE,N) reports earnings for 12mos to June 30


Cooper Arrested on Assault Charge
MICHAEL COOPER, the former Los Angeles Lakers star and current assistant coach, was arrested last week on a charge of battery and assault after allegedly threatening his wife, WANDA, with a vase, according to a Corrales, N.M., police report released today.
He was arrested the night of July 27 after the police responded to a report of domestic disturbance at Cooper's home.
The Coopers have been married for 17 years.
Through their lawyer, the couple released a statement saying: "While this incident is truly regrettable, it should be made clear that Michael never hit Wanda and that Wednesday night's activities were truly an aberration." (AP)


Elvis Presley's Daughter Confirms She Wed Michael Jackson
Lisa Marie Presley, the daughter of the late Elvis Presley, released a statement yesterday saying that she and the singer Michael Jackson had married.
After announcing a union that might have been conceived in supermarket-tabloid heaven and proclaiming a need for privacy, the world's most famous newlyweds were holed up last night in a place not known for its isolation: Trump Tower.


Jeb Bush's Florida Foes Team Up Against Him
Jeb Bush is well ahead of his opponents in the Republican primary race for governor of Florida.
But to make sure things stay that way in the month until the election, Mr.
Bush stunned his two closest rivals last week by attacking them in a television commercial.
Today, Mr. Bush's fellow Republicans fought back. Together.


Robot Is Nearing Goal Inside Active Volcano
THE Dante 2 robot, stepping cautiously through soft ash and around hulking boulders, crept deeper into the active crater of the Mount Spurr volcano in Alaska yesterday.
Researchers said Dante had descended more than 600 feet into the crater by late today and was an estimated 100 feet from the edge of a major goal, a field of volcanic vents on the bottom.
The scientific objective of the mission is to have the robot measure the composition and temperature of the hot gases and aerosols emitted from these vents, called fumaroles.


National Health Laboratories Holdings (NH,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Reinaldo Povod, A Playwright, Is Dead at 34
Reinaldo Povod, the author of the plays "Cuba and His Teddy Bear" and "La Puta Vida Trilogy," died on Saturday.
He was 34 and lived in Brooklyn.
The cause was tuberculosis, said Richard Barbour, a friend and colleague.


Lafarge Corp.(LAF,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


For Real Women, Emphasizing Fit
Dana Buchman is not overly concerned with fashion's excessive flights of fancy.
What she concentrates on is "real clothes for real women who want to get dressed and get to work and forget about what they have on."
This practical attitude has helped make the company that bears Ms.
Buchman's name a rare success on Seventh Avenue.
A division of Liz Claiborne Inc., Dana Buchman has tripled its volume to $90 million in the last three years and is planning to open its first retail store at 65 East 57th Street next month.


Anchor Bancorp (ABKR,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Lawyers Meet to Finish Times Square Plan
New York State officials and private developers appeared close to signing an agreement last night that would take the long-delayed redevelopment of Times Square one step closer to reality.
Lawyers for the 42d Street Development Project, the state agency charged with the redevelopment of Times Square, and for the developers, a partnership of Prudential Insurance Company of America and Park Tower Realty, worked past a midnight deadline to finish an agreement for an interim redevelopment plan.


Star-Studded Team Wins Knockout Title in Bridge
A star-studded team headed by Nick Nickell of Raleigh, N.C., won the Spingold Knockout Team Championship here on Sunday night at the conclusion of the American Contract Bridge League's Summer Nationals.
He and his teammates -- Bob Wolff and Bob Hamman of Dallas, Jeff Meckstroth of Tampa, Fla., and Eric Rodwell of Naperville, Ill., all four of whom are former world champions, and Dick Freeman of Atlanta -- successfully defended the title they won a year ago in Washington.
They have now won three out of the last four major national team titles.


Hospitality Franchise Systems Inc.(HFS,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Gerber's Hometown Ready to Welcome Sandoz
If all goes as planned, the $3.7 billion takeover of Gerber Products Inc. by Sandoz Ltd. of Switzerland, announced two months ago, will be a done deal by the end of August.
Normally a town whose main employer is being acquired by a foreign company might dread the future.
But not Fremont.
The sale is proving a windfall and an assurance of job security for this close-knit community of 3,900, where Gerber grew from a local canning cooperative to an American icon, the giant of the baby food industry.
Hundreds of local residents -- including descendants of those farmers who first invested in the cooperative that became Gerber Products -- are figuring out how to reinvest anywhere from the hundreds to tens of millions of dollars they will receive from their Gerber stock.
Investment Counselors Descend
The farmers include Henry Roosinck, a 70-year-old apple grower whose father joined the co-op in 1910.
He said that his one-seventh share of that investment today amounted to 1,800 Gerber shares, or more than $95,000, based on Sandoz's purchase price.


Gilbert Associates Inc.(GILBA,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to July 1


Languishing in Foster Care
About half of the 60,000 New York State children in foster care have been in the system for more than three years.
That is cruelly unfair to the children and costly to the taxpayers.
Foster care is meant to be a temporary vehicle for removing children from troubled family situations.
But children kept in foster families for long periods develop ties to those families that become hard to break, and they are deprived of the chance for permanent stability that they deserve.
Federal and state law and policy encourage resolution of a foster child's fate within 18 months.
But, as presented in a Times series last week, children languish in the system for many reasons, including sluggish child welfare bureaucracies, particularly New York City's Human Resources Administration, and courts that often take a long time to terminate parental rights and free children for adoption.


Webster Financial Corp.(WBST) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


A Deathly Silence
AIDS is tragic on many counts.
It is a lethal disease with no cure, and a disease that is relatively simple to prevent.
Prevention, however, depends on knowing enough about people's sexual attitudes and behavior to issue the appropriate warnings and advice.
But as a report from a panel of the National Academy of Sciences indicates, America still does not have that knowledge.
The political climate that prevailed during the epidemic's first decade stifled the search for it.
Consider what happened in 1991 to a federally financed nationwide study of behavior in adolescents that put them at risk of AIDS and H.I.V. infection, which was to be conducted by researchers at the University of North Carolina.
One Congressman called its $18 million price tag "wasteful government spending." The president of the conservative Family Research Council said it was "an invasion of privacy." The Secretary of Health and Human Services blocked its funding, and eventually the Government scrapped the project.
Later a similar study, of adult sexual behavior, was also canceled.


Bosnian Serbs Reject Peace Plan for 3d Time, Defying Russia
Nationalist Serbian leaders today rejected an international plan to settle the war in Bosnia, despite a fresh warning from Russia that refusal might lead to a serious increase in the fighting.
It was the third time the Serbs had rejected the peace plan.
After meeting with President Slobodan Milosevic of Serbia on Sunday, Foreign Minister Andrei V. Kozyrev of Russia said today that a final rejection of the peace plan by the Bosnian Serbs could result in "an escalation of the war, a huge confrontation and the possibility of air strikes."


Corrections
Because of a transmission error, an article yesterday about foreign efforts to help Rwandan refugees misspelled the surname of an American military spokesman.
He is Col.
Robert Mirelson, not Nirelson.


Spy's Spending Brought Alarm But No Action
A Central Intelligence Agency official supervising Aldrich H. Ames, the convicted spy, warned more than three years before Mr.
Ames was arrested that he was a potential turncoat with an inexplicable fortune, according to a C.I.A. memorandum made public today.
The December 1990 memorandum said that Mr.
Ames, then one among more than 20 suspects in the on-again, off-again hunt for a traitor within the agency, had in recent months spent more than $600,000 from an unknown source.
In the mid-1980's, as a counterintelligence officer, Mr.
Ames "had access to a number of operations that were later compromised" by disclosure to the Soviet Union, the memorandum said.


One Valley Bancorp of W.Va.  Inc.(OVWV) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Pensacola Police Say Slain Doctor Had Refused Protection
The Pensacola Police Department said today that it had offered six months ago to provide protection to the abortion doctor who was shot to death here on Friday but that the doctor and the clinic's directors had refused, saying such a step was unnecessary.
The police department's assertion came amid accusations by local abortion-rights advocates that neither the police nor the Federal authorities had done enough to prevent the killing of the doctor, John B. Britton, and his security escort at the Ladies Center, an abortion clinic here.


Odd Disorder of Brain May Offer New Clues
AT age 18, Wendy Verougstraete had high ambitions.
"You are looking at a professional book writer," she said cheerfully.
"My books will be filled with drama, action and excitement. And everyone will want to read them. I am going to write books, page after page, stack after stack. I'm going to start on Monday."
But that Monday never came.
Although she composes lyrics to love songs, has a rich vocabulary and tells wondrous stories, Ms.
Verougstraete has an I.Q. of only 49.
She cannot tie her shoes, set a table, cross the street alone or make change for a quarter.
Her reading, writing and drawing skills are like those of a first grader.
Now age 25, she lives in a group home for mentally retarded adults.


Centerbank reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Dime Bancorp (DME,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


In Selma, Everything and Nothing Changed
Bob Mants came to the Alabama Black Belt to work for civil rights in 1965 and still has a cattle-prod scar in his back to remind him of "Bloody Sunday," the attack on civil rights marchers here that evoked the worst of the dying empire of Jim Crow.
Mr.
Mants is still here working as director of a hand-to-mouth economic development agency, trying to bring jobs to desperately poor Lowndes County.
But his dream that he would see an old order steadily giving way to a new and better one died long ago.


Notre Dame Loses a Mover and a Shaker
Dick Rosenthal, who initiated Notre Dame's recent affiliation with the Big East in basketball as well as its NBC television pact for football, announced yesterday that he would retire as the university's athletic director.
Rosenthal, 61 years old, will be succeeded by Michael A. Wadsworth, a 1966 graduate of Notre Dame who is the Canadian Ambassador to Ireland.
Wadsworth, a native of Toronto, will take over on Aug. 1, 1995.


Beazer Homes USA Inc.(BZH,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


TREASURY LAWYER DISPUTES ACCOUNT OF TOP OFFICIALS
The Treasury Department's top lawyer today contradicted her bosses' accounts of how the department decided to notify the White House about an investigation that potentially involved President Clinton and his wife.
Other banking officials who testified today called the notification highly unusual.
At a daylong hearing before the Senate Banking Committee, Jean E. Hanson, the department's general counsel, said she had briefed the White House at the instruction of her immediate supervisor, Deputy Treasury Secretary Roger C. Altman.
Mr.
Altman has denied telling Ms.
Hanson to do that.


Corrections
An article on Saturday about the intense local newspaper coverage of Long Island's East End misspelled the given name of an author who lives in Sag Harbor.
He is Wilfrid Sheed.


Marshals Sent to a Dozen Abortion Clinics in Drive to Halt Violence
The Clinton Administration is intensifying its efforts to halt violence at abortion clinics in a drive that began over the weekend with the deployment of Federal marshals to about a dozen clinics around the country, senior Federal officials said today.
To spearhead the campaign, the Justice Department has formed an interagency group to pool the efforts of domestic terrorism experts at the Federal Bureau of Investigation, the United States Marshals Service and the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms, which investigates weapons violations and bombings.


Bruno's Inc.(BRNO,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to July 2


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-13  RWANDAN TROOPS SEEK REMATCH  Soldiers of the Rwandan Army who were routed by rebels are in refugee camps in Zaire, and they say they want to stay together and to try to take back the country.
A1


Newbridge Networks
Shares of the Newbridge Networks Corporation, a closely watched technology company, plunged yesterday after the company said first-quarter earnings would disappoint analysts.
Newbridge, a maker of voice and data telecommunications equipment based in Kanata, Ontario, cited higher marketing expenses.


Pacificare Health SystemsInc.(PHSYA,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Executive Changes
ALL AMERICAN SEMICONDUCTOR INC., Miami, named Bruce M. Goldberg president and chief operating officer.
MATTEL INC., El Segundo, Calif., appointed Douglas Glen senior vice president of business development and strategic planning.


PSI Resources Inc.(PIN,N) reports earnings for 12mos to June 30


PWA Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Market Place; In valuing Archer Daniels, analysts look past ethanol.
IN the view of critics, the Clinton Administration's policy on emission-reducing renewable fuels -- in essence, ethanol made from corn -- is little more than a politically inspired gift to farmers and corn processors, especially the Archer Daniels Midland Company.
They charge that from both environmental and cost perspectives, ethanol, which the Administration wants blended with gasoline in the nation's most polluted cities, is a second-rate tool for attacking urban pollution.
And as some Wall Street analysts see it, the debate has generated so much heat that investors are in danger of overestimating the financial impact of the mandate on the ethanol industry and Archer Daniels, which accounts for more than 60 percent of ethanol production.


If There's a Strike, The Baseball Network's Loss May Become Fox's Gain
So baseball players intend to strike on Aug. 12 if their differences with owners aren't resolved.
On the same day, Fox Sports launches its football schedule with its first preseason game.
Is what's bad for baseball's new TV deal good for football on Fox, NBC and ABC?
"The question is how long is the strike," said Jerry Dominus, a senior vice president of J. Walter Thompson, the advertising agency.
"If it's just in August, advertisers would probably migrate to the replacement programming. If it's post-season, I wouldn't conclude it's an automatic transfer to football, but the reality is some would."


Rwanda's Wounds Won't Heal Any Time Soon
To the Editor:
I commend Nelson Kasfir for expressing "Hope for Rwanda" (Op-Ed, July 22), despite the subhuman barbarism the world has been witnessing there.
It is a beautiful writeup except for a gap here and an oversimplification there.


Stelco Inc.(STE.A) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


I.B.M. Forms New Division Responsible for Servers
I.B.M. said yesterday that it had formed a new business unit, the Systems Technology and Architecture division, which is to develop common hardware technologies and design standards for the company's computers known as servers.
The International Business Machines Corporation disclosed the reorganization in an internal memo that it distributed to the press.


Sports of The Times; Bitten By the Glitter Bug
DERRICK COLEMAN has declared war on the woman who accused him of raping her in a Detroit hotel last month.
The Nets' All-Star forward and Dream Team II member was cleared of wrongdoing last week by the Wayne County prosecutor, who said that D.N.A. testing of semen taken from the woman and her clothes showed conclusively that Coleman was not the source.
Informed of the decision, however, Coleman was not relieved but defiant, saying, "It's not over," and vowed that the 22-year-old woman "will be made an example of."


Rush to the Moon Left Us Nowhere to Go
To the Editor:
I agree with some of the regrets expressed in "Wistful Pride and Cynicism Color Americans' Memories of Apollo 11" (news article, July 18), on the value of the 1969 Moon landing.
President John F. Kennedy's challenge in 1961 to land a man safely on the Moon before the end of the decade was shortsighted in two respects.


SPX Corp.(SPW,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
7.25
7.25
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.50
3.50
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
4.44
4.29
3.26
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.35
4.26
3.05
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.75
4.67
3.21
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.10
7.10
5.83
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.39
7.39
6.55
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.17
8.19
7.28
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.33
6.33
5.76
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Corrections
A report in the Chronicle column on Wednesday about Elie Wiesel's visit to Sighet, Romania, where he was born, referred incorrectly to the fate of members of his family in Nazi concentration camps.
Mr.
Wiesel's father died in Buchenwald, not Auschwitz; one sister, not three sisters, died in Auschwitz along with Mr.
Weisel's mother.
The report also omitted mention of one camp Mr.
Wiesel survived.
He survived Buchenwald, as well as Auschwitz.


BUSINESS DIGEST
International
The U.S. reached an agreement with Canada to sharply reduce Canadian wheat imports for a year.
The deal fulfills a Clinton Administration pledge to wheat-state lawmakers.  [ Page D1. ]


Peoples Heritage Financial Group Inc.(PHBK,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


TCF Financial Corp.(TCB,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


CHRONICLE
MARTHA STEWART is not ordinarily intimidated, so when she encountered a couple of black bears in Wyoming, she stood her ground.
So did the bears.
Ms.
Stewart was in the Wind River Range recently shooting a magazine spread on fly fishing, backpacking and camping.
"We were cooking exquisite food at our campsite," she said, describing a menu of black-bean chili, a salad of oranges, jicama and cilantro, brook trout and skillet corn bread.


In Warsaw, Former Enemies Commemorate 1944 Uprising
More than 200,000 victims of the 1944 Warsaw Uprising against Nazi occupation were honored today as Poland commemorated the 50th anniversary of the uprising, one of the most bitter ordeals of World War II.
Today's ceremonies, attended by Vice President Al Gore, represented not only a tribute to fallen heroes, but also a gesture of reconciliation to former foes.
Unlike the D-Day commemorations, which excluded Germans and Russians, officials from both those countries stood at the side of President Lech Walesa today.


Sterling to Buy Knowledgeware in Swap
Sterling Software Inc. announced yesterday that it would acquire Knowledgeware Inc., the financially troubled software company run by Francis Tarkenton, the former football star, in a stock swap valued at $143 million.
The acquisition will make Dallas-based Sterling the 11th-largest software company in the world, with revenues of more than $600 million.


Hartford Steam Boiler Inspection &amp; Insurance Co.  (HSB,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Indefensible Industrial Base
At the urging of Senator Sam Nunn of Georgia, the Senate has voted to spend $150 million to keep the production line warm to build more B-2 bombers.
His case for doing so rests on the need to protect America's bomber industrial base.
Other senators voted to spend about $100 million more to buy machine guns and carbines.
Again, their argument was the need to maintain the small-arms industrial base.


Altman's Double Life as a Politician Brings Him to the Edge of Scandal
The Congressional hearings on Whitewater that will delve into the handling of Whitewater matters by Roger C. Altman, the Deputy Treasury Secretary, had opened last Tuesday morning.
And there he was that night, lanky and amiable, chatting with the Clintons at a black-tie State Department reception for the leaders of Jordan and Israel.
The powerful of Washington were gathered there, and to some, Mr.
Altman's appearance seemed to proclaim, "I am one of you, and I am staying."
Certainly Mr.
Altman, a quietly intense man, holds a high public office, which has been his goal since the 1960's, when, as a graduate student in business, he first tasted politics, taking time off to campaign for Robert F. Kennedy.
Until Whitewater washed over him, Mr.
Altman seemed on track to succeed Treasury Secretary Lloyd Bentsen.
He remains a member of the inner circle of President Clinton's economic advisers, and his colleagues have rallied to him, hoping for a vindication that would be the Administration's as well.


CHRONICLE
Add the name of SUSAN EISENHOWER to the list of Presidential relatives with books to their names.
A granddaughter of Dwight D. Eisenhower, she has just completed her first book, an account of the beginning of her romance and marriage.
Her husband is ROALD Z. SAGDEEV, who was the chief of the space program in the former Soviet Union and a scientific adviser to Mikhail S. Gorbachev.
"It is the story of the last days of the Soviet Union as seen through the perspective of our developing relationship," Ms.
Eisenhower said yesterday.
"It was an extremely tense and dangerous courtship and did not get an enthusiastic response from the Soviet authorities. I also worried that there would be negative reaction in this country."


Hollywood Casino (HWCC,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Linear Technology Corp.(LLTC,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to July 3


By Design; Rhinestone Season Opens
One sign among many that glamour is trying very hard to make a comeback: hip designers like John Galliano and Marc Jacobs showed diamond jewelry with their fall clothes.
The women quickest to follow the trend will probably settle for rhinestones -- not the gaudy kind, but the ones that look like the real thing.
The styles most likely to succeed in the coming months are rhinestone-clad bobby pins and hair clips ($17 to $48), glittery bangles to wear singly or in multiples ($38 each), single-strand necklaces of two-carat brilliant-cut crystals ($80) and pear-shaped drop earrings ($58).
More adventurous types might choose rhinestone tiaras like the ones Anna Sui put on her models ($24 to $150).
All these styles are made by Marie Ferra, a 40-year-old costume jewelry company best known for producing the crowns worn by beauty contest winners.


Astoria Financial Corp.(ASFC,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Money Store Inc.(MONE,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Ripken 2,000, Twins 0: 'Aw, Shucks' From a Hero
Orioles 1, Twins 0
Cal Ripken became only the second major leaguer to play in 2,000 straight games, reaching the mark last night in the Baltimore Orioles' 1-0 victory over the Minnesota Twins at the Metrodome.
Ripken got a standing ovation from the 27,712 fans when he came to bat in the first inning after it was announced that he was playing No. 2,000.
Always the reluctant hero, he waved to the crowd, then waited a moment before taking off his helmet to acknowledge the appreciation.


New Valley Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Greek Coach to Quit Over Cup Disaster
Following Greece's poor showing in its first World Cup appearance, ALKIS PANAGOULIAS said yesterday he will resign as coach when his contract expires Aug. 31.
Panagoulias, 60, was coach of the United States team during the 1984 Olympics and 1986 World Cup qualifying.
Greece finished last at the 24-nation World Cup, losing, 4-0, to Argentina and Bulgaria and, 2-0, to Nigeria. (AP)


Wellpoint Health Networks Inc.(WLP,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Senate Backs Cuts for Schools That Endorse Homosexuality
After a display of what critics called "disgusting" pamphlets, the Senate tonight voted to cut off Federal money to schools that teach acceptance of homosexuality as a way of life.
The measure, proposed by two Republican Senators, Robert C. Smith of New Hampshire and Jesse Helms of North Carolina, passed 63 to 36.


Jazz, Classical, Art, Business: A Series Wraps All Into One
Lincoln Center's Classical Jazz series opens tonight to the sweet sound of money being spent on the arts.
It is jazz as high-culture business, a rolling machine that moves from a film presentation of jazz shouters like Joe Turner and Jimmy Rushing to a concert called "The City of Jazz," featuring the Lincoln Center Jazz Orchestra; a trumpet trio of Doc Cheatham, Sweets Edison and Wynton Marsalis; the saxophonists Joe Henderson and Benny Golson, and the trumpeter Roy Hargrove.
It will be televised by "Live From Lincoln Center" on PBS and seen by millions of viewers.
There will be a debate between Wynton Marsalis, the artistic director of the program, and the writer James Lincoln Collier, about Mr.
Collier's contrarian opinions on Duke Ellington and Louis Armstrong as well as his perception of the inadequacies of Mr.
Marsalis's program at Lincoln Center.
Tributes to the saxophonist and composer Jimmy Heath and the trumpeter and fluegelhornist Art Farmer will feature newly commissioned compositions and arrangements, along with small group performances.
One historical concert, "Cornet Kings Before Armstrong," will be balanced by a cutting contest in which trombonists and alto saxophonists try to outdo each other with their improvizations.


Rwanda's Wounds Won't Heal Any Time Soon; Treating Cholera
To the Editor:
Cholera causes rapid death, sometimes in less than eight hours.
We know how the disease is caused and how to prevent death.
The refugee situation in Rwanda and Zaire is an extreme example of what cholera can do when we are unprepared.


Wang Laboratories Inc.(WANG) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Bronx Garden Imposes Fee For Admission
To help raise money, the New York Botanical Garden has for years resorted to the genteel policy of asking for an entrance donation of $3 to stroll through its azalea gardens, Victorian greenhouses and zinnia patches.
But by and large, the request has been ignored.
Garden visitors on average pay less than $1 each.
As a result, for the first time in its 103-year history, the Bronx garden has set a fixed admission price.


Back to Woodstock: Some Electronic Routes
WOODSTOCK'S "three days of peace and music" in 1969 will soon be commemorated in upstate New York.
How to recapture the spirit and get back to where you once belonged?
How about that groovy computer?
Woodstock: 25th Anniversary CD-ROM, from Time Warner Interactive, a division of Time Warner Inc., in versions for Macintosh and Windows, requires eight megabytes of random access memory, roughly eight more than any flower child possessed.
Still, at a list price of $39.95, this compilation of music, photography and video beguiles you with a goofy charm.


Paul Roebling, 60, Actor in Television, Movies and Theater
Paul Roebling, a stage, film and television actor, died on Wednesday on a Navajo Indian reservation in the mountains of northern Arizona, where he was vacationing.
He was 60 and lived in Manhattan.
The cause of death is under investigation, said his son, Kristian, who declined to provide details.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; An offbeat California agency flourishes by uncovering the 'soul' of its clients' brands.
GROUND ZERO is the point at which an atomic bomb explodes.
But in the language of Kirk Souder, Jim Smith and Court Crandall, Ground Zero -- the name the three chose for their tiny agency -- is the essential truth of a brand that, when turned into pictures and prose, ignites an emotional response in consumers and causes sales to boom.
The concept has put the trio at the seat of what may be the fastest-growing new agency.
Formed six months ago in the Venice section here, Ground Zero can only be described as hot, having beaten out bigger agencies for at least one vaunted account at Disney and won clients including Porsche, L.A.
Gear and Virgin Interactive Video Games, which will release a video game based on Disney's "The Lion King." Ground Zero's billings already top $35 million.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League BOSTON RED SOX -- Optioned Eric Wedge, catcher, to Pawtucket of the International League.
Recalled Nate Minchey, pithcer, from Pawtucket.
OAKLAND ATHLETICS -- Placed Mark McGwire, first baseman, on the 15-day disabled list.
Recalled Ernie Young, outfielder, from Tacoma of the Pacific Coast League.
National League NEW YORK METS -- Optioned Juan Castillo, pitcher, to Norfolk of the International League.
Recalled Doug Linton, pitcher, from Norfolk.
SAN DIEGO PADRES -- Assigned Sean Drinkwater, third basemen, and Greg LaRocca, shortstop, to Rancho Cucamonga of the California League.
Basketball  National Basketball Association BOSTON CELTICS -- Signed Pervis Ellison, center, to a multiyear contract.
DETROIT PISTONS -- Acquired Mark West, center, from the Phoenix Suns for 1996 and 1999 second-round draft picks.
PORTLAND TRAIL BLAZERS -- Named Johnny Davis assistant coach.
Football  National Football League ARIZONA CARDINALS -- Waived Gerome Gardner, defensive lineman.
CINCINNATI BENGALS -- Waived Ostell Miles, running back.
HOUSTON OILERS -- Signed Todd McNair, running back.
MIAMI DOLPHINS -- Waived Kelly Stouffer, quarterback.
NEW YORK GIANTS -- Waived Peter Nye, wide receiver.
WASHINGTON REDSKINS -- Waived Moe Elewonibi, offensive tackle.
Hockey  National Hockey League DETROIT RED WINGS -- Signed Mike Krushelnyski, forward, to a one-year contract.
FLORIDA PANTHERS -- Named Bryan Murray general manager.
Soccer  National Professional Soccer League BALTIMORE SPIRIT -- Named Dave MacWilliams coach.


Let's Look Closer at the Rising Birthrate for Single Mothers
To the Editor:
Re your July 20 front-page article on the rising birthrate among unwed women: Instead of fueling outrage over "soaring illegitimacy," you might present some alternative perspectives.


Patterns
As the World Curls
No secret is safe in New York's beauty salon world.
Weeks before Kim Lepine was ready to tell Charles Booth of La Coupe that she was leaving his Madison Avenue salon after 24 years to open her own place, he saw a copy of the lease she had signed and confronted her.
A few days later, she left, taking Rita Starnella, a colorist, and Pegi Palagate, another stylist, with her.


I.R.A. Is Seen As Prepared To End Attacks
The Irish Republican Army has "strongly indicated" that it is preparing to suspend its campaign of killing in Northern Ireland, The Irish Times reported today.
The Times, usually accurate in its Northern Ireland reports, said in a front-page article that "Republican sources in Belfast" had indicated that the I.R.A. was getting ready to announce this month a unilateral cease-fire to last at least one month, possibly two or three, that could begin in September.
Independent analysts with contacts in Republican circles in the North confirmed the report.


Aztar Corp.(AZR,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


EAB reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


On the Homestretch Toward Travers Stakes Showdown
Holy Bull and Tabasco Cat were both reported to be in fine fettle today after their prep races at Monmouth Park and Saratoga on Sunday.
And both were booked into the $750,000 Travers Stakes here on Aug. 20 for the race that both camps expect to decide the championship of racing's division of 3-year-old colts.
Holy Bull won the $500,000 Haskell Invitational at Monmouth by nearly two lengths over Meadow Flight for his 10th victory in 12 starts, and once more he led every step of the way.
Tabasco Cat ran second to Unaccounted For in the $134,700 Jim Dandy Stakes at Saratoga, failing to catch him by one length.
It was his first race in two months since he won the Belmont and, before that, the Preakness.


Q&amp;A
Wedding Ring Allergy
Q.  How can you be allergic to a gold ring?


Repap Enterprises Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Orsulak Rock-Like In Crisis
Joe Orsulak came to work yesterday afternoon and his Mets teammates marveled.
He went through batting practice, did an early stretch and started in left field against the Atlanta Braves.
And, the entire time, he showed almost no signs of the crisis that has struck his family.
Orsulak left the team last Tuesday to be with his wife, Adrianna, who was told she has a brain tumor.
The family expects further news today on her condition but, as it stands now, the Orsulaks expect Adrianna to undergo both radiation and chemotherapy.


California Federal Bank (CAL,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Herman Melville Honored With Marathon Reading


Bristol-Myers Is Selling Its X-Ray Imaging Unit
The Bristol-Myers Squibb Company said yesterday that it had agreed to sell its Squibb Diagnostics imaging business to Bracco S.p.A. of Milan, Italy.
Analysts said the price, which was not announced, was about $500 million.
Bracco, a privately held company, supplied the raw materials for Isovue, an X-ray imaging agent, which is Squibb Diagnostics' main product.
Analysts said Squibb Diagnostics had 300 employees and about $370 million in 1993 sales, or about 25 percent of the $1.5 billion United States market for injected diagnostic pharmaceuticals.


Dowbrands Account Placed in Review
Dowbrands, the marketer of brands like Ziploc bags and Fantastik cleaner, said yesterday that it had placed in review its North American integrated marketing account, now handled by 10 agencies, in order to consolidate the business at one agency or an alliance of agencies.
Though billings were not disclosed, trade publications estimated them at $50 million to $100 million.
"We are trying enhance our integrated marketing process," Lauren Cislak, a spokeswoman for DowBrands in Indianapolis, said in confirming reports of the review in this week's issues of Advertising Age and Adweek.
She said that the company was searching for an organization with expertise in advertising, promotion and direct marketing, but that other key considerations would include public relations, media buying and advertising to Spanish-speaking consumers.


No Headline
"I'm not surprised that the concept of doing a nostalgia festival geared to 40- to 50-year-olds didn't work. But  it's sad." -- JOHN SCHER, co-producer of Woodstock '94, which is aimed at younger fans.  [ B2:4. ]


Arafat Wants Talks Now On Jerusalem
Yasir Arafat, the P.L.O. chairman, said today that Palestinians wanted to start immediate talks on the future of Jerusalem because of Israel's recognition of a special religious role there for Jordan.
In his most substantive public response to a Jordanian-Israeli declaration last week in Washington, Mr.
Arafat said at a news conference at his headquarters here that the political and religious status of Jerusalem was indivisible.


Laborers, Unwanted But Willing
THREE weeks have passed without a day's work and it is hurting.
Rent was due yesterday.
Many of the men are skipping meals.
There is certainly nothing to send home, where wives and parents and children are counting on regular money orders to survive.
"It is grave," Pedro Azurdia said. "Almost desperate."


Stone Container Corp.(STO,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


J. W. Randolph, 67, State Insurance Aide
James Wells Randolph, a lawyer and former Deputy Superintendent of the New York State Insurance Department, died on Wednesday at New York Hospital.
He was 67 and lived in Mount Vernon, N.Y.
The cause was a heart attack, his family said.


Sears Canada (SCC) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Pulte Corp.(PHM,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


OHM Corp.(OHM,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article in Business Day on Friday about the bankruptcy case of R. H. Macy &amp; Company misidentified the executive vice president of Macy in some editions.
He is Thomas C. Shull, not Thomas C. Shaw.


Court TV Has Negative Effect on Jury System
To the Editor:
While Court TV may be "The Eye That Educates," as Steven Brill, its founder, says (Op-Ed, July 15), it is many times a bloodshot one.


Century Telephone Enterprises Inc.(CTL,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Wellfleet Communications Inc.(WFLT,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Olivetti Chief Tries for New Direction
At business school, nobody told Corrado Passera it might someday get this difficult.
Two years ago, Mr.
Passera was given the job of fixing Olivetti S.p.A., the office-equipment company that is Europe's second-largest computer maker after Siemens Nixdorf Infomationssysteme A.G. of Germany.
Since 1990, Olivetti has not had a profit, and over the last three years it has lost a total exceeding $1 billion.
But if all goes according to his plan, by the end of this year Mr.
Passera, chief executive of Olivetti, will finally come close to break-even.


Western Beef Inc.(BEEF,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to July 1


From Atlanta to Birmingham, Blur of Progress and Stagnation
She was only 14 when she joined Martin Luther King 31 years ago in the civil disobedience that broke the back of the South's fiercest segregation, but Frances Foster White knew just where she wanted to go -- the grand spiral staircase in the Pizitz department store that led to the whites-only mezzanine cafe.
"I always had a thing for Loretta Young," said Mrs.
White, now a medical assistant at a local hospital, recalling the 1950's television series that began with Miss Young sweeping down a stairway in a glamorous gown.
"And that's why I chose Pizitz, because I wanted to walk down that staircase, proud, with my head held high. And I did it. And it's something I'll always be proud that I did."


Burlington Industries Inc.(BUR,N) reports earnings for Qtr to July 2


Block Drug Co. (BLOCA,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Valerie Worth, 60, Is Dead; A Novelist for Young Readers
Valerie Worth Bahlke, a poet and novelist for young readers, died on Sunday at her home in Clinton, N.Y.
She was 60.
The cause was cancer, her family said.


Anchor Glass Container Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Shea Stadium Has a New Hero and His Name Is "Ree-co"


A Latvian Bars Ordaining Women
The oldest working pastor in the Evangelical Lutheran Church of Latvia is 93.
The youngest, ordained this year, is 18.
The Archbishop of Latvia says the shortage of pastors in his country is so extreme that he has to take anyone he can get.
Except women.


U.S. Petroleum Data
In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
July 29
July 22
July 30
1994
1994
1993
Gasoline production, daily
7.2
7.2
7.3
Distillate production, daily
3.3
3.5
3.2
Gasoline stocks
210.8
212.3
215.2
Distillate stocks
129.3
126.4
119.0
Crude imports, daily
8.2
7.4
6.5
Product imports, daily
1.8
3.0
1.7
Crude stocks
328.3
332.0
351.9
Crude production, daily
6.5
6.5
6.7
Refinery utilization (%)
94.1
94.8
94.5
Source: American Petroleum Institute


2 Composers And a Mayor On a Night Out
The New York Philharmonic opened its 30th season of free outdoor concerts on Monday evening, and about 75,000 listeners took advantage of the clear, cool weather to settle back on the Great Lawn of Central Park and take in two hours of music and a fireworks display.
As a prelude, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani proclaimed Monday (or what was left of it) New York Philharmonic Parks Concerts Day, and other Philharmonic and city officials thanked sponsors and asked picnickers to clean up after themselves, all in less than five minutes.
As another welcome bonus, the Philharmonic replaced its usual folded flier with a regular program book with complete notes on the music and photos from past summers.
There were musical dividends as well.
The first half of the program was devoted to Howard Hanson's "Romantic" Symphony (Op. 30), a 1930 work that has been recorded a few times but is rarely heard in concert.
It has the makings of a crowd-pleaser: Hanson's melodies have a wonderful sweep, and his plush scoring moves between an Impressionistic shimmer and a brassy heftiness that at times seems downright Brucknerian.
There are times when its slow movements meander, but there are also pages of purely visceral thrills.


LG&amp;E Energy (LGE,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


The Federal Move Against Clinic Crime
The Federal Government has responded with commendable speed to the killings of a doctor and his escort at a Florida abortion clinic on Friday.
The Clinton Administration has sent U.S. marshals to help guard a dozen or so abortion clinics across the country and has begun to plan a broad strategy to prevent the further spread of violence and murder at the clinics.
What role the marshals will play, how long they will stay in the field and how many clinics they will help protect remain to be determined.
But their deployment is encouraging evidence that the Administration intends to prevent and punish crimes that deprive women of their constitutional right to an abortion.


Militant Group's Tax Exemption Is Attacked
A House Democrat asked the Internal Revenue Service today to revoke the tax-exempt status of an Alabama organization that has advocated killing doctors who perform abortions.
"I find it almost beyond imagination that the Federal Government would subsidize by tax exemption an organization that dedicates itself to murder," said the lawmaker, Representative Charles E. Schumer of Brooklyn.
"It's just appalling."


One Price Clothing Stores Inc.(ONPR,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to July 2


Derek Raymond, 63, a Writer Of Dark, Graphic Crime Fiction
Robin Cook, an English writer who wrote under the pseudonym Derek Raymond and who won a loyal following with his dark and brutally graphic crime novels, died on Saturday in London, where he lived.
He was 63 and also had a home in France.
The cause was cancer, according to Reuters, the British news agency.


Devils and Rangers To Renew Rivalry
The Devils, who will open and close the 1994-94 regular season with games against the Rangers, will also play them twice in the preseason.
The Devils announced a nine-game preseason schedule today, with only three of the games to be played at Byrne Meadowlands Arena.
The schedule starts with a game at Philadelphia Sept. 11 and concludes here Sept. 27, against the Rangers.


Legent Corp.(LGNT,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Islamic Hard-Liners Said to Gain Ground in Iran
After years of internal political struggle for control of Iran's Islamic revolution, the pragmatic faction led by President Hashemi Rafsanjani has been backed into a corner by resurgent hard-liners.
The advance of the Shiite Muslim radicals in the last few months appears to put an end, at least for now, to foreign diplomats' perennial expressions of hope that Iran would mend its relations with the United States and other Western countries, and end its support of Islamic revolutionary movements abroad.


Bugs and Squirrels Gnaw Away Nasdaq's Image
What gives at Nasdaq?
First it was bugs of the electronic sort, then a mammal of the squirrel variety.
And now securities traders are wondering just how secure things really are on the nation's second-largest stock market.
Technical breakdowns have caused three Nasdaq trading interruptions in the last few weeks.
The most recent interruption lasted 34 minutes on Monday afternoon after a squirrel chewed through an electric company's power line and the stock exchange's own backup power system in Trumbull, Conn., failed to kick in.


Nashua Corp.(NSH,N) reports earnings for Qtr to July 1


Results Plus
HARNESS RACING  Donerail Sets Trot Record  Donerail set a Meadowlands track and stakes record last night in winning the $564,750 Peter Haughton Memorial, a one-mile trot for 2-year-olds.
Donerail, now 8 for 8, won wire to wire in 1:554/5 , beating Tap In by five lengths.
It was the fastest time ever recorded by a 2-year-old in a parimutuel race.
Mac Lobell trotted a 1:553/5 in a non-betting race on Oct. 3, 1986.
The previous track mark for a 2-year-old trotter was 1:57 held jointly by Donerail and Demilo Hanover.
Donerail, driven by John Campbell, more than quadrupled his winnings with the $282,325 winner's purse. (AP) TENNIS  Petchey Wins in Los Angeles  Mark Petchey of England, the world's 89th-ranked player, capitalized on a strong serve to upset top-seeded Michael Chang, 7-5, 6-2, in just 72 minutes yesterday in the first round of the Los Angeles Open.
The No. 7 seed, Brad Gilbert, also lost, to Jared Palmer, 6-7 (5-7), 6-3, 6-4.
Team  The United States has claimed three medals after the first week of the world games at the Hague that continue through Sunday.
In three-day eventing, Dorothy Trapp of Lexington, Ky., won a silver medal.
In the vaulting, Kerith Lemon of Saratoga, Calif., won a silver medal.
The dressage team of Robert Dover, Lebanon, N.J.; Carol Lavell, Fairfax, Va.; Kathleen Raine, Rolling Hills, Calif., and Gary Rockwell, North Salem, N.Y., won the bronze team medal.


Fierce Sailor Done In By Shrinking Horizon
A new addition to the sailing glossary, one acquired here during a recent visit to the Wadawanuck Yacht Club, is "a horizon job."
A yacht finishes a race so far ahead of its opponents that it has left them over the horizon.
The definition of this term is not unlike the reply given Queen Victoria when she asked who was second to America in the 1851 race around the Isle of Wight that led to the America's Cup series: "There is no second, your majesty."


Corrections
An article on Friday about the New York City Department of Youth Services misattributed opinions about the agency's finances.
It was the city's budget director, Abraham M. Lackman, who said the department might have a $2 million deficit; it was not the Comptroller's office.
The Comptroller's office said the department has a surplus.


Senate's Promising Health Bill
The health-care bill that the majority leader, George Mitchell, put before the Senate yesterday looks encouraging.
It would achieve universal coverage and market reform by borrowing artfully from two flawed committee bills.
It is far better than the poorly designed bill before the House.
Though there is a glaring fault that needs to be corrected, Mr.
Mitchell has provided a workable basis for reform.
Mr.
Mitchell's bill would achieve universal coverage in stages.
It would first try voluntary reforms to soak up the uninsured.
But if by 2000 less than 95 percent of the population is covered, Congress would vote on a plan that is independently certified to achieve universal coverage.
If Congress turns down such a plan, an employer mandate would automatically kick in.
Employers hiring 25 or more workers would have to pay half the cost of insuring their workers; subsidies would be provided to workers at small companies to buy coverage.


Belgrade Issues Warning to Bosnian Serbs
With the threat of stiffer economic sanctions dangling over it, Serbia warned today that it would "end cooperation" with Serbian nationalist rebels in Bosnia if they do not accept an international plan to end the Bosnian war.
The Serbian Government has made such threats before, and even claimed to have closed the Serbian-Bosnian border for a time in 1993 in an effort to show that it was complying with international demands that it pressure the Bosnian Serbs to make peace.


Europe Wilts, Records Fall In Heat Wave
Much of Europe baked in the sixth week of a heat wave today, with the temperature expected to go as high as 100 degrees in eastern Germany and Poland later this week and no relief forecast until Sunday.
Last month was the hottest and sunniest on record in most places from the Netherlands to Hungary and Poland.
Hamburg and Stockholm, normally cool and breezy even in the summer, registered the highest average temperature for July ever, 71 degrees.


Old Republic International Corp.(ORI,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Yes, Let's Recycle Coliseum as Convention Hall; A Site for Overflow Art
To the Editor:
Re your July 24 news article on the Coliseum site: The Museum of Modern Art is looking for a place for its contemporary art.
Now wouldn't that be a marriage made in heaven?
The Modern could put on view a larger portion of its masterpieces in storage by displaying modern art at 53d Street and contemporary art at the Coliseum.
VINCENT MARMORA  Union, N.J., July 24, 1994


SCOR U.S. Corp.(SUR,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


No Headline
"I'm 47. But I touch the sand and I'm 18 again." BOB LENTI, a lifeguard on Long Island.  [ B5:1. ]


Japan's Premier Scraps Socialist Party Doctrine
Prime Minister Tomiichi Murayama rattled the country recently with several bold announcements.
The armed forces, one of the largest military machines in the world, are legal, he declared, the country's nuclear reactors, providing about a quarter of Japan's electricity, will not be shut down and the flag and anthem praising the Emperor will remain the national symbols.


Pacific Enterprises (PET,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


SENATE'S LEADER UNVEILS HIS PLAN FOR HEALTH CARE
The Senate majority leader today proposed national health insurance legislation that he said would achieve coverage of 95 percent of Americans by the year 2000 through voluntary measures and subsidies.
A commission would then tell Congress what it should do to insure the rest.
Senator George J. Mitchell of Maine, in the rare role of managing legislation, said at a news conference that he did not yet have the votes to pass his bill.
But he added: "I believe in the members of the Senate. I believe in their desire to do what's right for this country. And I hope that ultimately a majority can be persuaded, bipartisan, to support this." He said debate would begin on Tuesday.


Paris Journal; No, No White Horse. Still, Rightist Is Riding High.
One look at the bland technocrats governing France today helps explain the popularity of Charles Pasqua, a burly liquor salesman turned politician who hides a sharp wit behind a hangdog expression and delivers opinions straight from the hip in a thick Provencal accent.
But there is more to his appeal than folksiness.
As Interior Minister, he is also chief cop in the conservative Government.
And many French voters seem reassured that this tough former Resistance fighter has been charged with protecting France from illegal immigration, crime, drugs and other perils.


World Trade Pact Sows New Crop of Rwandas; Toxic-Friendly
To the Editor:
Should every Federal, state and local law in the United States march to a trade-above-everything drummer enforced by nontrade amateurs?
That is the pivotal issue overlooked by "Falsely Demonizing the Trade Pact" (editorial, July 23).


Corrections
A picture in Business Day yesterday, showing police officers who held back a crowd of potential buyers at the stock exchange in Shenzhen, China, was published in error.
The incident shown occurred in August 1992, not this week.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  *
GE Capital Corp., Stamford, Conn., a unit of the General Electric Co., is selling $100 million of 7.375 percent medium-term notes due in 2004 at 99.310 to yield 7.475 percent through Kidder, Peabody &amp; Co.
The noncallable issue is rated triple-A by both Moody's Investors Service and the Standard &amp; Poor's Corp.


Corrections
An article on June 5 about the financial difficulties of Mafia defendants in Philadelphia misstated the locations of the practice of Alan Ellis, a former president of the National Association of Criminal Defense Lawyers, who spoke about the situation.
He practices in Philadelphia and in Mill Valley, Calif., not in San Diego.
Mr.
Ellis pointed out the error in a letter that reached The Times on Monday.


Fila Holdings S.P.A. (FHL,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; From an executive at Ogilvy &amp; Mather, some guidelines for tasteful advertising on the Internet.
EARLIER this year, when an tiny immigration law firm in Phoenix flooded the Internet with advertisements for its services, outraged Internet users responded by "flaming" -- sending the firm electronic hate mail -- and various other forms of hackers' revenge.
Martin Nisenholtz, an executive with Ogilvy &amp; Mather, had another idea: He wrote a list of six guidelines for advertising on the Internet, the global web of computer networks.


Gentlemen Start . . . Er, Who Are These Guys?
At its best, the inaugural Brickyard 400 on Saturday will demand much more driving skill than stock-car racing's other jewel, the Daytona 500.
But it also means that at its worst, the Brickyard 400 could quickly degenerate into the Junkyard 400.
Darrell Waltrip, as both car owner and driver, will be in about as deep as a man could want to get when Nascar finally hits Broadway, in this case, its first race at the Indianapolis Motor Speedway.





General Re Corp.(GRN,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


In School
There was no talk of college in Daniel Gonzalez's home when he was growing up, despite his straight A average.
Nor was the boy encouraged in junior high school in South-Central Los Angeles, where most of his teachers set meager goals for him.
"They used to tell me, 'Get a high school diploma,' " Daniel said.
"Even to be a custodian, they said, you need a high school diploma."


Sierra Pacific Resources (SRP,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


New Light Shed on Churchill and Pearl Harbor
A newly declassified document suggests that Britain did not have advance warning of the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor, casting doubt on the theory that Churchill deliberately withheld such information from Roosevelt to make sure the United States entered the war, a historian here says.
Anthony Best, a lecturer in international history at the London School of Economics, said an internal history of British naval intelligence prepared in 1945 and released by the Government last week states that although there were warning signals about Japan's intentions, Britain did not know in early December 1941 that a Japanese force was preparing to attack the American fleet in Hawaii.


Is There Raunch in Rock After 50? A Yes Vote From the Rolling Stones
The Rolling Stones won't grow old gracefully.
If they have their way, they won't grow old at all; they'll keep acting like raunchy young wastrels who'll never stop rocking.
With their first tour since 1990, which started here on Monday night at Robert F. Kennedy Stadium, the Rolling Stones are still leering and strutting like adolescents, while twanging and socking like professionals.
As usual, the Stones bring a stadium spectacular with them.
They romped among walls and waves of lights, below computer animations and video blowups and amid bits of Caribbean carnival spectacle, apparently tied to the title (though not the contents) of the band's new album, "Voodoo Lounge" (Virgin). (The tour will be in the New York area, at Giants Stadium, on Aug. 12, 14, 15 and 17.) Before the Stones appeared, the Haitian group Rara Machine performed voodoo-style drumming and dancing in bleachers near the stage.


Canadian Pacific (CP,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Region Whose Borders Are in Eye of Beholder
There's one small problem with the South.
No one can agree on what it is.


Ryan Spies Again, This Time as C.I.A. Battles Drug Lords
Taming the eyeball-glazing prose of Tom Clancy's "Clear and Present Danger" with the same brisk efficiency they brought to "Patriot Games," the makers of this latest espionage thriller have made their first-rate work look easy.
And clearly, it was anything but.
No amount of exercise under the hot sun will beat the workout involved in following this story, with its dozens of locations, interchangeable-sounding character names (Cutter, Ritter, Clark, Ryan, many more) and high-tech military jargon.
A film with a "cellulose encased laser-guided bomb" for a conversation piece is not to be watched casually.
Yet "Clear and Present Danger" (photographed crisply by Donald M. McAlpine and scored by James Horner) looks so lean and moves so vigorously that it actually seems streamlined most of the time.
As directed by Philip Noyce, who also did "Patriot Games," this becomes another fast, gripping spy story with some good tricks up its sleeve, and with a much more economical style than that of Mr.
Clancy's best-selling novel.
Three distinctive screenwriters -- Steven Zaillian ("Schindler's List"), John Milius ("Apocalypse Now") and Donald Stewart (co-writer on "Patriot Games" and "The Hunt for Red October") -- deliver dialogue that is both colorful and swift.


Elscint Ltd. (ELT,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Haiti Attacks Critics and Restricts Civil Rights
In separate attacks that came hours after a state of siege was declared here, Government security forces shot and wounded a critic of military rule on Monday and beat and arrested several other people who were applying for refuge in the United States, witnesses and diplomats said today.
The military-dominated Government nominally headed by President Emile Jonassaint, which ordered the state of siege in a television broadcast early Monday, has also announced the first official restrictions on civil liberties under the decree: It warned radio and television stations here that their licenses may be rescinded if their news coverage is deemed unpatriotic.


Telxon Corp.(TLXN,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


No Five-Setters for Women
Australian Open organizers have abandoned plans to make the 1995 women's final a best-three-of-five-set match.
GEOFF POLLARD, president of the Australian tennis federation, said yesterday that talks between himself, the tournament director PAUL McNAMEE and officials of the Women's Tennis Association officials had led to the cancellation of plan. (AP)


Entergy Corp.(ETR,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Taylor Finally Gets His Wish
MELDRICK TAYLOR will finally get a chance to avenge the most disappointing loss of his career next month when he fights JULIO CESAR CHAVEZ for the W.B.C. superlightweight title on Sept. 17, about four and one-half years after the referee stopped the fight with Taylor ahead on two of the three judges' scorecards and two seconds remaining in the final round.
"This is something that I've been thinking about for the last four years," Taylor said yesterday. (AP)


New Medical Quandary at Heart of a Trial
In what medical ethicists say could be an important test of parents' rights to stop medical treatment for premature children, a Michigan doctor who disconnected his son's life-support system will stand trial on charges of manslaughter.
Judge Patrick Cherry of Ingham County District Court ruled on Monday after a preliminary hearing that there was enough evidence to try Dr.
Gregory Messenger, a dermatologist who took his premature son off life support without the permission of the hospital or his son's doctor.
His son, born at 25 weeks, 15 weeks before his due date, weighed 1 pound, 11 ounces.
The infant, considered at risk of brain damage, was given a 30 percent to 50 percent chance of survival.


Standard Products Co.(SPD,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Love Story
Somewhere above reality -- somewhere, let us say, between the earth and the ether -- there lies a land whose only manifestation is in those fabulous tabloids that greet supermarket shoppers just before they reach the cash register.
The checkout line becomes a reading room.
In this land, 99-year-old women give birth almost every day.
Some of these women have 15-year-old boyfriends.
Others were partnered, if only temporarily, by gentlemen who are not only out of this world but out of this species.


Bentsen Aide's Lessons, Penned in Diaries, Emerge Painfully in Public
At the end of his diary entries, Joshua L. Steiner would sometimes draw morals for himself, similar to the ones the birds and foxes and grasshoppers learned at the end of Aesop's fables.
Testifying today before the Senate panel looking into Treasury Department contacts with the White House on the Whitewater matter, Mr.
Steiner, the 28-year-old chief of staff for Treasury Secretary Lloyd Bentsen, was asked to read aloud the "lessons" that capped one of his February diary entries.


Trumpeting A Defense Of Art
IF the strains of "When Irish Eyes Are Smiling" ever drift your way past the smoky sizzle of sausage and the come-ons of carny barkers at an Italian street festival, chances are that Larry Laurenzano's brass band is somewhere in the mix.
Decked out in red caps and white shirts, the band looks Italian enough, and their sweaty, booming swing showcases the traditional folk songs and processional hymns that are the usual festival soundtrack.
But their repertoire can sometimes be as varied as the musicians themselves: at one time or another Mr.
Laurenzano's group has included Italian, Jewish, Hispanic and even Asian Indian players.


OMI Corp.(OMM,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


U.S. District Court Upholds 'Gerrymander' for Blacks
The United States District Court here has ruled that a serpentine, 160-mile-long Congressional district in North Carolina, though deliberately drawn along racial lines, is nonetheless constitutional because it helps remedy past discrimination against blacks.
In a 2-to-1 ruling late Monday, the court said that the district amounted to a "racial gerrymander," but ruled that its odd shape alone was not reason to void it.
The district, the 12th, meanders along Interstate 85, connecting several cities with sizable black populations.
In some places it is no wider than the highway itself.


Vigil for Slain Girl, 7, Backs a Law on Offenders
More than 1,000 people turned out for a vigil last evening for Megan Kanka, the 7-year-old New Jersey girl who was strangled last weekend.
The gathering in a park in Hamilton Township, N.J., a suburb of Trenton, was in support of what is being called Megan's Law, a proposal that would require sex offenders to notify local officials when they move into a community.
A twice-convicted sex offender has confessed to the murder.


Myers Industries(MYE,A) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Manzanillo Tries a Rest Cure
The number of reliable relievers in the Mets' bullpen shrank by one yesterday when a magnetic resonance imaging exam revealed that Josias Manzanillo has a bone spur in his right shoulder that is causing tendinitis and inflammation.
Manzanillo, whose 2.66 earned run average is the lowest of any Met reliever who has pitched more than 10 innings, will sit for 10 days to 2 weeks in what Gerry Hunsicker, the assistant vice president for baseball operations, termed a conservative approach to the injury.


Azinger Ready to Be A Fixture on Fairway
He stepped inside the ropes for the first time in nine months today, nodding and waving to the applauding gallery that had assembled next to the first tee at Warwick Hills Golf and Country Club.
It was a big crowd for a Tuesday at the Buick Open, and as the day wore on, it would get bigger.
They showed up on this damp, gray morning to share in a special moment.
Paul Azinger was about to leap back into his element, about to go from cancer patient back to PGA Tour professional golfer.
The awful series of six chemotherapy sessions were a distant memory, the five weeks worth of daily radiation treatments were all in the past.


Corrections
A picture caption yesterday about the cancellation of a Woodstock anniversary concert misstated the circumstances of the picture.
It was taken on July 26 at a news conference to announce some of the performers; it was not taken on Monday, when the concert was canceled.


Francisco Bastar, Band Leader, 58
Francisco Bastar, a percussionist and band leader who performed under the name Kako and was best known for his advocacy of Puerto Rican rhythms and song forms, died on Saturday in Fort Worth.
He was 58.
The cause was a heart attack, said a friend, Al Santiago.


Sports of The Times Players Ask: So What's Cookin'?
THE baseball owners have sent over financial statements to the players' association in a gesture of what they say is good faith, in an effort to avoid a strike.
They hoped to establish with the union their contention that, like baseball owners before them and those before them -- back to the 19th century, to the days of, pardon the expression, the robber barons -- that they, today's owners, are losing money.
Nineteen of the 28 teams say they are awash in a Red Sea of losses, and most of the losses, the owners contend, are attributable to the players' hefty salaries, paid for, coincidentally, by these very same owners, canny businessmen, whose average net worth is estimated by Forbes Magazine as $300 million to $400 million, with Ted Turner topping out at $2.2 billion.


Kennametal (KMT,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


USX-U.S. Steel
The stock of the USX-U.S.
Steel Group has spurted upward in the last week and a half amid expectations by analysts that significant price increases may be on the horizon.
The integrated steel producer has been particularly successful with sales to the auto industry and has been holding down its insurance and pension expenses.


Accent of Lemon Grass
WHEN lemon grass turns up in supermarkets, it means that Thai and Vietnamese food are having an impact on American cooking.
Lemon grass provides a unique citrus accent, so when you find it, buy it and store some in the freezer.
Game Plan Cook potatoes Prepare green beans Prepare beef through Step 7 Cook green beans Prepare red pepper, and add to beef Finish potato salad Finish beef Thai Beef Salad
8 ounces flank steak  1 large clove garlic  10 sprigs cilantro, to yield 2 tablespoons, finely chopped  6 or 7 large mint leaves to yield 1 tablespoon, chopped  1 large green onion  1 stalk lemon grass  1 tablespoon fish sauce (nam pla)  1 1/2 tablespoons lime juice  2 teaspoons sugar  1/4 teaspoon red pepper flakes  8 ounces whole red bell pepper or 7 ounces chopped ready-cut pepper (1 1/2 cups)  6 or 8 soft lettuce leaves.
1. Turn on broiler, if using, and cover broiler pan with aluminum foil.
2. Wash, dry and slice beef very thinly, less than 1/8 inch thick.
3.
Prepare stove-top grill, if using.
Broil or grill beef about 3 minutes, turning once.
4.
Crush or finely mince garlic; wash, dry and finely chop cilantro; wash, dry and chop mint.
5.
Wash, trim and thinly slice green onion; wash, trim, remove tough outer sheath of lemon grass and thinly slice bulb part.
6.
Combine garlic, cilantro, mint, onion, lemon grass, fish sauce, lime juice, sugar and red pepper flakes.
7. When beef is cooked, cut into bite-size pieces and stir into fish-sauce mixture.
8. Wash, dry and finely slice or chop red pepper; stir into beef mixture.
9.
Wash and dry lettuce and arrange on serving plate.
Spoon beef-pepper mixture into center.
Yield: 2 servings.
Approximate nutritional analysis per serving: 270 calories, 9 grams fat, 50 milligrams cholesterol, 520 milligrams sodium, 30 grams protein, 15 grams carbohydrate.
Warm Potato And Green Bean Salad
12 ounces tiny new potatoes  8 ounces green beans  2 teaspoons olive oil  1/8 teaspoon dried mustard  2 teaspoons balsamic vinegar  1 sprig fresh dill, to yield 1 tablespoon chopped  1 scallion  1/8 teaspoon salt  Freshly ground black pepper.
1.
Scrub potatoes; do not peel.
Cook in water to cover 15 to 20 minutes, depending on size.
2.
Wash and trim green beans.
About 7 minutes before potatoes are cooked, add beans to potatoes and cook until beans are tender but firm.
3. Whisk oil, mustard and vinegar.
4.
Wash and dry dill and chop; wash, trim and slice scallion thinly.
Add dill and scallion to dressing.
5.
When potatoes and beans are done, drain and cut potatoes into halves or quarters; cut beans in half; stir in dressing.
Add salt and pepper.
Yield: 2 servings.
Approximate nutritional analysis per serving: 255 calories, 5 grams fat, 0 milligrams cholesterol, 150 milligrams sodium, 6 grams protein, 50 grams carbohydrate.


Marsh Supermarkets Inc.(MARSA,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 25


Speed Up Rwandan Relief
How can it take so long for the industrial powers to deliver emergency supplies and equipment that are desperately needed to save the lives of Rwandan refugees?
As refugees began to be ravaged by cholera and dysentery from drinking contaminated water, relief workers begged for a clean water supply.
American equipment was rushed in to purify a million gallons of drinking water a day.
But relief workers complain that pure water is not much good unless it gets to the refugees; they say 200 tanker trucks are needed to deliver it.
About 20 have arrived.
Where are the other trucks?


Albany Study Finds Fraud In Welfare
In a new attack against welfare fraud around the region, computers that compared public assistance rolls in six states found more than 4,200 people who apparently received benefits both in New York and in another state, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo announced today.
State officials, who matched data from surrounding states for the first time, could not estimate how much the fraud cost taxpayers.
But officials in New York City -- where three-quarters of the double-dipping recipients claimed one of their addresses -- said the data provided by the study could save them up to $3 million as they strike offenders from welfare rolls.


Orion Capital Corp.(OC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Agco Corp.(AG,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Book Notes
Played the Game?
Hoping to capitalize on the huge market of people who play the electronic games "Myst" and "Doom" (and who might not read very many books), two agents have taken the intriguing step of offering publishers the chance to buy what could be the first novelizations of popular computer games.
Agents representing the properties have begun circulating proposals among big-name publishers, but the publishers don't know quite how to respond, particularly as far as price.
"Nobody's really tapped this market yet, and it's either going to be really huge, or fall completely flat," was how one publisher described this new genre of books.


At the Beach, With Responsibility; For a Lifeguard, Bodybuilding, Pranks and Rescues for Real
There is no knowing it when you come to the fiercely busy Central Mall field at Jones Beach to feel the baking sun and face the ocean, but this is Bob Lenti's beach.
Do something wrong, and feel his unflinching wrath.
Innumerable acts will get his attention: bopping someone with a ball where one is not supposed to play ball, propping up your umbrella past the umbrella line and obscuring the view of the lifeguards, drinking alcoholic beverages and then parading into the ocean or, of course, starting to drown.
He has one objective: that at the end of the day, the same number of people who come to his beach leave it.
That alone is how he measures a good day.


BMTC Group reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


AT LUNCH WITH: Blythe Danner and Gwyneth Paltrow; Not Entirely Out of Character
Lunch arrives in a rustle of brown paper bags at a table under white birches.
Would anyone care for the Blythe Danner Special from Pappa Charlie's Deli down the road -- tuna, sprouts, Swiss, tomato and avocado on whole wheat?
Absolutely not, says the tall and slender woman with the blond mane and the smoky voice.
She is Blythe Danner, of course, the 51-year-old actress who is performing here at Williamstown Theater Festival, one of the country's oldest and most prestigious summer stages.
Gwyneth Paltrow also declines the Blythe Danner Special.
Ms.
Paltrow is her 21-year-old daughter -- taller, thinner and blonder, and without that voice.
Ms.
Paltrow's name has been on the list of rising young movie stars since her small but scene-stealing performance last year as Ginnie, a grifter, in "Flesh and Bone." Her name has yet to go up on the sandwich board at Pappa Charlie's with those of other actors at Williamstown, though that may change soon.


Whole Foods Market Inc.(WFMI,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to July 3


Jury Acts to Free Mental Patient in Killing
In a verdict that perplexed prosecutors and mental-health administrators, a Manhattan jury has found that even though a man who has confessed to murder still has a mental disorder and poses a danger to society, he should no longer be held against his will.
Lawyers said yesterday that the verdict on Monday evening resulted from an unexpected interpretation of an outdated law.
Apparently surprised by the jury's decision, Justice Martin Evans of State Supreme Court ordered a stay preventing the release of the man, Ronald K. Crumpley, until the Manhattan District Attorney's office decides whether to appeal.
The judge meantime authorized his transfer to a minimum-security hospital.


Cadmus Communications Corp.(CDMS,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Watkins-Johnson Co.(WJ,N) reports earnings for Qtr to July 1


Sharpton Calls on Governor To Drop Liberal Endorsement
Saying that mainstream parties have not served black voters, the Rev.
Al Sharpton announced today the formation of a new party that might field a candidate against Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo.
The announcement of a new Freedom Party, on the day that Mr.
Sharpton left for an six-day visit to Rwanda, appeared aimed at both practical and lofty concerns: Dissatisfied with their representation in the Democratic Party and other liberal groups, black voters around the nation have begun exploring their own political organizations.


Islanders Add 5 Free Agents
With training camp just a month away, the Islanders beefed up their preseason roster yesterday, coming to terms with five free agents: forwards ANDY BRICKLEY and KIP MILLER, defensemen GORD DINEEN and MILAN TICHY and goaltender FRANK PIETRANGELO.


Kennedy Airport: Mob's Candy Store
Investigators and prosecutors have long called Kennedy International Airport "the mob's private candy store."
With cargo valued at more than $80 billion moving in and out of the airport every year, law-enforcement officials say that the Gambino and Lucchese crime families have been silent and violent partners in thefts and hijackings for 30 years.


Stepan Co.(SCL,A) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Killings Harden a Debate on Capitol Hill
Since last week's double slaying at a Florida abortion clinic, both sides in the debate have redoubled their resolve over how the emerging health care bills should cover abortion, with the Democratic leadership still searching for a compromise.
Abortion-rights proponents said today that the killings at a Pensacola clinic underscored the necessity for making abortion part of a basic benefits package.
Not to do so, said Eleanor Smeal, president of the Fund for a Feminist Majority, would "marginalize" women and abortion providers and set them up for being "picked off, terrorized and tortured."


TBC Corp.(TBCC,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Emerson Electric Co.  (EMR,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


A Salad Undaunted By August
WHEN it comes to salads, this is not the moment for well-behaved little clusters of greens.
Summer salads demand bright flavors and colors, an edge of salty sharpness, a touch of sweet, some acid and some crunch.
Try, for instance, sauteeing corn kernels stripped from freshly picked ears in olive oil with fresh chanterelles and onions until just soft, then spooning them, warm, over arugula dressed with a mustard vinaigrette.
Some flat-leaf parsley can garnish the top.


El Paso Electric (ELPAQ,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


A Fable of Love and an Exercise in Technology
Gordian Maugg's "Olympic Summer" is not the first movie to interweave decades-old news and documentary film clips with fictional scenes that duplicate as closely as possible the look and style of an earlier era.
Still, one is hard pressed to recall a film in which the past and the present are blended so seamlessly that contemporary actors portraying 1930's characters give the illusion of people being caught on film nearly six decades ago.
The movie, which opens today at Film Forum 1, is at once a wildly romantic fable of love and lost innocence in Nazi Germany and a showy exercise in cinematic style and technology.
Much of its charm owes to an ingenious technological experiment.
Mr.
Maugg, a 27-year-old German director and screenwriter, filmed the actors using the same sort of hand-cranked camera that was used to film the movie's documentary scenes of Berlin street life and of the 1936 Olympic Games.


Canfor Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Rwanda Plans to Try Thousands For Massacres, New Leader Says
The Prime Minister of Rwanda said today that his newly installed Government would proceed with war crimes trials of members of the ousted Government and thousands of civilians suspected of taking part in genocidal attacks and other human rights violations during the recent civil war.
"We are not going to wait for long for an international tribunal to be held," Prime Minister Faustin Twagiramungu said.
"It can take more than three years for the United Nations to organize an international tribunal, and people will think we are playing around here."


Bullets Trade Away Adams And Open the Floor for Skiles
The Washington Bullets handed SCOTT SKILES the keys to their offense yesterday as they traded MICHAEL ADAMS to the Charlotte Hornets for second-round draft picks in 1996 and 1997.
Adams ranks fifth on the Bullets' career assist list, but Washington General Manager JOHN NASH said Skiles, acquired Friday in a trade with Orlando, is more qualified to run the floor.
"I think Scott is a little better suited to play halfcourt basketball," Nash said.
The turn of events delighted Skiles, who was destined to be buried on the Orlando bench behind ANFERNEE HARDAWAY.
"This is a great opportunity for me," Skiles said.
"In Orlando, I'd probably be looking at playing 10 minutes a game. Now I'm a starter on a young team that has a chance to do something this year." (AP)


The Giants' No. 1 Pick Finally Gets to Work
Thomas Lewis, the Giants' first-round choice in the National Football League draft, finally got on the field in training camp today.
Even he said it was about time.
The delay was caused by injury, and the wide receiver from Indiana recited this timetable:


Future Shop reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


School Board Letter Warns Of Effects of Mayor's Cuts
The Board of Education warned yesterday that new budget reductions ordered by Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani could force such drastic actions as the shortening of the school day or the school year.
The board's president, Carol A. Gresser, and the Chancellor, Ramon C. Cortines, urged the Mayor to reconsider the cuts, which Mr.
Giuliani ordered each agency to begin preparing last week to keep the city's $31.6 billion budget in balance.


Sealright Co.(SRCO,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Bringing Neighbors Together in Safety


Corrections
Because of a production error, an article on Monday about a proposed Federal system to track asteroids that threaten Earth omitted several lines in some copies.
The affected sentences should have read:
"The six-person study panel is to be headed by Dr. Eugene Shoemaker, a discoverer of the cometary fragments that slammed into Jupiter from July 16 to 23, igniting flashes that outshone the planet.


Fritz Cos. (FRTZ,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Northwest Airlines Splits With Fallon
Northwest Airlines and one of its lead domestic agencies, Fallon McElligott of Minneapolis, said yesterday that they had decided to part ways, effective immediately.
As a result, rather than placing its estimated $20 million account in review, the airline will reallocate Fallon's responsibilities among its other agencies.
"Based on recent discussions, we have mutually decided we should go our separate ways," Patrick R. Fallon, chairman of Fallon, said in a statement.
Rick Dow, managing director of worldwide advertising for Northwest in St.
Paul, echoed Mr.
Fallon's reasons for the split in their three-year relationship.


Performance Food Group Co.(PFGC,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to July 2


Hope Springs Here and Now: Eighteen Start in Hambletonian
The Hambletonian, the most prestigious event in harness racing, will go off at the Meadowlands on Saturday with no overwhelming favorite.
The fourth-place finish of Victory Dream in the Beacon Course Trot, the last prep before the $1.2 million Hambletonian, has created a wide-open race in the second leg of trotting's triple crown.


N.A.A.C.P. Looks at Payment To Determine Who Is Liable
The legal counsel for the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People said today that he was seeking to determine whether the group's executive director, and not the organization itself, was liable for an out-of-court settlement reached with a former employee in a sex discrimination case.
Dennis C. Hayes, the group's general counsel, said he was looking into the settlement between the executive director, the Rev.
Benjamin F. Chavis Jr., and Mary E. Stansel, a former N.A.A.C.P. employee who worked as Mr.
Chavis's deputy for a month last year.


World Trade Pact Sows New Crop of Rwandas
To the Editor:
"Falsely Demonizing the Trade Pact" (editorial, July 23), defending the World Trade Organization, the body that would oversee trade rules under the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade, makes a strange juxtaposition with your humane, constructive editorial on the Rwandan tragedy.
Yet we must examine the connection between the global economy and global chaos.


Corrections
A report in the Company News column of Business Day on Saturday about a $680 million noncash charge against earnings by the Mobil Corporation misstated the quarter in which the after-tax charge was being taken.
The charge reduced the earnings previously reported for the first quarter of 1994, not the second quarter.


In Mandela's South Africa, Foreign Investors Are Few
Courting South Africa last year, the advance scouts of Western money brought an alluring message: make peace and take the free-market pledge, and a thousand projects will bloom.
But 10 months after Nelson Mandela formally invited foreign business to come back, and three months after the elections that secured this reborn capitalist the presidency, South Africa has yet to see the surge of investment needed to fuel growth and jobs.


Maybe I Should Send My Posters to Poland?
To the Editor:
On July 26 you reported a flap in San Rafael, Calif., in which shoppers objected to art about undocumented workers that appeared on supermarket grocery bags.
The same day, a lengthy, glowing article applauded the return of Polish poster art after the fall of Communism.
These articles point up the problem faced by artists in the United States.


Rollins Truck Leasing Corp.(RLC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Life Improves a Bit at Rwandan Refugee Camps


Real Estate
A SECOND large governmental agency has decided to build new headquarters near Los Angeles Union Station, highlighting the growing importance of rail transit in the region and the ambitions of developers to create a high-rise office district around the historic downtown train station.
The Metropolitan Water District, one of the largest government agencies in Southern California, has hired the Catellus Development Corporation, a San Francisco-based developer, to build a 500,000-square-foot, $100 million headquarters on land that Catellus owns near the station.
The water district, which sells water from Central and Northern California to six Southern California counties, chose the station area in April after a long site-selection process.


Court Panel Bars Maddox for 5 More Years
Alton H. Maddox, a civil-rights lawyer who has been suspended since 1990, has been barred from practicing law for five more years for his refusal to cooperate with an ethics panel looking into his conduct in the Tawana Brawley case.
A five-judge panel of the Appellate Division in Brooklyn said Mr.
Maddox's refusal to testify before a committee investigating his conduct in the Brawley case "bespeaks a fundamental disrespect for the judicial system." Ms.
Brawley was a black teen-ager whose family and advisers claimed in 1988 that she had been kidnapped, raped and beaten by a gang of white men in Dutchess County.
The authorities later said the case was a hoax.


Tootsie Roll Industries(TR,N) reports earnings for Qtr to July 2


Unbeaten Brown Loses Coach
STEVE GLADSTONE, Brown's crew coach for the last 13 seasons, announced his retirement yesterday to take a position in the university's development office.
Gladstone, a Syracuse graduate who had also been head coach at California, coached Brown men's heavyweight crews to undefeated seasons and national championships the last two years.
His dual race record at Brown was 66-21.
Gladstone, son of the former WOR radio personality HENRY GLADSTONE, will undertake various assignments at Brown including a $450 million fund-raising drive in the next five months.


Peeking Beyond Poetry's Conceits
The Great Fires
Poems 1982-1992
By Jack Gilbert
90 pages. Alfred A. Knopf.. $20.
Earthly Measures  By Edward Hirsch  93 pages. Alfred A. Knopf. $20.
Why read a poem?
It's a way of being alone with someone else's tones, obsessions, rhythms and sense of form; a way of giving yourself over to another human being and getting back something that is different from, and hopefully more than, either of you.


Bangladesh Ivory Tower Is No Haven
Serajul Islam Chowdhury was in full voice at the University of Dhaka, lecturing on Shakespeare's tragedies, he recalled, when the rattle of gunfire on campus drowned his words.
The 58-year-old professor closed the classroom window, then resumed his discourse.
"It disrupts you for a while," Mr.
Chowdhury said as he recounted the incident, which occurred last year.
"But then the gunfire dies down and you get on with the lecture. Academic life continues."


Silicon Valley Group Inc.(SVGI,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Food Notes
Wild About Tomatoes
Three cookbooks celebrating the tomato have just been published.
"Tomato Imperative!" by Sharon Nimtz and Ruth Cousineau (Little Brown, $14.95) is packed with information about the tomato: its evolution, cultivation and preparation.
The recipes are organized according to season, using the still-green tomato of early summer in a salsa, the ripe tomato later in the season for a velvety cold tomato cream soup and several vegetable casseroles and then, in fall, back to the green tomatoes.
There are recipes, too, for preserved tomatoes.
"Tomatoes, a Country Garden Cookbook" by Jesse Ziff Cool (Collins Publishers, $19.95) is one of a series of elegant single-subject books with romantic photographs of tomatoes and some of the prepared dishes.
The introduction describes and illustrates various kinds of tomatoes.
Inviting recipes include baked tomatoes stuffed with sweet corn and crab, fresh noodles with just-warmed tomato sauce and a savory bread pudding made with tomatoes and cheese.


Coventry Corp.(CVTY,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


United Cos. Financial Corp.(UCFC,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Eating Well
THE transformation of expensive, hard-to-find, exotic ingredients like arugula, mesclun and chanterelle into everyday supermarket items is happening all over the country.
Shoppers are indebted to chefs like David Bouley, Larry Forgione, Michael Romano and Anne Rosenzweig, who looked for the ingredients they had discovered in their travels abroad.
Their willingness to buy these foods helped to create a demand in specialty and farmers' markets and now in supermarkets.


Department 56 Inc.(DFS,N) reports earnings for Qtr to July 2


Pataki Rival Outlines Plans to Cut Taxes
Combining economic policy with political jabs at a Republican rival, the insurgent Republican candidate for governor issued a detailed proposal today for cutting state personal income taxes by 24 percent and reducing state spending by almost $4 billion a year.
The proposal by Richard M. Rosenbaum draws abundantly from the policies of two Republican governors whose legislative successes are becoming issues in New York State's race: William F. Weld in Massachusetts and Christine Todd Whitman in New Jersey.


Expeditors Intl of Washington Inc.(EXPD,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Accounts
*
Kinder-Care Learning Centers Inc., Montgomery, Ala., to the Martin Agency, Richmond, to handle its advertising and marketing account, previously at Tracy-Locke, a DDB Needham agency in Dallas.
Billings were estimated at $6 million to $7 million. *
APS Holding Corp., Houston, to Hadeler Sullivan Ewing, Dallas, to handle advertising and marketing for its Big A Auto Parts and Big A Installers' Express programs, previously handled by DFM/Tatham, Chicago.
Though billings were not disclosed, Adweek estimated them at $4 million to $5 million.


Stocks Are Listless as Dow Falls 1.95
The stock market was listless yesterday and ended with no distinctive trend.
"The burned-out bulls and burned-out bears let the chips fall where they may," said Alan R. Ackerman, executive vice president of Reich &amp; Company.
"This was a market that had more than a split personality. It went nowhere fast."


Harper Group Inc.(HARG,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


SENATORS ASSAIL TREASURY DEPUTY
In high dudgeon, members of both parties on the Senate Banking Committee assailed Deputy Treasury Secretary Roger C. Altman on Tuesday and into the early hours today for having been untruthful, in their view, about the Whitewater case at a hearing last February.
In a session that went on until 2:08 A.M., the most contentious day of Whitewater hearings yet, Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato, Republican of New York, accused Mr.
Altman of being "at the very least disingenuous."


Executive Changes
BERGDORF GOODMAN, New York, named Richard Lambertson senior vice president and director of creative services.
CARR GOTTSTEIN FOODS CO., Anchorage, promoted Mark Williams, its president and chief operating officer, to chief executive.


Military Caste System Marches Blindly On
To the Editor:
You report July 19 on the court-martial of Sgt.
Erwin M. Graves, accused of raping and murdering a woman officer, Lieut.
Lisa N. Bryant.
The reason for this tragedy, you assert on the say-so of your military sources, is that "with bases closing and scaling back in size since the end of the cold war," many posts are attempting to maximize the use of their buildings by "blurring traditional barriers that once separated officers from lower-ranked personnel." Sergeant Graves and Lieutenant Bryant lived in the same base housing.


Independent Insurance Group Inc.(INDHK,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Raymond James Financial Inc.(RJF,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 24


Man Charged In an Attempt To Sell His Son
A Bronx man was ordered held on $10,000 bail yesterday after he tried to sell his 4-month-old son to strangers on a Queens street for $1,000, the police said.
The man, Vincent Slight, 37, of 2480 Belmont Avenue in East Tremont, was arrested at 7:18 P.M. on Monday at the corner of Queens Boulevard and Union Turnpike in Kew Gardens after passers-by called the police, said Detective Andrew McInnis, a spokesman for the New York City Police Department.


22 Are Arrested in Thefts Of Kennedy Airport Cargo
Three major air-cargo theft rings that stole millions of dollars in merchandise from warehouses around Kennedy International Airport were shut down yesterday with the arrests of 22 suspects, many with connections to organized crime, law-enforcement officials said.
Preferring stormy weather because it caused a flurry of alarm-system breakdowns, the thieves broke into dozens of cargo warehouses in the last three years, stealing everything from Dom Perignon champagne to Reebok sneakers to a $1 million shipment of Kodak film, said the Queens District Attorney, Richard A. Brown.
Investigators said they can document about $5.5 million worth of merchandise stolen by the thieves but believe the actual amount to be in the tens of millions.


Piper Jaffray Cos.(PJC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


An Impatient Advocate Stirs Up the Education Department's Right Office
In the year that she has served as the Assistant Education Secretary for Civil Rights, Norma V. Cantu has moved through the once-moribund office like the blustery winds that sweep across the plains of her native Texas.
She has ordered her 10 regional offices to double the number of complaints they investigate.
She has told regional officials to hire more bilingual staff members.
And her office, which acts as a watchdog against civil rights violations in educational institutions, has unleashed a flurry of regulations on age discrimination and racial and sexual harassment on the job and in the classroom.


U.S. Panel Moves Toward Regulating Cigarette Nicotine
A Federal advisory panel to the Food and Drug Administration found today that nicotine was addictive and that it was the chief reason people smoke cigarettes.
The panel's votes are a step in the Food and Drug Administration's investigation of whether to regulate nicotine as a drug and took the agency farther than it has gone before in establishing control over nicotine.
A negative vote by the committee could have ended the investigation.
When the investigation is completed, the agency's commissioner, Dr.
David A. Kessler, must decide whether to regulate nicotine and how to do so.


How Lack of Sleep Can Make You Fat
To the Editor:
While most explanations of obesity focus on external factors such as dietary choice or lack of exercise, an equally plausible explanation may be another appetitive behavior: sleep.


Fire Crews Gasp, But Welcome The Smoke
The smoke was heavy again today, blocking out the sun, the steep, jagged mountains and the fire itself.
Hundreds of tired firefighters, who have rushed here to battle the worst of the forest fires sweeping the Northwest, sucked the hot smoke into their lungs as they opened fire lines with shovels and bulldozers.
But they hoped that the air would not clear.


State and Developer Agree to Refurbish Times Square Storefronts
New York State and a principal developer in the long-delayed Times Square redevelopment project yesterday agreed to a stopgap plan for refurbishing dozens of storefronts while the developer waits for the real-estate market to improve.
The Prudential Insurance Company of America and Park Tower Realty, the development partnership, agreed to pay $20 million for renovating the storefronts and $2.6 million for decorative lighting and other street improvements.


Novellus Systems Inc.(NVLS,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


CHRONICLE
Saturday may or may not be Andy Warhol's 66th birthday.
One way or the other, JAMIE WARHOLA, his nephew, will be in New York tomorrow to commune with his uncle, who died in 1987.
The occasion: a pre-birthday seance to be conducted at Serendipity, the East Side restaurant and shop, by two psychics, ELLIE CRYSTAL and JOHN J. EDWARD.
They will try to "channel" (speak to) Mr.
Warhol, whose precise birth date has been surrounded in mystery, though Aug. 6, 1928, is commonly accepted.


Mid Atlantic Medical Services Inc.(MAMS,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Public &amp; Private; A Very Loud Silence
They are older now.
Jane Hodgson is 79; it has been nearly a quarter-century since she performed an abortion on a patient with German measles and was immediately arrested for violating Minnesota law.
Irving Rust is 64.
He was a young man when abortion became legal in New York, much of his training spent treating women burned, torn or infected inside by the desperation measures of ending a pregnancy.
John B. Britton would have been 70 next birthday had he not been murdered outside a clinic in Pensacola last week.


U.S. Shelves Plan to Transfer Haitians to Third Countries
No longer facing a flood of boat people leaving Haiti, the United States has shelved a plan to send the refugees at an American naval base in Cuba to "safe havens" in Caribbean countries, Administration officials said today.
Pentagon and State Department officials say that for now it is cheaper and more convenient to keep the more than 16,500 Haitians at Guantanamo Bay in Cuba than to spend tens of millions of dollars building and operating camps elsewhere.
If the flow of refugees, which has dwindled to a trickle, should pick up again, officials say, Washington may revive the idea of sending Haitians to third countries.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
American Home Products offered to buy American Cyanamid for $8.5 billion in cash.
The offer, which stunned Wall Street, is a sign that the consolidation in health care is far from over.  [ Page A1. ]


Oak Industries (OAK,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


At a School-Lunch Contest, No Faint Praise
It was a day of fierce competition.
Eleven chefs labored to dazzle their opponents and impress discriminating judges with their skills.
But instead of carving icy swans or searing foie gras, the contestants at a cook-off on Monday at the American Culinary Federation's annual convention were trying to cook a cheap, tasty school lunch.
They were seeking to please not only fellow professionals, but also some candid children on a tasting panel.


Marvel Entertainment Group Inc.(MRV,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Metropolitan Diary
DEAR DIARY:
The other day I boarded an uptown bus on Madison at 60th, found an empty seat and contentedly set about doing the day's crossword puzzle.
A few minutes later, I became aware of a grating whistle loud enough and annoying enough to jar my concentration.


Nassau Board Approves a Legislative Map
The Nassau County Board of Supervisors today unanimously approved a charter for a new form of county government, setting the stage for the creation of a 19-member legislature and the extinction of the board, which has governed Nassau for almost 100 years.
The decision came after months of acrimonious debate over the legislative district map and the scope of the new government that had been ordered by a Federal judge, who ruled last year that the county's present form of government violated the constitutional principle of one person one vote.


Showalter's Hunches Are Also on Fire
Scott Kamieniecki was desperate.
He had pitched eight sound innings, but the score was tied in the ninth and the Yankees had to score for him if he was to win.
Sloppy defense by Matt Nokes had destroyed Kamieniecki's chance for a shutout, enabled Milwaukee to score one important run and blemished his outstanding start.
Now Kamieniecki needed Nokes.
There Nokes was, batting against Jaime Navarro with runners on first and second and none out.
Would Buck Showalter pinch-hit for Nokes with a better bunter?
No.
Would Showalter instruct Nokes to bunt?
No.
Showalter unveiled a novel strategy by letting Nokes hit, and the villain shed his tag by rapping a single that scored Don Mattingly to snap a 1-1 tie and help catapult the Yankees to a 7-1 victory over the Brewers.


Earle M. Jorgensen Co. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


49er Way Fits Moore; So Does Jets' Staff
They flickered across Rob Moore's living room: Jerry Rice and John Taylor.
The 49er receivers showed up on film, and they showed Moore the level he needed to reach with the Jets.


Hope Springs Here and Now: Eighteen Start in Hambletonian
The Hambletonian, the most prestigious event in harness racing, will go off at the Meadowlands on Saturday with no overwhelming favorite.
The fourth-place finish of Victory Dream in the Beacon Course Trot, the last prep before the $1.2 million Hambletonian, has created a wide-open race in the second leg of trotting's triple crown.


Arctco Inc.(ACAT,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


It's Curtains for Braves, Curtain Call for Brogna
Rico Brogna did not win the ball game at Shea Stadium last night.
He did not have the game-winning hit or score the game-winning run or pitch eight innings without giving up an earned run.
Brogna was the Met, though, who got the hero's treatment.
His popularity -- and his local legend -- already noteworthy after six short weeks in the majors, Brogna earned his first career curtain call last night, when his two-run, eighth-inning homer off Atlanta's Steve Bedrosian capped a 4-1 victory for the Mets.


Aon Corp.(AOC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Jerry Hadley Is Stravinsky's 'Rake' In a New Production at Salzburg
The new production of Stravinsky's "Rake's Progress" is a perfect embodiment of the atmosphere that has evolved here at the Salzburg Festival since Gerard Mortier took over as artistic director two years ago.
The opera shows some daring in its attempt to trump the famous Glyndebourne production designed by David Hockney with costumes and sets by a lesser-known painter, Jorg Immendorff.
It has a cosmopolitan character, with Sylvain Cambreling conducting an accomplished cast that includes the American singers Sylvia McNair, Jerry Hadley and Grace Bumbry.
It stretches the conservative classical boundaries of the festival by being part of a miniature homage to Stravinsky ("L'Histoire du Soldat" is being staged, as well as Peter Sellars's much-awaited interpretation of "Oedipus Rex," which will have its premiere in a few weeks).
And like much of Mr.
Mortier's Salzburg programming, "The Rake's Progress" seems to flirt so dangerously with radical innovation that it cannot possibly work.
Then it often does, creating an entirely new set of interpretations and possibilities.
Controversy is guaranteed, but so are rewards; I hope this production will make its way to New York.


Brushback Pitch: Owners to Kill Pension Payment
In a move that is certain to raise the level of hostility and further erode the chances of reaching an agreement that would prevent a baseball players' strike Aug. 12, the owners have decided not to make a payment of about $8 million to the players' pension plan.
Richard Ravitch, the owners' chief labor executive, confirmed last night that he had informed the plan's administrator, Leonard Gray, in a letter dated last Friday that the payment would not be forthcoming Aug. 1, as the expired benefit plan agreement between the clubs and the players provides.


Warnaco Group Inc.(WAC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to July 9


A Rise in Lending Fuels Optimism
Rarely has the economy been harder to decipher than it is today.
Evidence of a slowdown is building up.
But in the midst of the glum news, two important indicators -- consumer borrowing and bank loans to companies -- are still rising smartly, suggesting that there is still optimism and growth.
Until this lending dies down, if it does, the economy probably won't slow very sharply.
"The borrowing is a sign that people are relaxing and the expansion will stay for a while," said Prof.
Robert Gordon, an economist at Northwestern University.
"And it is a sign that people in most of the country, while they might not be getting raises, are no longer so worried about losing their jobs. That's more important."


Winn-Dixie Stores Inc.(WIN,N) reports earnings for 12wks to June 29


METRO DIGEST
22 ARRESTED IN AIR-CARGO THEFTS
Three major air-cargo theft rings that stole millions of dollars in merchandise from warehouses around Kennedy International Airport were shut down with the arrest of 22 suspects, many with connections to organized crime, law-enforcement officials said.
A1.
Investigators and prosecutors have long called Kennedy "the mob's private candy store." B2.
NEW YORK CITY


Qualcomm Inc.(QCOM,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 26


Robot Completes Volcano Exploration
The Dante 2 walking robot completed its exploration of an Alaskan volcano's crater and headed out of the dangerous, steaming pit, researchers said yesterday.
The eight-legged robot accomplished all its objectives and proved the concept of using mechanical surrogates to do research in areas too dangerous for humans to venture, researchers declared.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-11  FEW INVEST IN SOUTH AFRICA  South Africa is still awaiting a surge of foreign investment 10 months after Nelson Mandela appealed for businesses to return.
Investors worry about militant workers, trade barriers and currency controls.
A1  RWANDA PLANS WAR-CRIMES TRIALS  The new Prime Minister of Rwanda said his Government would proceed with war crimes trials of members of the ousted Government and civilians suspected of taking part in genocidal attacks.
A1


World Trade Pact Sows New Crop of Rwandas; Legislating Swiftly
To the Editor:
"Retreating on the Trade Pact" (editorial, July 27) is inaccurate.


Yes, Let's Recycle Coliseum as Convention Hall
To the Editor:
Of the eight people who said what they'd do if they had the New York Coliseum site at Columbus Circle, whose fate is now uncertain after the collapse of Mortimer B. Zuckerman's plan to build a high-rise building complex on the site (news article, July 24), only Manhattan Borough President Ruth Messinger suggests a simple, productive option: "As an interim step, reuse the Coliseum building as a convention hall."


Harris Corp.(HRS,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Quebecor Inc.(PQB,A) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


New-Home Sales Off 14% in June
Sales of new homes fell 14.1 percent in June to a two-year low, the Government reported yesterday, providing another sign that an important part of the economy was slowing down.
Analysts said the home sales figures confirmed what recently reported declines in housing starts and sales of existing homes had been suggesting: that interest rate increases engineered by the Federal Reserve Board were putting a crimp in home building and related businesses.


INSIDE
Cross-Border Welfare Fraud
A check of public assistance rolls in six states found more than 4,200 people who apparently 'double dipped' by getting benefits in New York and elsewhere, officials said.
Page B1.
Sponsor Warns Bosnia Serbs
In its strongest warning to date, Serbia's Government told the Bosnian Serbs that it would cut off support for them if they did not accept an international peace plan.
Page A10.
Race and Breast Cancer
Recent studies indicate that breast cancer might appear in a more deadly form among black woman than it does among white women.
Page C10.
Age-Old Ills of the South
Three decades after the civil rights movement wiped out institutional segregation, race relations in the South have been a confusing blur of progress and stagnation.
Page A14.


Geneva Steel Co. (GNV,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


COMPANY BRIEFS
AMERICAN HOMEPATIENT INC., Franklin, Tenn., a provider of home health care services, acquired Clasen Home Health Care, St.
Louis, for an undisclosed amount.
EMERY WORLDWIDE, a unit of Consolidated Freightways Inc., Palo Alto, Calif., was named Chrysler Corp.'s primary air-freight carrier and received a three-year, multimillion-dolllar contract.


Treasury Issues Mixed; Bonds Give Back Gains
Prices of Treasury securities were mixed yesterday as the bond market gave back much of its earlier gains after a Government report showed a sharp drop in June new-home sales because of higher interest rates.
Bonds were given a lift from a stronger dollar amid optimisim that talks between the United States and Japan would produce a compromise to avert a potential trade war.


This Doll Tells the Young to Hold Off
It doesn't take a rocket scientist to figure out how to become a parent, but a rocket scientist believes that he has found a way to deter people -- particularly teen-agers -- from becoming parents.
Richard Jurmain, an unemployed aerospace engineer who worked with the space agency, has developed a high-tech doll to give people a realistic sample of parenthood.
The doll is programmed to shriek at random intervals day and night.


Fidelity National Financial Inc.(FNF,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


New Maybelline Job For Gotham Group
Maybelline Inc. said yesterday that it had expanded its relationship with the Gotham Group of New York by awarding the shop responsibilities for its Yardley of London division, which had been handled by Lord, Dentsu &amp; Partners of New York for the last two years.
Billings had been estimated at $5 million, but are expected to increase.
Gotham, which already handles Maybelline's estimated $50 million account, was awarded the Yardley of London bath and fragrance line and its Yardley Bath Shoppe line of specialty bath and body products, without a review.
A campaign is expected to begin early next year.


Market Place; From a Glitch, Cancellations and Confusion
When a customer dumps a stock and gets confirmation from the broker, it is normal to conclude that the sale, for better or worse, is finished.
But at Nasdaq, this is not always the case.
While most of Nasdaq's embarrassments on Monday dealt with a power outage that shut down its computers, a lot of talk on Wall Street was about Newbridge Networks, a Canadian maker of equipment for computer networks, and the fact that Nasdaq's effort that same day to halt trading in the company's stock somehow failed.
Sometimes, it appears, Nasdaq cannot make its systems work.
Sometimes it cannot keep them from functioning.


T. Rowe Price Associates Inc.(TROW,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Avoiding Basic Human Desires, or Trying To
"Eat Drink Man Woman," the delectable new film from Ang Lee, the director of "The Wedding Banquet," is about a father who has lost his joie de vivre.
No happier than Mr.
Chu (Sihung Lung) are the three beautiful daughters whose romantic lives are star-crossed and who can't seem to escape their father's spell.
Mr.
Chu, a widower, is considered a great man in some circles, but at home it's another matter.
Sunday dinner for father and daughters is a terrible ordeal.
Family tensions run so high the participants can barely even eat.
It's possible that Mr.
Lee, a warmly engaging storyteller under any circumstances, could have made the father a celebrated singer or dog-trainer with equal ease.
As it happens, he presents Mr.
Chu as the greatest chef in Taipei, which not only makes the Sunday dinner sequence a spectacular affair but also turns "Eat Drink Man Woman" into an almost edible treat.


C-TEC Corp.(CTEX,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Wine Talk
Outwardly, little has changed in the last few years at Eagle Ridge Ranch, where Hubert Germain-Robin makes what may be the best brandy in the United States.
There are still the wheat-colored slopes of the California coastal range, the sheep huddled in the shade to escape the 100-degree heat, the barns, the little distillery, the chai where the brandy ages, and the buzzing of cicadas.


Crestar Energy reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Cooper's Wife Defuses Reports
The wife of MICHAEL COOPER, the former Lakers star, said yesterday that she did not want people to compare their domestic dispute to the circumstances surrounding the O. J. SIMPSON case.
Cooper, who played on five championship teams and is now an assistant coach, was arrested July 27 and charged with assault and battery.
The police report said he threatened his wife with a vase.
WANDA COOPER said she was taken aback by the reaction after the arrest report was released Monday.
She singled out a Los Angeles television station that led into a report on the Simpson case with a story about Cooper's arrest.
"They make it sound as if the man was absolutely killing me," she said.
"That's not the case at all." (AP)


Broken Dreams on the Road To Country-Music Stardom
Cabarets in the Times Square district are unlikely showcases for wholesomeness.
But with only a few excisions, "Honky-Tonk Highway," a jalopy-to-limousine musical about a touring country music band at Don't Tell Mama, could play Disneyland.
This formulaic, folksy parable about the perils of fame, with a book by Richard Berg and music and lyrics by Robert Lindsey-Nassif, is a smoothly sanitized pastiche of film biographies of Nashville stars, like "Your Cheating Heart" and "Coal Miner's Daughter." And its sensibility bears roughly the same relationship to the throbbing heartache behind the best country classics that airline food does to home cooking.


At Rwandan Camps, Life's a Bit Bearable
As the mist lifted and the night coughs and wheezes gave way to the first morning stirrings today at the Kibumba refugee camp near here, the new cafe owner at the camp was counting money.
Jean d'Amour Harelimana slapped wads of Rwandan 50-franc notes on his mattress and said he figured he had sold 190 pieces of fried bread yesterday, the opening day for his roadside store.
Life in the camps has become slightly more tolerable as the strongest survivors begin to form daily routines.


Standard Motor Prod.  (SMP,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Rallying Round the First Lady


Thorn Apple Valley (TAVI,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Tennis, Anyone? Better Bring a Helmet
RECREATIONAL tennis players, beware: the game is going ballistic.
At a time when the tennis industry and many players themselves are slowing down, racquet manufacturers say they have figured out what the weekend warriors of the sport really need: racquets that are big yet lightweight, and sure to hit the ball no matter what.


IPL Energy reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


MBIA Inc.(MBI,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


National Sanitary Supply Co. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Berlitz International Inc.(BTZ,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


N.B.A. Rejects 2 Contracts In Strategy for Salary Cap
Citing a silver-lining clause in an otherwise adverse court ruling last year in the Chris Dudley case, the National Basketball Association is making a new effort to defend its salary cap against imaginative contracts.
This time, the league is doing so by rejecting A. C. Green's new $26 million, five-year contract with the Phoenix Suns and Horace Grant's contract with the Orlando Magic.
In rejecting the two contracts yesterday, the league contended, in effect, that Green is getting far too much and Grant far too little.


In America; Second Round of a Bad Rap
Eric Jackson is something less than your basic solid citizen.
He's a thief and a predator who's spent much of his life lurking in shadows, alert to any opportunity to do wrong.
Charles Hynes, known to his pals as Joe, is the District Attorney of Brooklyn.
He would like the voters to make him State Attorney General.
In the eyes of a politician, a lowlife like Eric Jackson can be a godsend, a sacrifice on the altar of ambition.
So Mr.
Hynes has joined the parade of politicians who have conducted an outlandish campaign, spread over 15 years, to nail Mr.
Jackson for six murders he never committed.


Antec Corp.(ANTC,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Off the Menu
Priorities at Le Bernardin
Eric Ripert, the executive chef at Le Bernardin, the seafood restaurant at 151 West 51st Street, was working as guest chef at the James Beard House in Greenwich Village last Thursday night when he learned that Gilbert Le Coze, the maestro of Le Bernardin, had suffered a fatal heart attack.
"I decided I would not tell anyone and that we would go ahead with the dinner," Mr.
Ripert said.
"I believe that is what Gilbert would have wanted." For the same reason, the restaurant was open for lunch and dinner the next day.
It will continue to maintain its regular schedule.


Abe Lincoln Gets His Annual Bath


A Man With a Vision: The Biggest Gun Ever
"Doomsday Gun," an HBO Showcase presentation, has all the earmarks of a high-concept thriller with a plot hewn by several people sitting around a conference table.
It's the story of a man whose full-scale, never-ending pursuit of his boyhood dream makes him seem sexy to his wife, charming to his colleagues, avuncular to his employees.
And formidable to his enemies, who are many and powerful.
Their opposition, naturally, makes him only more determined to succeed.
And that, of course, warps his dream into an obsession, which becomes, alas, the inevitable tragic flaw.


Personal Health; Fish stories and the hoopla over fish oils.
THE words are big -- eicosapentaenoic acid and docosahexaenoic acid -- but the sales are even bigger, exceeding $45 million a year.
These are the scientific names of two prominent fatty acids in fish oils, better known as omega-3's, supplements of which have become hot items among the health conscious.
Despite the popularity of fish oil capsules, most researchers in the field say this pill popping is scientifically unjustifiable and may even be dangerous to some people.
Furthermore, some of the early claims for benefits attributed to fish oils have not yet been borne out, despite well-designed studies.
Fish Oil Furor
The enthusiasm for fish oils began with the observation that Greenland Eskimos, whose diet is rich in marine oils, rarely suffer heart attacks or strokes caused by blood clots.
Several effects of fish oils have been cited as the probable explanation for this association.
First, the oils lower blood levels of artery-damaging fats called triglycerides.
Elevated levels of these fats can increase the risk of a heart attack.
Some preliminary research also indicates that fish oils may help to prevent a potentially fatal disruption in heart rhythm called ventricular fibrillation.


18% of H.I.V.-Infected Hemophiliacs May Stay Free of AIDS for 25 Years
A SIGNIFICANT minority of hemophiliacs infected with the virus that causes AIDS may live for up to 25 years before developing the disease, British medical researchers have calculated.
The researchers based their estimate on the results of a continuing study of 111 men with hemophilia whose immunological and health status has been monitored since they became infected with H.I.V., the AIDS virus, during a six-year period starting in 1979.


Bonilla Finally Boosts Own Spirits
It's another sticky and warm afternoon at Columbia Presbyterian Medical Center, and a soft-featured youth of 17 -- chatty, with a moustache in training -- waits nervously with his family at his bedside for the man whose posters cover his bedroom walls.
"Bobby Bo!" he says, his words tumbling out. "I've always wanted to meet him."


North Korea Says Desire to Settle the Nuclear Issue Continues
Just days before critical talks with the United States are to begin, North Korea's new leadership partly eased uncertainty over its policies today by indicating that it would maintain an apparently constructive turn in the former leader's approach to North Korea's nuclear program.
Shortly before he died a month ago, Kim Il Sung, Communist North Korea's absolute ruler for nearly five decades, turned away from confrontation by suspending his efforts to produce plutonium, the raw material for atomic bombs.


Deadliness of Breast Cancer In Blacks Defies Easy Answer
IN the two decades that the National Cancer Institute has been gathering data on breast cancer, one thing has been clear: although white women are more likely than black women to get breast cancer, black women are much more likely to die from it.
But the question is, why?
Now, several recent studies indicate that breast cancer might appear in a more deadly form among black woman.
The tumors tend to be more malignant, as measured by cellular indicators of a poor prognosis.


Minerals Technologies Inc.(MTX,N) reports earnings for Qtr to July 3


Off the Menu
Priorities at Le Bernardin
Eric Ripert, the executive chef at Le Bernardin, the seafood restaurant at 151 West 51st Street, was working as guest chef at the James Beard House in Greenwich Village last Thursday night when he learned that Gilbert Le Coze, the maestro of Le Bernardin, had suffered a fatal heart attack.
"I decided I would not tell anyone and that we would go ahead with the dinner," Mr.
Ripert said.
"I believe that is what Gilbert would have wanted." For the same reason, the restaurant was open for lunch and dinner the next day.
It will continue to maintain its regular schedule.


VLSI Technology (VLSI,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to July 1


Cleaning Art: No Mean Feat


New Misstatements Admitted In Handling of Foster's Files
The White House said today that it had given a misleading account for months of how senior officials had disposed of files on President Clinton's Whitewater real estate investment that were found in the office of Vincent W. Foster Jr. after his suicide a year ago.
It was the third time since December that officials have acknowledged inaccurate or incomplete explanations of how they dealt with papers in Mr.
Foster's office.


Gore, in Ukraine, Expresses Support for Economic Change
In another indication that the West is viewing Ukraine as an important East European country, Vice President Al Gore today offered strong United States support for "comprehensive economic reforms" to stabilize this country's ailing economy.
"This is an extremely important priority for the United States of America," said Mr.
Gore, who is the most important foreign official to visit President Leonid D. Kuchma since he defeated Leonid M. Kravchuk last month.


Panel Clears GATT Accord Without Fast-Track Proviso
An influential Senate panel took a big step today toward putting the new world trade pact into legal force, but it left out a provision that the Clinton Administration needed to help negotiate future trade accords.
The Senate Finance Committee approved legislation for the expanded General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade negotiated in Geneva.
This advanced the process toward Congressional approval of the 117-nation deal reached last December to reduce tariffs around the world.
The next step is for a conference early next week of House and Senate delegates to work out the differences in legal language between the two chambers' bills.


Again, American General Goes After Unitrin
The American General Corporation, one of the nation's largest providers of retirement annuities, consumer loans and life insurance, said today that it was offering $2.6 billion in cash to acquire Unitrin Inc., a financial services holding company.
Unitrin said in a statement that its board had determined that a sale was not in the company's interest.
Unitrin executives did not return telephone calls today seeking further comment.


Oglebay Norton Co.(OGLE,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


CHRONICLE
HENRY A. KISSINGER knows more than a thing or two about security matters, but that didn't keep his car from being stolen.
A chauffeur discovered that the 1994 Mercedes-Benz was missing when he went to get it from a garage near Mr.
Kissinger's East Side apartment on Monday, The Associated Press reported.
The thief apparently took the keys from a locked box at the garage and stole the car when an attendant was distracted, the police said.


The Calm New Chief Enters the Storm Of the Paris Opera
There are those who believe that Hugues Gall is stepping into an impossible situation.
As the designated director of the Paris Opera -- he formally takes over next August -- Mr.
Gall will inherit a quagmire that has bogged down administrators and cultural bureaucrats for most of this century, if not longer.
Since the 19th century, the Paris Opera has been dogged by a declining tradition of composition and singing, a predilection for placing social display over artistic accomplishment, a lack of clear Governmental policy and labyrinthine, self-serving union rules.
Now, in addition, there is the grandiose, high-tech Bastille Opera, the Socialist "people's opera" that opened in 1989 in time for the 200th anniversary of the French Revolution.
It may indeed be popular in terms of attendance, but it is neither inexpensive nor efficient.


CSF Holdings Inc.(CSFC,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


An Empire Heard Again
The Mostly Mozart Festival took a night off from both its own orchestra and its namesake on Monday night.
The Austro-Hungarian Haydn Orchestra under Adam Fischer visited Avery Fisher hall.
The music was by Haydn, Beethoven and Schubert.
The seven-year-old orchestra tells us in musical terms that empires die hard.
Its 30-odd musicians represent a post-Iron Curtain reunification of an old Vienna-Budapest axis, the roster almost evenly split between Austrian and Hungarian players.
The underlying conceit here is that cold war or not, a performing style once shared by the two countries survives and can be shared again.


Esco Electronics Corp.(ESE,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Diller Seeking Higher Bid As QVC Board Meets Today
On the eve of a QVC Inc. board meeting to consider a takeover offer from the Comcast Corporation and Tele-Communications Inc., the two sides were close to a sweetened deal of $46 a share, according to several people with knowledge of the talks.
Barry Diller, the chairman of QVC, has been seeking an offer that is higher than the $44 a share that Comcast and Tele-Communications have bid for 55 million shares of QVC.


Court Grants Writer's Bail In Bangladesh
A feminist writer who had spent two months in hiding in fear of death threats by Muslim fundamentalists appeared in court under heavy police guard today in Dhaka, the capital of Bangladesh.
After being granted bail on a charge of defaming the Muslim faith, the writer, Taslima Nasrin, quickly went into hiding again, saying she still feared for her life despite Government pledges to protect her.


Pittston Minerals Group (PZM,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Barkley Refuses to Get With the Program
CHARLES BARKLEY has had his rehabilitation program adjusted, allowing the Phoenix Suns star to go to Philadelphia and play golf.
Barkley was supposed to have completed a stringent eight-week rehabilitation program for his back this summer, but he stopped after four days, The Phoenix Gazette reported yesterday.


Wiping Eyes at the White House
President Clinton ditched his schedule today, stepped outside his West Wing office and turned an otherwise routine promotion for the health care legislation into an eye-dabbing scene evocative of a Frank Capra film.
The occasion was a gathering on the White House South Lawn of hundreds of riders from the Health Security Express, the bus caravan of health legislation supporters that made its way from the nation's far corners into Washington on Wednesday.
Mr.
Clinton's wife, Hillary, had been designated to welcome the supporters, but the President took time out to join her.


U.N. Can't Get Refugee Leaders to Visit Rwanda
The first concerted effort by the United Nations to persuade Rwandan refugee leaders to return to their country has failed and ended in recriminations on both sides.
During a heated meeting with United Nations officials on Tuesday, about 20 provincial leaders refused to cross the border in cars with United Nations banners and come back to Zaire in the same cars to report on conditions to their constituents.


Oshkosh Truck Corp.(OTRKB,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Clinton Plans Series of TV Appearances
President Clinton will appear in a series of two-minute commercials on CNN for at least a week to press for passage of his health care proposal, a spokesman for the cable network said tonight.
The commercials will be paid for by the Democratic National Committee and will appear about 7:50 P.M. during the public affairs program "Crossfire."


Clinton Sees a Softening in Syria
President Clinton said tonight that he believed Syria was interested in making peace with Israel now that Jordan and the Palestinians have moved to do so.
"I think there are difficult issues still between Israel and Syria, but I believe both leaders do want to make peace," Mr.
Clinton said at a news conference.


Loews Corp.(LTR,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Cavaliers Sign Cage, a Free Agent
MICHAEL CAGE, a 10-year N.B.A. veteran who became a free agent after playing for the Seattle SuperSonics for the last six seasons, agreed to a three-year deal yesterday with the Cleveland Cavaliers. (AP)


U.S Intends to Raise Science and Technology Spending, Gore Says
The Clinton Administration announced its intention today to increase the nation's overall spending on science and technology research to a level equivalent to those of Japan and Germany.
At a news briefing, Vice President Al Gore presented a report, "Science in the National Interest," that outlines the Administration's commitment to expanding its support and making science and technology "a top priority" in future budgets.


Chinese Company Admits To U.S. Import Violations
A California-based company owned by the Chinese Government pleaded guilty yesterday in Federal District Court in Manhattan to evading United States quotas on clothing imports by falsely labeling thousands of sweatshirts.
The company, Caltex Enterprises Inc., admitted to helping import more than 4,000 garments in violation of a law that bans the underpayment of duty on imported merchandise.
Caltex, of Alhambra, Calif., is a subsidiary of the China National Textiles Import and Export Corporation of Beijing, which controls China's textile and clothing trade.
Federal prosecutors said it was the first time a company owned by the Chinese Government had pleaded guilty to such charges.


CHRONICLE
E.
L.
DOCTOROW set a climactic scene in his new historical novel, "The Waterworks" (Random House, $23), at the site of the decaying Octagon Tower, once the central rotunda of the New York City Lunatic Asylum on Blackwell's Island in the East River.
On Tuesday, the author set eyes on the tower for the first time, when he visited the island, now known as Roosevelt Island.
He was there to announce a fund-raising drive to save -- but not rebuild -- the landmark tower.


2 Big Eastern Railroads Said to Discuss Merger
Two large Eastern railroads, the Norfolk Southern Corporation and Conrail Inc., are discussing a possible merger, according to people familiar with the companies' plans.
The talks raise anew the possibility that the two railroads would join forces.
Norfolk Southern, the fourth-largest railroad in terms of revenue, made its first offer to buy Conrail, currently the fifth-largest railroad, in 1984 for $1.2 billion, and pulled its final offer to buy the railroad for $1.9 billion in 1986 in part because of a six-month impasse in getting approval for its offer from the House of Representatives.


Right and Wrong on Trade
This was the week for the Clinton Administration to play tough on trade.
It threatened to retaliate unless Japan reversed government procurement policies that discriminate against exports of U.S. telecommunications and medical equipment.
And it bludgeoned Canada into agreeing to reduce wheat exports to the U.S. for a year while a commission reviews an ongoing dispute about such exports.
The fighting stance toward Japan is justified, though the Administration threatens to carry it to excess.
The decision to shut out Canadian wheat, by contrast, amounts to an assault on U.S. consumers -- the price of Mr.
Clinton's promise to bail out Midwestern farmers whose support he desperately needed in Congress to pass the North American Free Trade Agreement.


You Call This Scam Health-Care Reform?
To the Editor:
A July 25 front-page article describes the millstones burdening Hillary Rodham Clinton as she campaigns across the country for health care reform.
We're advised, Don't even think about a single-payer plan or a Canadian-style plan: they are as dead as socialized medicine.


4 Mathematicians Are Named Winners of Prestigious Medals
Four mathematicians yesterday were awarded Fields medals, the most prestigious awards in mathematics.
The winners were Jean Bourgain of the Institut des Hautes Etudes Scientifiques in Paris, Pierre-Louis Lions of the University of Paris-Dauphine, Jean-Christophe Yoccoz of the University of Paris-Sud and Efim Isaakovich Zelmanov, of the University of Wisconsin.


Weatherford International(WII,A) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Sports of The Times; Good Faith Needlessly Turns Bad
IF the owners of the major league clubs were setting out to find an issue that would further galvanize the players, they have hit the proverbial grand slam.
Nearly a month after the players participated in an All-Star Game they traditionally play gratis in return for the clubs' contributions to their pension fund, the players have found that the owners have no intention of making their annual August contribution.


Time Inc. Appoints Chief Executive
Taking another step in its evolution from a traditional book and magazine publisher to a multimedia company, Time Inc. named Don Logan, its president and chief operating officer, chief executive yesterday.
In his new position, Mr.
Logan succeeds Reginald K. Brack Jr., who will remain as chairman and devote his attention to long-range strategic issues, public policy and the expansion of the company's international businesses.


When Our Presidents Send Troops Abroad
To the Editor:
Anthony Lewis argues that the American public is now so adverse to combat casualties that the deaths of 18 soldiers in Somalia can cause a complete reversal in policy (column, July 25).
As proof, he notes that the only cases where democracies risked significant casualties were the Falkland and Persian Gulf wars.


Throwback to the Days of Yore
The most popular race horse in Saratoga isn't Holy Bull or Tabasco Cat or Sky Beauty or any of those television stars.
It's the 9-year-old gelding named Fourstardave, who gets a standing ovation every time he races, which is often.
And in a sport increasingly marred by frailty on the track, he is a constant: He has won at least one race at Saratoga each year for the last eight.
In human terms, he would be an athlete in his 60's.
But when he ran at Saratoga two weeks ago, he zipped a mile in 1:353/5 and won by five lengths.
He got the customary standing ovation, even from rival owners and trainers, and he entered the winner's circle for the 21st time in a career of almost unthinkable range: 93 races, 21 victories, 18 times in second place, 15 times third.


Chase Sets $348 Million Acquisition
The Chase Manhattan Bank said yesterday that it had agreed to acquire American Residential Holdings for $348 million, or $28.25 a share, in another sign of contraction within the mortgage banking industry prompted by rising interest rates.
Following the announcement, American Residential shares set a 52-week high in Nasdaq trading at $28, before ending at $27.75, up $2.875.


New Leader For Kendall
Kendall Square Research, the troubled supercomputer company, has named Larry E. Reeder as its new president and chief executive.
Mr.
Reeder, 56, replaces William I. Koch, the yachtsman and largest investor in the company, who had served as interim president while the company struggled to survive an internal shake-up and misstated earnings.
Mr.
Reeder, who was not available for comment yesterday, has been on Kendall Square's board of directors since 1988.
He is a general partner of the Sprout Group, a venture capital firm affiliated with Donaldson, Lufkin &amp; Jenrette.
A former I.B.M. employee, he has computer industry management experience, having served as vice president of finance at the Keydata Corporation and vice president of marketing operations at RCA Computer Systems, which is now defunct.


Singing the Praises of a Designer of Central Park
ASK New Yorkers who designed Central Park and, most likely, the answer will be Frederick Law Olmsted.
That answer is only half right, according to "Calvert Vaux: Architect &amp; Planner," a new book by William Alex and George B. Tatum (Ink Inc.).


Accounts
*
Kayser-Roth Corp., Greensboro, N.C., to Evans &amp; Kravetz, New York, to handle creative work for Hue Legwear line's fall campaign, and to Bohbot Communications, New York, to handle the media planning and buying.
The account was previously inactive.
Billings were estimated at $1 million. *
ITT Cannon, Santa Ana, Calif., to FCB/Technology Group, San Francisco, to handle its worldwide account, previously divided among various agencies.
Billing have not been determined.


Market Place; Recalling history, analysts in Tokyo are cool to Japan Tobacco.
IF there is one thing that stock market experts tend to understand, with their obsession for charts and tables, it is stock market history.
And that may be one reason that analysts here have been decidedly cool to what will be the biggest event to reach the Tokyo Stock Exchange in the last year, the initial public offering of Government-owned Japan Tobacco Inc., one of the world's largest cigarette companies.


Out on the Porch
I am delighted to learn that front porches are making a comeback in California subdivisions, following the style of Midwestern homes built in the earlier part of this century ("Building Small, Thinking Big," July 21).
But I'm disappointed on visits to my hometown of Minneapolis to find the front porches there are almost always empty.
The main reasons, I'm told, are air-conditioning and television. (Surely the answer isn't to bring TV onto the front porch, which would not only disturb the neighborhood quiet but prevent members of the household from conversing.)


COMPANY BRIEFS
ARA SERVICES INC., Philadelphia, a managed services company, said it would change its corporate name to Aramark effective Oct. 10.
NEWELL CO., Freeport, Ill., a manufacturer of consumer hardware and housewares, declared a 2-for-1 split on its common shares, payable Sept. 1 to shareholders of record on Aug. 15.


Sysco Corp.(SYY,N) reports earnings for Qtr to July 2


Andres Townsend Ezcurra; Peruvian Legislator, 79
Andres Townsend Ezcurra, a Peruvian who had been a legislator in his homeland and the first secretary general of the multinational Latin American Parliament, died on Sunday at his home in Lima.
He was 79.
He had cancer, Lima newspapers said.


Terex Corp.(TEX,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Dog and Elephant Days: Giuliani Woos G.O.P.
Ah, sweet summer in New York City.
There simply could not be a better time to try to persuade the Republican National Committee to hold its 1996 Presidential nominating convention in the city.
The skeptics might disagree, but they probably haven't got caught up in the spirit.


CHRONICLE
In another time and another place, WHOOPI GOLDBERG is stepping in to help Rwandan refugees.
The star of "Sister Act" and "The Color Purple" said yesterday that she has donated $75,000 to relief organizations working with the refugees, The Associated Press reported.


Ronald Rawson, 76, Theatrical Producer
Ronald Rawson, a broadcaster and producer who established several summer theaters on Long Island, died on July 18 at his home in Cohasset, Mass.
He was 76 and also had a home in New York City.
The cause was pancreatic cancer, his family said.


Three-Bowl Coalition Aiming for One Winner
College conference commissioners are expected to announce today the creation of a three-part football coalition intended to greatly increase the chances of a national championship game in one of the participating bowls.
It could be for a three- or a six-year term, starting in 1996.
The Sugar, Fiesta and Orange Bowls emerged yesterday as the likely winners, with the Big East and Southeastern conferences voting in their favor, according to two persons familiar with the situation who asked for anonymity.


Precision Castparts Corp.(PCP,N) reports earnings for Qtr to July 3


CLINTON PRESSURES G.O.P. LAWMAKERS ON HEALTH CARE
Asserting that Congress has a "historic opportunity" this year to enact universal health care legislation after six decades of failure, President Clinton accused Republican lawmakers tonight of abandoning their earlier support for guaranteed benefits and said the responsibility for finding a workable formula "now should shift to them."
But in the third prime-time news conference of his term, Mr.
Clinton was also forced to answer accusations that he had abandoned his stated goal of insuring every American by endorsing the version of insurance legislation unveiled on Tuesday by the Senate majority leader, George J.  Mitchell of Maine.


Questioning the Realty-Trust King
The hottest sector for stock offerings on Wall Street these days is real estate companies, and by far the hottest issuer of real estate stocks is Merrill Lynch &amp; Company.
The investment bankers in Merrill Lynch's property group have underwritten $2.9 billion worth of shares this year in the property companies known as real estate investment trusts, or REIT's, including $2 billion in initial public offerings.
That amounts to more than 40 percent of all new property shares at a time when the trusts are the fastest-growing category on the New York Stock Exchange.


Rollins Inc.(ROL,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


No Headline
"New York is the center of the industry. I couldn't afford to cut myself off from where the action is." -- ZEEV VOLCHIK, moved his business back to Brooklyn from New Jersey.  [ A1:3. ]


In Improving Its Look, Cyanamid Drew a Suitor
Ending years of obscurity that unkind traders said was well deserved, the American Cyanamid Company has emerged as Wall Street's latest Cinderella, its stock skyrocketing more than 40 percent on the expectation that it will be acquired by a wealthy suitor.
Albert J. Costello, 58, an aggressive deal-spinner who has been the company's chairman and chief executive for only 18 months, has transformed the once-lackluster chemical manufacturer into a leaner, more profitable health care and agricultural products company by cutting costs and shedding underperforming divisions.
And that has attracted attention.


RESULTS PLUS
HORSE RACING  Fillies Rule the Day  On a day when fillies reigned, Coronation Cup won the first division of he Nijana Stakes at Saratoga Race Course yesterday in Saratoga Springs, N.Y., and Alywow won the second division.
And, in between, Educated Risk outran November Snow in an allowance race featuring former stars pursuing comebacks.


Seaboard Corp.(SEB,A) reports earnings for Qtr to June 18


Man Is Killed by L.I.R.R. Train in Queens
A Long Island Rail Road train struck two young men in Springfield Gardens, Queens yesterday evening, killing one and seriously injuring the other, officials said.
"It looks like a case of two males in their late teens playing chicken with a train and losing," Richard A. Brown, the Queens District Attorney, said at the scene of the accident.


Victors in Michigan Primaries
Michigan voters on Tuesday nominated candidates with sharp ideological differences for what are expected to be closely contested races for governor and the United States Senate this fall.
Former Representative Howard Wolpe narrowly won the Democratic nomination for governor, with 241,403 votes, or 35 percent.
His closest rival was State Senator Debbie Stabenow, who had 209,013 votes, or 30 percent.


A hotel team with an eye on South Beach, family and Madonna.


Beating '92 Gold Medalists Just a Dream, Says Johnson
Practice sessions might be the only time Dream Team II will be challenged at the world basketball championships, which begin today in Toronto.
But at least one member of the original Dream Team thinks this year's upstarts would be wise not to get too cocky.


Chinese Company Admits To U.S. Import Violations
A California-based company owned by the Chinese Government pleaded guilty yesterday in Federal District Court in Manhattan to evading United States quotas on clothing imports by falsely labeling thousands of sweatshirts.
The company, Caltex Enterprises Inc., admitted to helping import more than 4,000 garments in violation of a law that bans the underpayment of duty on imported merchandise.
Caltex, of Alhambra, Calif., is a subsidiary of the China National Textiles Import and Export Corporation of Beijing, which controls China's textile and clothing trade.
Federal prosecutors said it was the first time a company owned by the Chinese Government had pleaded guilty to such charges.


Hold the Champagne: Yanks Clinch, With Asterisk
It might mean everything.
It might mean nothing.
For now, it means something.
What is this confusing description referring to?
The Yankees, first place, the pending players strike and what the Yanks' nifty status atop the division really means.
No one knows yet and the value of it will not be realized until the labor developments are finally settled.
There was no champagne, no celebrating and no predictions after the Yankees defeated the Brewers, 2-1, today in a rain-shortened seven-and-a-half-inning affair and assured themselves of remaining ensconced in first until the strike date of Aug. 12.
Once the Orioles lost, 4-3, to the Twins today and the Yankees followed with their sixth straight victory after waiting through a 68-minute rain delay, they clinched the top spot in the American League East.


Stocks Have Aimless Day; Dow Off 3.56
Stocks were mixed yesterday for a second consecutive session, as traders awaited the release of important economic information this week and next.
With investors focusing on individual stocks, the overall market was generally directionless.
The Dow Jones industrial average, which was down more than 9 points near 4 P.M., benefited from a last-minute buying surge of blue chips and regained ground to close at 3,792.66, off 3.56 points.
The Nasdaq composite index dropped 1.11 points, to 723.69.


In an Upset, Baggio Dislikes Shootouts
ROBERTO BAGGIO, who missed a penalty kick that proved decisive in Italy's loss to Brazil in the World Cup final last month, wants to eliminate shootouts.
Instead, he said yesterday, when World Cup matches end in ties, a new game should be played three or four days later.
A second game, or a replay, was the system in place, but never used by FIFA to resolve ties in the championship game until the 1980's.
Baggio said the shootout is unfair "for teams that have worked hard for four years to play a World Cup." Baggio said Brazil "was a just winner." (AP)


Why Adirondack Residents Fear Wolf's Return
To the Editor:
As a former resident of the Adirondack Park in Northern New York State, I was not surprised by the hostile reaction to the proposed reintroduction of timber wolves into the area (news article, July 21).
Many of the park's 200,000 residents bitterly oppose any intrusion onto what they believe is their property.
They call downstaters "invaders," "environmentalists" or "Commies."


Moderate Gains Posted By Treasury Securities
Treasury prices rose moderately yesterday, as several reports provided few surprises on economic growth.
The Treasury's 30-year bond rose 6/32 , to 8617/32 .
Its yield, which moves in the opposite direction, slipped to 7.38 percent, from 7.40 percent on Tuesday.


Wisconsin Energy Corp.(WEC,N) reports earnings for 12mos to June 30


W. T. Wittman, 80, Lawyer Specializing In Municipal Law
Walter T. Wittman, a Bergen County lawyer specializing in municipal law and an equal-rights advocate since the 1940's, died on Monday at Mount Sinai Hospital in Manhattan.
He was 80 and lived in Paramus, N.J.
The cause was respiratory failure, according to the firm of Beattie Padovano in Montvale, N.J., to which Mr.
Wittman was counsel.


Wyle Laboratories (WYL,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


CHRONICLE
RUTH GRUBER, the author of 14 books, is also visiting a place she described in one of them, but in her case she has been there before.
She is going to Oswego, N.Y., for a three-day reunion of refugees she accompanied to this country 50 years ago and more than 100 of their descendants.
Ms.
Gruber wrote a book in 1983 called "Haven," about the mission she led in 1944 as an aide to Harold Ickes, Secretary of the Interior, to bring 982 refugees from 18 countries to the United States.
President Franklin D. Roosevelt lifted immigration quotas to let them in, and they were taken to Fort Ontario, an Army camp in Oswego.


USAir Pilots Propose Pay Concessions
The pilots' union at USAir yesterday suggested a sweeping financial restructuring of the airline, which has been plagued by losses.
The proposal, which offers wage concessions in return for equity, would require other employees and investors to make sacrifices.
The plan calls for $2.5 billion in savings from all workers over five years in return for a 25 percent ownership stake, seats on the board and $700 million in preferred stock.
It represents the latest step in talks between USAir and its unions on lowering the airline's operating costs, which are the highest of all major carriers and have contributed to five straight years of losses.


People
*
Mary Trudel was named president at Kahn Communications, New York, succeeding Jeff Kahn, who was named chairman.
Ms.
Trudel was previously president at the Trudel Group, New York, which has been absorbed by Kahn. *
Betsy Frank, senior vice president and director of television and new media at Saatchi &amp; Saatchi Advertising, New York, was promoted to the new position of executive vice president and director of strategic media resources.


Hiroshima Journal; Museum's A-Bomb Message: There's More to It
For two generations the millions of Japanese schoolchildren who filed through the grim exhibits of the atomic bomb museum at ground zero here saw history through Hiroshima's distinctive prism, and they could easily be forgiven for thinking that World War II started on Aug. 6, 1945.
That was the day the bomb was dropped, and the devastation that followed has always been presented in this city's Peace Memorial Museum with only the briefest reference to the politics of the era or Japan's responsibility for starting the war that the bombing ended.


Secret Forest Of Marijuana Is Uncovered In SoHo Fire
A building in SoHo that burned yesterday concealed something more than bricks, mortar and endangered tenants.
When police officers and firefighters entered, they stumbled on a small forest of marijuana plants.
A top-floor apartment in the four-story brick building at 494 Broadway, between Spring and Broome Streets, included three secret rooms where 400 marijuana plants were being grown, said Detective Andrew McInnis, a police spokesman.
Stored near the greenery, he said, were fertilizer and equipment for cultivating the contraband.


Maxus Energy Corp.(MXS,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


British Javelin Star Plans Comeback
The former javelin world-record holder FATIMA WHITBREAD said yesterday in London that she is planning a comeback, and her goal is a gold medal at the 1996 Atlanta Olympics.
The 33-year-old Briton, who retired four years ago with injuries to her back and shoulder, said she expected to be given medical approval later this month. (AP)


Pacers Will Re-sign Scott, Report Says
BYRON SCOTT, 33, whose leadership and scoring off the bench helped spark Indiana's drive to the Eastern Conference finals, will sign a three-year, $5 million contract with the Pacers.
Pacers President Donnie Walsh was in Los Angeles to sign the former Lakers star yesterday, The Indianapolis Star reported. (AP)


New Tape of a Police Beating in California
A videotape of a police officer repeatedly hitting a teen-ager with his baton raised new accusations of police brutality in Los Angeles today.
The F.B.I and the Los Angeles County District Attorney's office are investigating, as is the Police Department in Compton, where the incident took place on Friday.


Train Derails Near Buffalo, Hurting Scores
A Chicago-bound Amtrak passenger train derailed in this rural town early today, sending nine cars hurtling down an embankment into pitch-black chaos.
At least 92 people were injured, many after being jolted from their sleep and thrown about the topsy-turvy cabins like rag dolls.
At least 29 people were hospitalized.
Genesee County officials said one woman was critically injured, but apparently no one was killed, and officials called that extremely lucky.


Ogden Projects Inc.(OPI,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Cliburn Saddles Up the Tchaikovsky Again
If guardian angels exist, Van Cliburn's must be moonlighting as a Hollywood scriptwriter.
An American cultural icon ever since he won the 1958 Tchaikovsky Competition in Moscow, Mr.
Cliburn remains a celebrity, his fame undimmed despite an absence of any real musical achievement since the early 1970's.
Abandoning the concert stage in 1978 only increased his allure, and he has performed so rarely since his comeback in 1989 that his every appearance is touted as a historic return.
These performances have often been emotional high-wire acts, with word of backstage drama buzzing through the audience.
This was certainly the case on Tuesday evening, when Mr.
Cliburn, accompanied by the Moscow Philharmonic and its conductor, Vasily Sinaisky, performed at the Metropolitan Opera House.
The concert was part of Mr.
Cliburn's first full-fledged tour since what he calls his "intermission," but until the boyish-looking, 60-year-old pianist took the stage, there were doubts about whether he would play.
On Thursday, when his 97-year-old mother, Rildia Bee Cliburn, had a stroke, Mr.
Cliburn postponed his weekend concerts and flew home to Fort Worth.
On Sunday he decided to postpone the Met concert, too, but just before midnight he changed his mind, saying that his mother would want him to go on. (Mrs. Cliburn died yesterday; an obituary is on page D18.)


Enserch Corp.(ENS,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


'Old Mud Hole' Fails Just When Needed
Townspeople affectionately call it "the old mud hole," a small pond where just about everyone in this rural community has been learning to swim since the turn of the century.
Emily Greiser, 10, learned to swim there, as did her father, Richard, who owns the town's general store, and her grandfather.
Even Emily's great-grandfather swam there when he came to Easton, about 60 miles from New York City, to open the store in 1926.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
Scott Paper announced the biggest corporate restructuring in its history, planning to lay off nearly a third of its work force by the end of the year and put its headquarters complex up for sale.  [ D1. ]
For all its success underwriting public offerings of stock in real estate companies, Merrill Lynch now faces criticism that it is making low-value companies look better than they really are.  [ D1. ]


Pitt-Des Moines Inc.(PDM,A) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


A Refuge Where Playwrights See Their Inspirations Coming to Life
In an old church in the theater district of Manhattan, playwrights take wing.
The building is the home of New Dramatists, an organization that for 45 years has offered selected new and experienced playwrights the gifts of time and performance space, professional actors so that the plays dancing in their heads can be staged, and even a place to bed down.


Elbit Ltd. (ELBTF,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


The Pop Life
Future Shock
When Lollapalooza, a traveling alternative-rock festival, comes to Downing Stadium on Randalls Island on Friday and Saturday, its founder, Perry Farrell, hopes to open a few people's minds, literally.


Agco Corp.(AG,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


High School Senior Goes Distance for U.S.
On a club filled with veterans and professionals, they call midfielder Tiffany Roberts "the little one."
It's an affectionate pet name for the 5-foot-3-inch high school senior from San Ramon, Calif.
At 17 years of age, she has earned the right to suit up for the defending world champion United States women's soccer team, and she played all 90 minutes in tonight's 1-0 victory against China.


Sherritt Inc.(SE) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Corrections
An article yesterday about the Senate Banking Committee testimony of Joshua Steiner, the Treasury Department chief of staff, misstated his educational connection to Oxford University.
Mr.
Steiner received a Master of Science degree in modern history from Oxford; he was not a Rhodes scholar.


Russia Backs Group Fighting Secession in South
Hoping to stamp out a three-year-old secessionist movement in southern Russia, the Government in Moscow is openly backing a rebel group that wants to overthrow the local secessionist government and rejoin the Russian Federation.
Moscow has had tense relations with the Chechen republic in the northern Caucasus ever since it declared its independence from Russia in 1991.
And the rebel group's leader, Umar Avturkhanov, who formally broke with the Chechen government and pledged his allegiance to Russia while visiting Moscow this weekend, provided the Russian Government with an opportunity to act.


Scherer (R.P.) Corp.(SHR,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


INSIDE
Rwandans Balk at Returning
Insisting they would be killed, leaders at Rwandan refugee camps refused to return home with a United Nations escort to assess conditions.
Page A3.
Derailment Near Buffalo
An Amtrak train bound for Chicago derailed in Batavia, N.Y., injuring at least 92 people.
Page B1.
Rage Over New Jersey Death
A girl's death has spurred calls for laws requiring that neighbors be told when sex offenders move in.
Page B1.
Yankees Clinch*
Hold the champagne, but with a strike that could shut down baseball set for Aug. 12, the Yankees have an unbeatable division lead.
Page B13.
Bangladeshi Writer Appears
Taslima Nasrin, a Bangladeshi writer hunted by Muslim militants, emerged in Dhaka to face charges of defaming Islam.
Released on bail, she went back into hiding.
Page A5.


Transcript of Clinton's News Conference at the White House
Following is the transcript of President Clinton's news conference, held tonight in the East Room of the White House, as recorded by The New York Times:
PRESIDENT CLINTON Good evening, ladies and gentlemen.


Pittston Services Group (PZS,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


TOP U.S. OFFICIALS DIVIDED IN DEBATE ON INVADING HAITI
Despite winning approval of the United Nations Security Council for an invasion of Haiti, the Administration is split over whether to set a deadline for carrying it out, senior Administration officials said today.
This division became evident, officials said, at a meeting of Mr.
Clinton's top national security advisers on Tuesday at the White House.
The meeting had been called to draw up recommendations for the President.


Senate G.O.P. Heats Up Attack on the Health Bill
Battle lines hardened on the health care front today and deadlines showed signs of slipping.
In the Senate, conservative Republicans escalated a bitterly ideological assault on the new plan from the Democratic leadership, asserting it would lead to socialized medicine, a "medical Gestapo knocking on your parents' door" and other generalized threats to what Senator Phil Gramm of Texas described as the future of America.
They vowed once again to try to slow the legislative process, even as Senator George J. Mitchell, the majority leader, continued to move the bill toward floor consideration next week.


Thiokol Corp.(TKC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


New Law Is Urged on Freed Sex Offenders
As far as his neighbors in Hamilton Township, N.J., knew, Jesse Timmendequas was a mild-mannered laborer who lived with two roommates in a cream-colored frame house at 27 Barbara Lee Drive and liked to show his new puppy to neighborhood children.
It was only last weekend, after he was accused of strangling and raping Megan Kanka, a 7-year-old who lived just across the street at No. 32, that they learned Mr.
Timmendequas was a twice-convicted felon who had served six years for sexual assault.
Both of his other victims were young girls.
Mr.
Timmendequas's housemates, neighbors also learned, had also served time for sex offenses.


Corrections
An entry in the Company Earnings listing in Business Day yesterday for the Agco Corporation included an incorrect footnote.
The figures provided were in United States dollars, not Canadian.


A Hidden Bat Trick: Vizcaino Saves Mets
Rico Brogna looked downright ugly when he faced Atlanta's Steve Avery last night at Shea Stadium.
In his first two at-bats against the left-hander, Brogna struck out on six pitches.
In his third plate appearance, he flew out weakly to right field.
It appeared, then, that someone in the National League had finally found a way to solve Brogna, the red-hot Mets rookie who has hit .382 since his call-up on June 25.
And the 11-game hitting streak Brogna brought into last night's contest?
It looked dead.


Antennas: Beyond the Rabbit Era
RABBIT ears may look good to (and on) rabbits.
But wiry indoor antennas clash with almost any decor except that of the Starship Enterprise.
It is no wonder radio listeners and television viewers with a sense of style refuse to turn their homes into electronic rabbit hutches.
But apartment dwellers without cable service or access to a roof antenna complain that radio reception is not clear and that their screens are haunted by "ghosts."


BAUSCH &amp; LOMB PREDICTS DECLINE IN 1994 EARNINGS
Bausch &amp; Lomb Inc. said yesterday that its earnings for 1994 would probably decline 15 percent to 20 percent from the $3.21 a share the company earned before it took a restructuring charge in 1993.
The charge removed a $75 million imbalance in inventories of sunglasses and standard contact lenses.
Bausch &amp; Lomb, a manufacturer of optical and health products based in Rochester, said it expected to achieve strong progress in 1995 as a result of reductions in expenses and increased sales growth.
The company made its earnings announcement after the close of stock trading yesterday.
Bausch &amp; Lomb's stock rose 37.5 cents, to $36.375, on the New York Stock Exchange.


Sundstrand Corp.(SNS,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Sullivan County Police To Patrol a No-Show Show
The reunion concert planned for the site of the original Woodstock festival may be off, but Sullivan County officials, meeting in emergency session today, said they were taking no chances.
Fearing that thousands will flock to the Max Yasgur farm in Bethel anyway, county officials said they would deploy police officers as they had originally planned for the weekend of Aug. 13 and 14, and that they would keep the $200,000 provided by the original promoters to pay for the services of state troopers.


Minnesota Grocer Chooses Wells Rich
Cub Foods Inc., a grocery chain based in Stillwater, Minn., said yesterday that it had selected Wells Rich Greene BDDP of Chicago to handle the creative portion of its account, which had been at Clarity Coverdale Fury of Minneapolis for the last two years.
Billings were estimated at $12 million.


Bond Dealer Group Is Against S.E.C. Proposals
The Municipal Securities Rulemaking Board, the agency set up by municipal bond dealers to regulate the industry, is opposing several proposals by the Securities and Exchange Commission intended to increase the financial information given to buyers of municipal bonds.
The S.E.C. is currently considering proposals to make it easier for buyers of municipal bonds to obtain information on the financial health of the cities and agencies that have issued those bonds -- much in the same way that corporations issue periodic earnings reports and make other financial information available to buyers of their stocks and bonds.


AT HOME WITH: Sue Grafton; A Is for Alter Ego
AT times, in fact a lot of the time, it's as though Kinsey Millhone were standing there saying, "Puleeze!" and "Hello, hello!" and "Excuse me!" But Kinsey is a fictional creature and talks only in print.
This outspoken, irreverent woman is Sue Grafton, the creator of Kinsey, a quirky, fiercely independent private investigator who was born in 1982 in a book called "A Is for Alibi" and has survived being shot, pummeled, punched and accosted through the alphabet to the current best-selling "K Is for Killer."
"Kinsey is my alter ego -- well, not even very alter," Ms. Grafton said.


Rildia Bee Cliburn; Mother and Teacher of Pianist, 97
Rildia Bee O'Bryan Cliburn, the mother of Van Cliburn and his only piano teacher until he was 17, died yesterday at All Saints Episcopal Hospital in Fort Worth.
She was 97 and lived in Fort Worth.
The cause was a stroke that occurred last Thursday, said Mary Lou Falcone, Mr.
Cliburn's spokeswoman.


Making Furniture 'Seem Like Clouds'
WHEN Helene Verin, a designer of furniture, wallpaper, rugs and shoes, bought her small studio apartment in Greenwich Village last fall, she wanted it to be two things: a pied-a-terre and a miniature showroom for her designs.
To make the 14-by-30-foot box of a room versatile, Ms.
Verin, below, designed lightweight furniture that can be quickly rearranged for different uses.
The line consists of two small desks, two consoles, a coffee table and chairs.
"This room is not an architectural wonder," Ms.
Verin said.
"Anything heavy or bold would overwhelm it. I wanted to make the furniture seem like clouds and disappear."


Alco Standard Corp.(ASN,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Remaking a Hotel, The Un-Miami Way
HERE in South Florida, the holiday home to Madonna, Versace and thousands of deeply tanned and tattooed tourists, was a scene that looked like a war-room strategy session.
Behind closed doors at the Raleigh Hotel, on the northern frontier of the South Beach Art Deco district, Ian Schrager and Philippe Starck huddled around a conference table earlier this summer, plotting.
The team that created the Royalton and Paramount hotels in Manhattan -- Mr.
Schrager, the entrepreneur, and Mr.
Starck, the French design superstar -- is refining its next project: the transformation of the Delano Hotel on South Beach's Collins Avenue.
They want to turn the building, a 14-story, 328-room, pink-stucco landmark built in 1947, into what Mr.
Schrager hopes will be "a self-contained destination resort."


Rattling the Bones Of an Old House
IF walls could speak, most homeowners -- and all real-estate agents -- would love every old house to be revealed as a sea captain's bordello, designed by Stanford White and converted to a speak-easy by the young Philip Johnson.
In fact, every building does have a story -- even though most houses were built by average people for average people.
The story of a house is not only about its design and construction, but also about the lives that were lived there.
And these lives naturally seem more interesting when seen through the lens of decades or even centuries.


Questar Corp.(STR,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


F.B.I. Undertakes Conspiracy Inquiry In Clinic Violence
Setting aside a longstanding reluctance to involve itself in cases of abortion-related violence, the Federal Bureau of Investigation has begun an inquiry into accusations that the use of force against women's clinics and their doctors is the work of a conspiracy by anti-abortion militants.
A confidential teletype sent to all 56 F.B.I. field offices on Saturday evening said the bureau had information indicating that about half a dozen anti-abortion figures might be posing "a conspiracy that endeavors to achieve political or social change through activities that involve force or violence."


Arkansas Puts 3 to Death After Flurry of Appeals
In the first triple execution in the country since 1962, Arkansas today put to death three men who murdered a prominent businessman in front of his family in 1981.
Beginning at 7 P.M., the executions by lethal injection took place about an hour apart in a small concrete-block room here at the Cummins Unit of the state prison system.
Hoyt Franklin Clines, 37, then Darryl V. Richley, 43, and finally, James William Holmes, 37, were each in turn strapped onto the same gurney to be carried to the death chamber and injected with a fatal mixture of chemicals.


CAE Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Breast Cancer Group Offers Free Support
To the Editor:
I was pleased to see your excellent news article July 29 about breast cancer support groups and, in particular, the importance of mothers and daughters confronting the disease together.


Fehr Hears a Drumbeat From the Players: 'Strike Now!'
If a growing number of players could make the decision, their labor leader said yesterday, they would move up the strike date from Aug. 12.
To when?
"Yesterday, last week," Donald Fehr said.
"Some have asked, 'Why didn't we do it at the All-Star Game?' I have an incipient player revolt on my hands."
The players are angry, Fehr explained, because the owners decided not to make a payment of about $7.8 million to the pension and benefit plan last Monday, the date stipulated in the expired benefits agreement.
The owners' labor representatives said the clubs were not contractually obligated to make the payment, so they didn't, but would take care of it once the two sides reach agreement on a new labor contract.


Redman Industries(RDMN,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to July 1


Unusual Alliance in House Unites to Stall the Crime Bill
The Clinton Administration's comprehensive crime bill, which last week seemed on its way to final passage in Congress, has run into an 11th-hour threat from political forces similar to ones that brought down crime bills in past years.
A strange if inadvertent alliance of gun supporters, blacks and Republicans has moved to block the bill, a compromise measure worked out last week by House and Senate negotiators, from reaching the House floor for a final vote.
The maneuvering has prompted President Clinton to join the fight for the measure.


Five French Citizens Are Slain in Algeria
Five French citizens working for the French Government in Algiers were killed by suspected Muslim militants today, bringing to 56 the number of foreigners slain in Algeria since the banned Islamic Armed Group began attacking foreigners there last September.
The French victims, three paramilitary gendarmes and two consular officials, were shot dead when four gunmen opened fire on gendarmes protecting an embassy housing complex in an Algiers suburb, Ain Allah.
French Government officials said the gunmen had also planned to explode a car bomb.


Corrections
A picture caption on Monday with an article about two towns affected by plans for "Woodstock" anniversary concerts misidentified a resident shown at a bungalow colony in Bethel, N.Y.
She was Sheila Brown.


Southam Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Italian Chief Hoping August Recess Will Cool Political Crisis
With most Italians soaking up heat on the beach or heading for the hills to avoid it, Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi seemed today to have won a respite from crisis, evidently hoping that his country's traditional August torpor will blunt political tempers, too.
With a televised speech to Parliament on Tuesday night that enabled the tycoon-politician to capitalize on his skills before the camera, Mr.
Berlusconi overcame rifts in his coalition prompted both by worries over the conflict between his business and political interests and concerns about his increasingly touchy relationship with the investigating magistrates.


Titan Wheel Intl(TWI,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Information Freeway?; Open Data Path Is Urged
With a tangle of cut-rate electronics and a couple of computers, the free-netters of Buffalo are campaigning to bring cyberspace to the people.
"We're built on the concept of community, not profit," said Jody Lebrenz, a founding member of the Buffalo Free-Net.
"We believe that the minute you charge even $5, you're dividing people into haves and have-nots. Access should be free to the community, like a public library."


Corrections
An obituary on Tuesday about Rosa Chacel, a Spanish novelist, misidentified the author of the English translation of her book "The Maravillas District," published in 1992 by the University of Nebraska Press.
It was translated by D. A. Demers, not Susan Kirkpatrick.


Tyco Intl Ltd.(TYC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Cuomo Appeals to Union Leaders for Help in Campaign
Seeking to revitalize the liberal-labor coalition that helped start his political career 12 years ago, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo implored state union leaders today to give him the foot soldiers and the money he needs to win perhaps his toughest campaign.
In a fiery speech to leaders of the state A.F.L.-C.I.O., Mr.
Cuomo cast the race in grand historical themes, calling it a battle for the "heart and soul" of America and warning that a Republican victory would be a powerful blow to union workers not just in New York State but nationwide.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  *
Chase Manhattan Corp., New York, is selling $150 million of 7.875 percent subordinated notes due in 2004 at 98.731 to yield 8.062 percent through Bear, Stearns.
Callable at par in five years, the issue is rated Baa1 by Moody's Investors Service Inc. and A- by Standard and Poor's Corp. and Duff &amp; Phelps. *
Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corp., known as Freddie Mac, is selling $50 million of debentures due in 1997 at 100 to yield 6.645 percent through CS First Boston.
The issue is callable in one year.


In the Clubby New Cub Room, Slouching Is a Sanctioned Option
THE CUB ROOM, a restaurant that opened last month in SoHo, achieves splendid informality: bar and restaurant as living room.
The owners of the restaurant, Henry Meer, at right in photo, who is also the chef, and Philip Saunders, left, formerly a maitre d'hotel at Orso and Raoul's, wanted a design that was both rustic and urbane, rough-hewn yet elegant.
Especially, they wanted people to feel comfortable, to be able to slouch in curvy banquettes, or open one of the mullioned windows that divide the kitchen from the hallway and chat with Mr.
Meer as he roasts the lobsters.
Nearly every banquette is covered in a different, opulent fabric (some nubby, others silky): olive velvet damask, purple raw silk, rust-colored kilims.


Miscellany
*
Charney/Palcios &amp; Co., Miami, a print media representative, opened an office in New York.


Calendar: Tours, Talks, Shows and a Festival
Home Garden Ideas  New York Botanical Garden, 200th Street and Southern Boulevard, the Bronx; (718) 817-8700.
Home Gardening Weekend is Saturday and Sunday, from 11 A.M. to 4 P.M.
Events will include tours along Annuals Walk, talks and an exhibition of house gardens from around the world in the demonstration gardens, advice on composting and growing bulbs, and activities for children.


This U.S. Team Is Younger but Much More Brash
They have come to proclaim themselves the new lords of the basketball universe, masters of the collapsible rim, their existential credo being: I dunk, therefore I am.
Oh, and those celebrated gold medalists who pioneered the National Basketball Association's penetration to the interior of international competition two summers ago?
They may as well accept their places in ancient history with George Mikan and the peach basket that Shaquille O'Neal would dearly love to break into a thousand fragments.
"As for the Dream Team, I think we'd beat them easily," O'Neal crowed today on the eve of the 1994 world basketball championships, after he and some of his teammates tried to tear down a few rims as practice wound down.
"Our legs are a lot younger."
By today's flaccid standards, young legs and as-yet undistinguished careers nonetheless actuate huge bank accounts and enormous egos.
Coach Don Nelson will send Dream Team II, as the marketing propagandists insist on calling it, into battle Thursday night against Spain in the 16-team, 10-day tournament.
The United States pros are the overwhelming favorites to take the gold.
Croatia, Brazil, Germany Are Here
Croatia, the 1992 Olympic silver medalist in Barcelona, Spain, is back, with Toni Kukoc, Dino Radja and Stoyko Vrankovic, but, sadly, without the late Drazen Petrovic.
Brazil is here, though a movement toward youth forced the eccentric gunner, Oscar Schmidt, off the national team.
Germany has Detlef Schrempf and Angola has Herlander Coimbra, whom some may recall as the recipient of Charles Barkley's ceremonial first elbow of the Barcelona Games.
What no country really has, unless Nelson forgets he's not coaching the Warriors and fields an entire lineup of players under 6 feet 4 inches, is a chance to run with the United States for more than a few fanciful moments.
And, regardless of what O'Neal and his dunking buddies might believe, the ability to dominate the developing basketball world is about all Dream Team II has in common with the original, which featured three of the best players in the history of the sport.
"The ignorance of youth, huh?" laughed Joe Dumars, when asked about O'Neal's boast.
Of Championship Caliber
One of three 30-plus veterans sprinkled about the roster, Dumars is the only United States player who owns an N.B.A. championship ring.
The two he won with the Detroit Pistons shrink when matched against the total of 12 the original Dream Team had won by the time of the '92 Olympics, thanks to Magic Johnson's five, Larry Bird's three and the two apiece for Michael Jordan and Scottie Pippen, who added one more.
"I think that's one of the problems for these young guys now," said Dumars.
"The N.B.A. has set such a high standard of excellence for entertainment, and now any perceived drop-off is going to seem much worse than it is.
"You have to look at these guys differently. Most of them are in their second, third and fourth years. Five years from now, Shaquille will have won a couple of titles. Probably Larry Johnson and Alonzo Mourning. It's not fair to compare these teams." Veteran Leadership
Nonetheless, Dumars and his fellow graybeard Dominique Wilkins ride the bus with O'Neal, Mourning, Derrick Coleman, et al., and can't believe what they hear.
"I'm kind of caught between the two teams," said Dumars.
"I played with the older guys in their primes and now I'm with these guys. Believe me, they have some interesting discussions. Like the other day, Alonzo was talking about scoring down low, about this move and that move.
"Nique told him, 'No big man had more moves than Kevin McHale.' Then I said, 'That's right, McHale could destroy people on the block.' Alonzo said, 'Destroy? Come on.'
"I said, 'Yeah, all right. Think what you want.' " REBOUNDS
Given his predilection for small lineups, DON NELSON's starting lineup for the opener against Spain includes three guards, JOE DUMARS, REGGIE MILLER and KEVIN JOHNSON, and SHAQUILLE O'NEAL and SHAWN KEMP. . . .
Nelson named Dumars, LARRY JOHNSON and Miller as tricaptains. . . .
The United States is in Pool A, with Brazil, Spain and China.


T.W.A. Is Set To Furlough Up to 3,000
Trans World Airlines, which is in the midst of a cost-cutting drive, said late yesterday that it would furlough up to 3,000 employees, or 11 percent of its work force, during the next 30 days.
The job cuts, which are expected to affect employees in all areas of the nation's seventh-largest airline, will move T.W.A. a step closer to its goal of cutting $135 million from its annual costs, to insure that it has enough cash to make it through the winter.


Economic Data Up; Outlook Murky
A host of fresh economic reports was released by the Government yesterday, but private analysts said the reports shed little additional light on whether the pace of economic growth was moderating.
The Commerce Department said its index of leading economic indicators, its main forecasting gauge, rose by two-tenths of a percent in June, following a revised one-tenth of a percent increase in May.


Bentsen Denies Aides' Assertions Of Briefings on Whitewater Talks
Returning to the Senate to defend his reputation, Treasury Secretary Lloyd Bentsen today contradicted the description of his role in Whitewater discussions that his two top aides repeated today before a panel on the other side of Capitol Hill.
Mr.
Bentsen told the Senate Banking Committee, the panel that had grilled Deputy Secretary Roger C. Altman for nine hours the night before, that errors of judgment had been committed by Mr.
Altman and the department's general counsel, Jean E. Hanson.


Jets Will Start Glenn; Hasty Causes a Scare
On the day that Aaron Glenn, the Jets' No. 1 draft pick, was named the starting left cornerback, the team lost James Hasty, its outstanding right cornerback, for at least the rest of the preseason.
Hasty will undergo arthroscopic surgery on his right knee on Thursday morning at Lenox Hill Hospital.
The surgery will be performed by Dr.
Elliott Hershman, the team's orthopedist.


Chrysler Is Asking for Directions on Quality
Grappling with both the public's perceptions and the reality of its quality headaches, the Chrysler Corporation has turned to an outside consultant to try to improve its scores on an independent automobile quality survey.
Using the outside company, the Process Development Corporation in Taylor, Mich., is one of several extraordinary efforts by Chrysler to improve the quality of its Neon subcompact cars by this fall, when the survey, by the California auto consultant J. D. Power and Associates, is conducted.


Manuel J. Gonzalez Dies at 50; Hispanic Pioneer at the F.B.I.
Manuel J. Gonzalez, the first Hispanic agent to reach the rank of assistant director at the Federal Bureau of Investigation, died on Monday at the Hospice of Northern Virginia, in Arlington, his hometown.
He was 50.
The cause was cancer, said the bureau, which appointed him assistant director for personnel last October.


Violence in the Home
The Parent &amp; Child column of July 14, "Debating the Violence in 'Lion King,' " described how some parents are upset about their young children seeing scenes of fratricide.
Violence is the hidden secret of American family life.
It is an acceptable part of American culture.
The average child views more than 10,000 acts of violence on television and in the movies before he or she is 15.


Dealing With War Crimes
There is no doubt that horrible war crimes have been committed in the civil war in Rwanda.
But Prime Minister Faustin Twagiramungu's determination to proceed with the trial and execution of thousands of civilians accused of war crimes in Rwanda speaks of victor's justice.
Mass trials in suspect circumstances can now only deepen the divisions that have caused two million Rwandans, most of them Hutu, to flee a country whose victorious revolutionaries are most Tutsi.
Far better for the world as well as Rwanda to seek justice before an international tribunal under United Nations auspices.
Mr.
Twagiramungu believes such a process could take too long to organize, but it need not.


Essay; The Whole Truth
Why have the Riegle hearings on the Whitewater scandal brought credit to the Senate, while the Gonzalez circus on the same matter has brought ridicule on the House?
Because the essence of the Senate hearings is not about the abuse of the banking system by the Clintons, or even about White House attempts to impede or wrongfully investigate an investigation.
These hearings are not yet about Whitewater; they are about the constitutional requirement that the Congress be told the whole truth.


Hadassah Goes Beyond Its Original Goal of Fostering Ties to Israel
Even at 90, Anne Rimland is not the oldest person attending the national convention of Hadassah, the Women's Zionist Organization of America Inc.
But she offers an idea of the kind of voluntary efforts that contribute to running a charitable organization that raised more than $83 million in the last year for health care in Israel and various educational projects.
Mrs.
Rimland, who lives in Chicago and has been a Hadassah member for almost 50 years, said she takes a bus to her local chapter to stuff envelopes.
"I still go down to Hadassah to give three or four days a week," she said.
"You can ask my president."


Union Texas Petroleum Holdings Inc.(UTH,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


American Slices, on Main Street and Off the Road; These Three Brake for Mummies
IT was like being in a road movie: driving through 17 states, 4,002 miles from sea to shining sea in less than a week, out to look at 50 roadside attractions.
A strippers' hall of fame.
The world's largest thermometer.
Drive-through caves.
A town where the squirrels are white.
Mummies in West Virginia.
Three of the men in the blue van racing along from the Roy Rogers Museum in Victorville, Calif., to the Food Wheel in Keansburg, on the Jersey Shore, where vacationers gamble for boxes of cereal, were authors of a guide to roadside America.
They were scouting for new entries for a future edition of their book, "The New Roadside America" (Simon &amp; Schuster, $13).
The original was published in 1986; it was updated and expanded for a second edition, in 1992.
A reporter was along for the ride.


K-III Communications Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Parish Could Be a King for Season, or Two
He will be taking a cut in pay, but he says he wants to play one more season, so the reported offer from the Sacramento Kings of nearly $3 million for two years might be attractive to ROBERT PARISH, 40, the National Basketball Association's oldest player.
Parish made $4 million last season with the Boston Celtics, but that money in his salary-cap slot this season is going to forward DOMINIQUE WILKINS, 34, who signed with Boston last week.
According to The Boston Globe yesterday, the Kings would pay Parish $2.3 million next season with a buyout clause for the next year.
If he decided to play only one season, he would still receive nearly $3 million.
The Globe also reported that the Charlotte Hornets are interested in Parish. (AP)


From Consensus to Doubt
Top Federal Reserve officials are in a quandary: despite what other analysts see as signs of slowing growth, they sense early signs of rising inflation and strong business confidence that could lead to an overheated economy.
But they have doubts about their judgment, and worry that if they are wrong, raising interest rates to stop inflation could halt the nation's economic expansion prematurely.


Zaire Aid Workers Report Holdups
The United Nations said today that Zairian soldiers had held up relief workers at gunpoint, ordering them to hand over boxes of food and medicine while the workers were unloading shipments at the airport here on the last three nights.
The airport authorities denied that soldiers had held up the aid workers and accused the workers of pilfering the goods, which are intended for Rwandans at refugee camps around Goma.


Newmont Mining Corp.(NEM,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Big Cuts In Scott's Revamping
The Scott Paper Company, the world's largest producer of tissue products, announced the biggest corporate restructuring in its history yesterday, with plans to lay off nearly a third of its work force by the end of the year, reduce its corporate headquarters staff in Philadelphia by 70 percent and put its headquarters complex up for sale.
Albert J. Dunlap, a turnaround specialist who has been the company's chairman and chief executive for just four months, said that as a result of the restructuring, Scott would save $420 million in operating costs next year, before taxes. 100 Fewer Products
He said in an interview that the plan included the elimination of 10,500 jobs, the closing of unproductive plants and the sale of noncore businesses.
The company will also cut the number of its consumer products to 300, from 400, he said.


BUSINESS DIGEST
OUTLOOK FOR INDUSTRY BRIGHTENS New York City's long-troubled industrial concerns are experiencing an unexpected turn of fortune: The retreat of manufacturing jobs has recently come to a halt, according to new figures from the New York State Department of Labor.
For smaller companies, particularly in Brooklyn and Queens, a modest expansion even appears to be under way.
A1.
NEW YORK CITY  GIULIANI PITCHES G.O.P.
ON CONVENTION Ah, sweet summer in New York City.
A good time to try to persuade the Republican National Committee to hold its 1996 Presidential nominating convention in the city.
Hot?
Of course it's hot.
It's August.
But at least it's not cold.
Democrats?
Yes, there are Democrats.
In fact, they outnumber Republicans 5 to 1.
But the new Mayor is a Republican, and he is eager to please.
B3.


Memorex Telex NV(MEMXY) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Lemieux and Penguins to Discuss Status
MARIO LEMIEUX, just back from a golf vacation to Scotland, met last night with the Pittsburgh Penguins' chairman, HOWARD BALDWIN, to discuss his future with the team.
It's a future the Penguins apparently believe won't include the 1994-95 season.


A Cast of Dreamers Married to the Mob
Playland  By John Gregory Dunne 494 pages. Random House. $25.
"Playland," the title of John Gregory Dunne's darkly comic new Hollywood novel, is the name of an opulent gambling casino that one character, the New York mobster Jacob King (born Jacob Kinovsky), is erecting in Las Vegas after having eliminated a rival from Los Angeles.
In fact, shortly before his own assassination -- by a shotgun blast in his suite in the casino -- King had renamed the place King's Playland.


CNA Financial Corp.(CNA,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Let Disney Teach History Someplace Else; Lectures in the Park
To the Editor:
Thomas Bender's belief that the complex and unfinished story of the Civil War is not being given to the widest possible public fails to credit the efforts and scholarship of the many National Park Service historians who have interpreted the Civil War story to millions since the 1930's (Op-Ed, July 25).


Lewis to Fight McCall
After three lackluster defenses of a tarnished crown, Lennox Lewis, the World Boxing Council heavyweight champion, will finally be meeting a quality opponent when he takes on Oliver McCall in London on Sept. 24.
That, at least, was the line being peddled in New York yesterday by, among others, Lewis, McCall, Dan Duva, the fight's promoter, and, most vociferously, McCall's personal promoter, Don King.
The contention that McCall (24-5) is a plausible challenger for Lewis (25-0) rests on several arguments


Itel Corp.(ITL,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Economic Scene; Why a trade dispute over roses is turning into a perennial.
ACCORDING to Gertrude Stein, a rose is a rose is a rose.
But not according to the Department of Commerce, which is on the prowl for imports that unfairly compete with American Beauties.
And while it's easy to make light of the latest charges that Colombian growers are "dumping" millions of dollars worth of flowers in Miami and points north, the Colombians aren't laughing.
Nor should American consumers, suggests Robert Z. Lawrence of Harvard's Kennedy School of Government.
For the case illustrates much of what economists think is askew in America's anti-dumping laws.
"The whole thing's a travesty," Mr.
Lawrence concludes.


American Slices, on Main Street and Off the Road; Memory Lane Is Thriving
STANDING in the Grand Variety Store, a 45-year-old five-and-dime in Caldwell, N.J., Pat Ross is impressed.
The store might seem a little dowdy to anyone else -- an aluminum sign reads "Toys Housewares Stationery" -- but it's a treasure trove for Ms.
Ross, less for the 20,000 objects it stocks than for the history it breathes.
Having spent two and a half years crisscrossing the country in search of quintessential small-town America, she sees in the architecture and ambiance of an old-fashioned Main Street store a vital connection to the past -- even here, where so much of the past has been swallowed up by strip malls, commercial highways and the inevitable melding of towns into the solid mass of suburbia.


UGI Corp.(UGI,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Grand Larceny Charge Deepens an Elmsford Family Tragedy
A year ago, after robbing a liquor store at gunpoint, Eric Shames inspired more sympathy than outrage.
His story drew national attention because Mr.
Shames, a retired New Rochelle police officer, said he had acted in a desperate attempt to get money for his ailing young son.
Letters of support, donations of food and clothing, and thousands of dollars poured in from people across the country who wanted to help Mr.
Shames, his wife, Elizabeth, and their son, Christopher, who was born with a heart defect and suffered severe brain damage during surgery to correct the problem.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
7.25
7.25
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.50
3.50
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
4.13
4.21
3.14
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.30
4.32
3.07
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.68
4.72
3.21
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.07
7.10
5.87
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.38
7.40
6.55
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.17
8.18
7.27
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.31
6.30
5.74
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Papering the Walls With Team Spirit
YANKEE and Mets fans, do your bedrooms need sprucing up?
As teams' colors and logos change, so do wallpaper designs.
So Village Wallcovering of Manhattan is changing its lineup.
For three years, the company has produced pin-stripe wallpaper and borders that feature the logos of the 28 major league baseball teams.
The new borders for the Yankees and Mets are bigger, bolder and sprightlier.


Torchmark Corp.(TMK,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Outlook Improves for Industry in New York
When he moved his Brooklyn knitwear company to New Jersey eight years ago, Zeev Volchik joined a decadeslong exodus of industrial concerns from New York City.
Like so many New York manufacturers before and after him, Mr.
Volchik was convinced that he would save hundreds of thousands of dollars by locating elsewhere and avoiding all the troubles of doing business in the city.
But two years ago, Mr.
Volchik, an immigrant from Israel, moved his company back to Brooklyn.
Why?
Even though he had been just a few miles away in Perth Amboy, N.J., Mr.
Volchik found that his company, Sarig Fashions, was losing touch with the tight network of garment makers, suppliers and customers in Queens and Brooklyn that helped him survive.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an obituary last Thursday about a physician who headed the physiology department at Columbia University for 20 years referred to him erroneously at one point in some editions.
He was Dr.
John V. Taggart 3d; Dalton was the name of the professorship he held.


Corrections
An article on Monday about the Grass Roots Shakespeare Troupe referred erroneously to a 1950's dispute between Robert Moses, then parks commissioner, and another troupe, the New York Shakespeare Festival started by Joseph Papp.
The New York Shakespeare Festival first performed in Central Park in 1957, not 1958, and did so with the initial permission of Mr.
Moses, not over his objections.
He raised objections to the festival in 1959.


Snapple Beverage Corp.  (SNPL,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


'Jerusalem? Shalom! Do You Copy?'
Accompanied by an Israeli fighter jet escort and a blaze of official publicity, King Hussein of Jordan flew over Israel today, passing over Muslim holy sites in Jerusalem on his way home to Amman from Europe.
The flyover, announced to Israelis by Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin's office, was an attempt to show how quickly changes were going into effect after the signing in Washington last week of a declaration that formally ended the state of war between Jordan and Israel.


CBI Industries Inc.(CBH,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Garden Q.&amp;A.
Late Vegetables
Q.
Because of health problems, I've been unable to plant vegetables this year.
Is it now too late to grow anything myself? -- Florence C. Higgins, Westport, Conn.


Roadmaster Industries(RDM,A) reports earnings for Qtr to July 2


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-11  A SPLIT ON INVADING HAITI  Though it has won the authorization of the United Nations Security Council for an invasion of Haiti, the Administration is split over whether to set a deadline for carrying it out, senior Administration officials say.
A1


For Gazan, Her Return Breeds Hope
At sunrise on the first day of July, Intissar al-Wazir rode across the Allenby Bridge from Jordan into the West Bank town of Jericho, returning to the land she calls Palestine after more than 30 years.
Then Mrs.
Wazir -- widow of Khalil al-Wazir, the late military chief of the P.L.O., who is believed to have been killed by Israeli commandos -- traveled through Israel to her native city of Gaza with an Israeli escort.


Providian Corp.(PVN,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Federal Panel Proposes Register To Curb Hiring of Illegal Aliens
A Federal advisory commission proposed today that the Government establish a computerized register of the names and Social Security numbers of all citizens and aliens authorized to work in the United States, so that employers could check the immigration status of job applicants.
In a unanimous recommendation, the nine-member advisory panel, the Commission on Immigration Reform, which is headed by Barbara Jordan, the former Democratic Congresswoman from Texas, said the measures were needed to curb the hiring of illegal aliens.


After 50 Years, Virginian Will Renew a Friendship Torn Apart by Soviets
Their brief relationship flared just as the wary World War II alliance between the United States and the Soviet Union grew icy enough to be called a cold war.
The young American assistant naval attache was expelled from Stalin's Moscow on charges of espionage; the 21-year-old Russian medical student was thrown into prison for four months of interrogation, then sentenced to eight years in the Gulag for her contact with him.
Nearly 50 years later, after life marked them both and the Soviet Union that punished them had itself died, she found him again through intermediaries.
He invited her to visit him in America, taking responsibility for her tickets and expenses.
But the American Embassy rejected her request for a visa, assuming her interest, at 68, was only to emigrate.


Royals Look Different But Keep on Winning
Royals 9, Athletics 5
The Kansas City Royals extended baseball's longest winning streak this season to 12 games last night with a 9-5 victory over the Oakland Athletics at Kauffman Stadium.
The Royals -- donned in replicas of the uniforms worn by the Kansas City Monarchs, the 1924 champions of the Negro leagues -- have not lost since dropping a 5-2 decision to Detroit on July 22.


Bio-Rad Laboratories Inc.(BIO.A,A) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Transactions
Baseball  American League  NEW YORK YANKEES -- Claimed Rob Murphy, pitcher, off waivers from the St.
Louis Cardinals.
Basketball  National Basketball Association
CLEVELAND CAVALIERS -- Agreed to terms with Michael Cage, center-forward, on a three-year contract.
Continental Basketball Association
RAPID CITY THRILLERS -- Traded Doug Roth and Wayne Tinkle, centers, and the rights to Lester Neel, center, to the Tri-City Chinook for Terry Dozier, forward, and the rights to Jud Buechler, Todd Lichti, and Joe Wolf, forwards.
Football  National Football League
ARIZONA CARDINALS -- Signed Sebastian Barrie and Jon Baker, defensive linemen.
Waived Eric Blount, running back; Steve Lofton, cornerback; and Kenny Lopez, defensive lineman.
BUFFALO BILLS -- Signed Mo Elewonibi, offensive lineman.
CLEVELAND BROWNS -- Agreed to terms with Antonio Langham, cornerback, on a four-year contract.
MIAMI DOLPHINS -- Signed Todd Dixon, wide receiver.
NEW YORK GIANTS -- Signed Keith Hamilton, defensive end, to a three-year contract.


Retailers Providing Instant Furniture
HOW do people want their new furniture to arrive?
Overnight.
In perfect condition, assembled, with the legs screwed on, and put in place.
And if it's a sofa, the pillows fluffed.


Foamex International Inc.(FMXI,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to July 3


Mining Some Drama From Whitewater at Last
After an opening that veered between a yawn and a farce, the Whitewater hearings caught fire this week.
The promise of the appearance of a villain or a victim usually excites interest on the stage, and so it was for this television show that occupied PBS, CNN and C-Span for hours and hours. (The networks passed, presumably saving themselves for the trial of O. J. Simpson.)
The drama began to build on Tuesday morning with the questioning of Joshua L. Steiner, whose diary served as a metaphorical smoking gun against his former boss at the Treasury Department, Roger C. Altman.
Mr.
Steiner's hyperbolic prose turned the Senators into literary critics.
By afternoon, expectations over how Mr.
Altman would try to wriggle out of words, words, words ran high.


Continental Corp.(CIC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Let Disney Teach History Someplace Else
To the Editor:
Re "Disney Is an Easy Target" (Op-Ed, July 25): Thomas Bender, in his enthusiasm for Disney's theme park in Virginia, argues "we ought to be seeking any means available, commercial or not, that will enable us to tell that complex and unfinished story" of the Civil War's "larger significance -- the struggle over the meaning of American nationalism and our concept of freedom."


A Televised Test of Character and Endurance
As Deputy Treasury Secretary and for many years before as a prominent and prosperous Wall Street investment banker, Roger C. Altman has been used to giving orders, to cutting deals, to being in charge.
But for the last two days, he has been anything but in command.
He has been subjected to a form of torture peculiar to Washington: the televised Congressional hearing.


Brooklyn Youth Arrested After Officer Is Shot
It was nearly 1 A.M. yesterday when the chase began through the stairwells of the scruffy Cypress Hills Houses in East New York, Brooklyn.
Bullets were exploding and ricocheting off the walls, and as Detective Joseph Vigiano hit the fifth-floor landing, one shot ripped across the edge of his bulletproof vest and halted him with a grazing wound to his left arm.


Moore Corp.(MCL,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


You Call This Scam Health-Care Reform?; What Coverage Means
To the Editor:
Re "Strong Support for Health Plans" (front page, July 21): Even you are committing the grotesque error of treating universal care and universal coverage as identical.
The subheading on this article refers to overwhelming public support for universal care, the body of the story primarily to universal coverage.
Clearly they are not synonymous.


The Making of a Roof Garden Teaches the Gravity of Gravity
IN the country, you may run out of space for your garden, but you don't run out of soil.
In the city, you run out of both. I call it Gardening on a Tiny Planet.


Jostens Inc.(JOS,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Teammates Welcome an American Abroad
ALEXI LALAS was greeted by applause from his new teammates when he joined Padova of the Italian League yesterday in Bressanone, Italy.
Lalas, a 24-year-old defender from Birmingham, Mich., and Rutgers University who played in the World Cup last month, is the first American to sign with a team in the Italian League, the most expensive and highly regarded league in the world.
He spent his first day taking a physical exam, being fitted for a uniform and house-hunting.
Padova begins its league schedule on Sept. 4 at Sampdoria of Genoa. (AP)


Shakespeare in the Park Goes Aquatic


State Queries Some Renters About Income
Occupants of 1,900 rent-regulated apartments in New York City began getting notices from a state agency this week asking them for information about their income that could lead to the removal of their apartments from rent regulation.
The agency, the New York State Division of Housing and Community Renewal, has already removed 186 apartments from rent regulations, all of them in Manhattan.
The orders, and the notices that are being issued this week, result from a law passed last year by the state removing from regulation apartments renting for more than $2,000 a month to people whose income exceeded $250,000 a year for two years in a row.


Newmont Gold Co.(NGC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Journal; A Blip on the Screen
Joshua Steiner, the 28-year-old diarist who ate his words under oath, is already a blip in Whitewater, which may or may not prove a blip in the history of the Clinton Administration.
Mr.
Steiner, the Treasury Department's chief of staff, testified before the Senate Banking Committee on Tuesday, shed no light on anything, and promptly disappeared into the dregs of a news cycle dominated by the marathon bad hair day of the designated Whitewater fall guy, Roger Altman.
Yet Mr.
Steiner's appearance, before a panel more bipartisan and less farcical than its House counterpart, marked the first time these hearings had left blood on the floor.
"Painful to watch" is how Don Imus, the rare radio talker who doesn't hate the President, described the spectacle.
To which other sympathetic observers might add words like excruciating, poignant, sad.
Though Mr.
Steiner's ordeal added nothing to the Whitewater story line, it did seem to compress into a few hours both the great promise and great disappointment of the Clinton era so far.


Visa Buying Electronic-Payment Operation
Visa International said yesterday that it would buy the electronic-banking and bill-paying operation of the U.S.
Order Corporation, so that Visa's member banks could offer services by personal computer and telephone.
U.S.
Order, based in Herndon, Va., sells phones with small computer screens and keyboards that customers can use for shopping and information retrieval, as well as banking.
The company, in which Worldcorp, an air-freight concern, has a majority interest, will continue to sell the telephones and the shopping service.


Wainoco Oil (WOL,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Le Coze Memorial
A memorial service for Gilbert Le Coze, co-owner of the Manhattan seafood restaurant Le Bernardin, will be at 11 A.M. on Friday at the Cathedral of St.
John the Divine.
Mr.
Le Coze, 49, died of a heart attack on July 28.


Chinese Company Admits To U.S. Import Violations
A California-based company owned by the Chinese Government pleaded guilty yesterday in Federal District Court in Manhattan to evading United States quotas on clothing imports by falsely labeling thousands of sweatshirts.
The company, Caltex Enterprises Inc., admitted to helping import more than 4,000 garments in violation of a law that bans the underpayment of duty on imported merchandise.
Caltex, of Alhambra, Calif., is a subsidiary of the China National Textiles Import and Export Corporation of Beijing, which controls China's textile and clothing trade.
Federal prosecutors said it was the first time a company owned by the Chinese Government had pleaded guilty to such charges.


Bridge
Last week may have been the changing of the guard at the top level of American women's bridge: None of the players who have represented the United States in world team competition for the last 20 years were able to win the Women's Knockout Team title at the American Contract Bridge League's Summer Nationals in San Diego, and a few of them were not even present.
The victory went to a relatively young group that will now be in the running to represent the United States in Beijing next year: Sally Woolsey of Kensington, Calif., Joann Glasson of Pennington, N.J., JoAnn Manfield of Philadelphia, Jo Anne Casen of Boca Raton, Fla., Jan Martel of Davis, Calif., and Georgiana Gates of Houston.
They were all winners of this prestigious event for the first time.


Xerox attempts a new beginning by making its name the last word in a corporate rechristening.
CONNOISSEURS of advertising savor recollections of the kickoffs of corporate image campaigns like the uncorking of fine, and not so fine, wines.
In the annals of corporate logoland, who can forget classic vintages like the initially mocked Unisys, the mysterious Primark or even the doomed Allegis, a label that was only briefly tolerated by the parent of United Airlines?


Violence in the Home
The Parent &amp; Child column of July 14, "Debating the Violence in 'Lion King,' " described how some parents are upset about their young children seeing scenes of fratricide.
Violence is the hidden secret of American family life.
It is an acceptable part of American culture.
The average child views more than 10,000 acts of violence on television and in the movies before he or she is 15.


Executive Changes
RAYTHEON MARINE CO., Hudson, N.H., a unit of the Raytheon Company, named Robert Unger president.
SANDY CORP., Troy, Mich., named John Zimmerman chief financial officer and group vice president.


New York's Electoral Shame
Despite a substantial simplification of New York State's election law in 1992, candidates for public office are still bombarding rivals with challenges to their nominating petitions.
In New York City alone, 114 challenges were filed with the Board of Elections against candidates for the September primaries.
That may mean the law needs further modification to make life easier for petition candidates.
Or it may simply mean that hoary political tradition dies hard.


Howard Glad to Be Put Out Of Position
Erik Howard has never looked this good, not even when he was a 21-year-old rookie with the Giants in 1986.
He has slimmed down 15 pounds to 275, partly to reduce pressure on a chronically aching back.
He walks with a spring.
On the field at the Giants' training camp here, he looks quicker and happier.


On Loan From Olympus, Marino Plans New Ascent
It was one of those oppressively humid tropical afternoons, the kind where the odor of sweat mingles with the distant threat of rain to create that peculiar South Florida mix of torpor and unease.
On the field at the Miami Dolphins training camp here, the quarterback slid his hands under the center and looked over the defense, his head swiveling left to right as he tried to detect some weakness, tried to isolate an inferior defender on a superior receiver.


Clinton Aide Offers Qualified Contradiction of Altman
A top White House official on Thursday contradicted Deputy Treasury Secretary Roger C. Altman in testifying that Mr.
Altman had given the White House inside intelligence about the status of an investigation into a failed savings and loan.
Any such disclosure by Mr.
Altman, during a meeting at the White House last February, would have been improper, in the view of senators from both parties.


Corrections
A chart in Business Day on July 27, with an article about the Microsoft Corporation's move into electronic publishing, misidentified the publisher of "The Mayo Clinic Family Health Book" in CD-ROM computer disk form.
The disk is published by IVI Publishing Inc., not Sony Electronic Publishing.


Health Care for New York's Poor
Mayor David Dinkins started an innovative plan last year to put primary health-care clinics in dozens of medically underserved neighborhoods throughout New York City.
He sought to give poor children somewhere to go when they felt sick, other than the hugely expensive emergency rooms of nearby -- or not so nearby -- hospitals.
But would a new mayor embrace his predecessor's vision?
Mayor Rudolph Giuliani has answered with a resounding yes.
Last week he joined Richard Cotton -- chairman of the Primary Care Development Corporation, the nonprofit organization that will oversee the program -- to announce the first 16 clinics that the corporation will help develop.


Medical Residents at Risk
Moves to promote general-care training are seen as a threat by New York hospitals, reliant on residents learning specialties.
Page A18.


Molson Cos.(MOL.A) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Players Decide to Strike Later Rather Than Sooner
Call it a false alarm.
Or credit union officials with extinguishing a fire -- a burning desire in many players to walk out today.
However it is viewed, the baseball union's executive board decided yesterday to stay with their Aug. 12 strike date, meaning that the players and the owners have one week to try to avert the shutdown of a scintillating season.
"Just because the owners are behaving in an irresponsible and provocative manner, it doesn't mean the players have to do so," Donald Fehr, executive director of the Players Association, said in announcing the board's decision.
"Their object is to try to reach an agreement."


Rights Leader Says a Letter Absolves Him
Facing scattered calls that he resign, the executive director of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People today made public a letter that he said absolves him of the accusation that he sexually harassed a former employee.
At the same time, lawyers for the director, Benjamin F. Chavis, sought to portray the civil rights leader's accuser as a litigious woman with a history of suing people.


Rediscovering a 30's Novelist Who Touched a Generation
In the 1930's, John Dos Passos was up there among America's literary stars along with Ernest Hemingway and F. Scott Fitzgerald.
His trilogy, "U.S.A.," was acclaimed a masterpiece.
The luster has faded, but this appreciation is a reminder of the influence of his work on a generation of writers, and its significance, at least for its time.


Medical Care America Inc.(MRX,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Lucky No. 13 for Royals As Their Streak Continues
Royals 5, Athletics 2
The Kansas City Royals beat the Oakland A's by 5-2 yesterday at Kauffman Stadium, matching the major leagues' longest winning streak in two years with their 13th straight victory.


Winpak Ltd. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Behind the Lights, Casino Burnout; Atlantic City Dealers Feel Trapped in Tense, Dead-End Jobs
The night the high roller dropped dead and casino workers rolled his body beneath the craps table so the game could proceed was Vinnie Springer's confirmation of the relentlessness of the game.
"Even when the paramedics came to remove the body 15 minutes later, the dice kept rolling," said Mr.
Springer, a tall, amiable 40-year-old man who has worked as a craps stick man and blackjack dealer at Atlantic City casinos for the last 10 years.


Art in Review
Robert Rauschenberg
'Stoned Moon'  Mary Ryan Gallery  24 West 57th Street  Manhattan  Through Sept. 17
Twenty-five years ago last month, several artists were invited by NASA to attend the Apollo 11 moon launch at Cape Canaveral.
Robert Rauschenberg was among them, and he quickly produced 33 lithographs and a series of collages recording his reactions to the event.


Household International Inc.(HI,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Corrections
An article yesterday about the awarding of Fields Medals to four mathematicians gave an incorrect affiliation for one of them, Jean Bourgain.
He is on the faculty of the Institute for Advanced Study in Princeton, N.J.; he is no longer at the Institut des Hautes Etudes Scientifiques in Paris.
In addition, the affiliations of Efim Isaakovich Zelmanov were described incompletely.
He is on the faculty of the University of Chicago while on leave from the University of Wisconsin.


Tommy Hilfiger Corp.(TOM,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Design Team Chosen to Set Stadium Plan
Seeking to make the Yankees feel at home in the Bronx, the city yesterday hired a team of consultants to design a make-over of the stadium and the neighborhood around it.
The aim is to create more fan-friendly transportation and parking and a more vibrant setting for the ball park.
Leading the consulting team will be the architectural firm Hellmuth, Obata &amp; Kassabaum, which has designed several baseball stadiums, including Oriole Park at Camden Yards in Baltimore, which is widely regarded as the premier modern urban ball park.


A Shattered Idyll Among the Birds
The Bird Artist
By Howard Norman
289 pages. Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux. $20.
Toward the end of Howard Norman's quirky new novel, the narrator paints a huge mural for the village church.
Because the narrator -- one Fabian Vas, by name -- is a "bird artist," an aspiring Audubon, as it were, the mural is filled with birds: puffins and sandpipers, herring gulls and black-legged kittiwakes, petrels and murres, a ring-necked duck, a hooded merganser, a blue heron and an owl.
The mural, however, is also a portrait of Fabian's hometown, and it contains fanciful portraits of some of the town's better-known residents: Botho August, the sullen lighthouse keeper, appears as a sort of dark angel, spreading his wings as he peers down from the topmost window of his lighthouse; Reverend Sillet has levitated to the roof of his church, where he stands perched atop the weathervane, and Helen Twombly, the local eccentric, surfaces as a mermaid in a pretty cove.


Genesis Health Ventures Inc.(GHV,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


At the Bar; Muslim inmates are able to hire big-name legal talent, thanks to a 1976 act of Congress.
Maybe it goes back to Spencer Tracy's portrayal of Clarence Darrow in the movie version of "Inherit the Wind," the story of the Scopes "monkey trial," but civil liberties lawyers often seemed to hold their heads higher than other lawyers because they were convinced that they were fighting the good fight.
Deep down, however, they often felt a little envious that their freedom of speech or religion cases rarely hit the financial jackpot the way many tort cases did.
A lawyer might win more than $1 million in contingency fees in a particularly gruesome product-liability matter.
But a lawyer who won a landmark First Amendment battle usually had little to show for it except some newspaper headlines.


Last Chance
Here is a sampling of shows and exhibitions in New York City that are to close soon: Closing This Weekend  "HEDDA GABLER," Roundabout Theater, 1530 Broadway, at 45th Street.
The Ibsen drama, in a translation by Frank McGuinness; with Kelly McGillis, Keith David, Jeffrey DeMunn and Jim Abele.
Through Sunday.
Performances: today, 8 P.M.; tomorrow, 2 and 8 P.M.; Sunday, 2 P.M.
Tickets: $47.50.
Information: (212) 869-8400.


CHRONICLE
Should LORD SNOWDON have taken more flattering photographs of his former mother-in-law, QUEEN ELIZABETH THE QUEEN MOTHER, for her 94th birthday portrait?
The pictures, which were printed in British newspapers yesterday, aroused complaints that could be heard in the crowd gathered around Clarence House, the Queen Mother's palace in London, to wish her a happy birthday.
They were also the subject of considerable coverage by the press.


Wheel Unit Examined in Amtrak Derailment
Federal investigators looking into the derailment of an Amtrak passenger train that injured 92 people here were focusing today on a possible mechanical malfunction in the wheels of an empty mail car just behind the two locomotives.
But the precise cause of the accident that sent nine cars hurtling down an embankment early Wednesday was still a mystery this evening.


Tokoza Journal; An Apartheid Legacy: A Lethal Clash of Cultures
In the devastated courtyard of Tokoza Men's Hostel No. 2, a migrant workers' residence that has been for five years an epicenter of urban warfare, Elijah Buthelezi was tending his cattle.
One cow lay neatly butchered, the hide splayed in the yard and the entrails curled on the hood of a derelict Ford.
Mr.
Buthelezi had scattered hay for the rest of the small herd.
Now he was doing the milking.


Zilog Inc.(ZLOG,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to July 3


K N Energy Inc.(KNE,N) reports earnings for 12mo to June 30


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article yesterday about divisions within the Clinton Administration over policy on Haiti referred incorrectly to Senate action on the issue.
The Senate approved a nonbinding resolution stating that the United Nations' authorization of a United States-led invasion of Haiti did not mean that Congress necessarily approved of such a move.
The resolution did not say Congressional approval of an invasion was required.


Borland International Inc.(BORL,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


U.S. and North Korea to Resume Negotiations
One month after the death of President Kim Il Sung, North Korea and the United States are to resume crucial negotiations on North Korea's nuclear program here on Friday, with American officials hopeful that the new leadership in the North remains interested in reaching a swift accord.
The talks, which began on July 8, were suspended a day later by the North Korean leader's sudden death.
"I hope we can able to pick up where we left off," Robert L. Gallucci, the chief American negotiator, said today.
"We were proceeding in a professional and businesslike way. I hope we can do that now."


Sports of The Times; Baseball Is Skating On Thin Ice
THERE is hope.
We must keep saying that.
If one of America's favorite fun couples can be united, then we can attain universal health care, cooler weather, no baseball strike.
Anything can happen.
They are together again.
By "they," I am not referring to the ultimate odd couple, Michael Jackson and Lisa Marie Presley, a legal union so weird that I do not consider myself qualified to discuss it in a sports column.


GBC Technologies


Fuel, Bellows and Spark: A Blaze in Washington
A week ago, firefighters here in the tinder-dry Northwestern woods were dealing with two forest fires in difficult mountain terrain that were manageable -- until Friday afternoon.
Up along Rat Creek, a narrow stream running down the steep slopes into Icicle Canyon, two men, working with a chain saw and probably smoking cigarettes, touched off a fire that afternoon, officials said.
It spread so fast and so ferociously that it awed the experienced forest rangers and firefighters as it nearly surrounded this Bavarian-style resort town in the Wenatchee Mountains.


Home Video
Talk of MPEG-2
Home video techno-talk this summer is about MPEG-2, a bit of alphabet soup that represents a major concept: a two-hour movie on one compact disk.


At Saratoga, Even Losing Horseplayers Feel Lucky
THE world of horse racing can be harsh, even seamy, sometimes.
Aqueduct in Queens on a freezing winter day, for example, is not a sight to gladden the heart, and the sound of grown men banging on trash cans and cursing as their long-shot play fails does not please the ear.
The horses still look noble, but there's not much else to prop up the image of thoroughbred racing as the sport of kings.
When the wind off Jamaica Bay howls down the back stretch, there's only one thing to do: dream of Saratoga.
The annual summer meeting at Saratoga Springs, N.Y., now in its 126th year, is horse racing's Garden of Eden: five weeks of top-quality racing presented in ideal surroundings, and wrapped in the festive atmosphere of a county fair.
Money is wagered, of course.
But for a brief, idyllic interlude, finer feelings come to the fore.


Honda Says It May Drop U.S. Wagon
The Honda Motor Company is considering dropping the Accord station wagon it builds in Ohio from its United States product lineup, Nobuhiko Kawamoto, Honda's president and chief executive, said today.
Mr.
Kawamoto said the move would be taken as part of a broad effort to strengthen its car line in the next two years.
Honda would continue to produce the station wagons at its Marysville, Ohio, plant for export to Europe and Japan, where most of them are sold.
The wagon is not popular in the United States, Mr.
Kawamoto said, so the new, Japanese-built mini-van that Honda plans to sell here next year may replace it in American dealerships.
Honda sells about 30,000 Accord station wagons annually in the United States; it exports 40,000, mostly to Japan.


AMC Entertainment Inc.(AEN,A) reports earnings for 13wks to June 30


QVC Board Approves Buyout Bid
The home shopping channel QVC Inc. agreed to a $2.5 billion takeover yesterday by the nation's largest and third-largest cable television companies, Tele-Communications Inc. and the Comcast Corporation.
After spending more than six hours yesterday analyzing and revising details of the deal, the QVC board accepted an all-cash offer of $46 a share for the 35 million shares not already held by Tele-Communications and Comcast.
The companies had previously offered $44 a share.


Brown's Time With Giants Hasn't Come
Rick Mirer remembers the days when Derrick Brown could do no wrong.
At Notre Dame, Brown was called Superman, and Mirer remembers how Brown was the guy he could always count on.
If he needed a big catch, he went to Brown.
The big hits and the pancake blocks, where a defender would usually end up flat on his back, came from Brown, too.
Mirer is with the Seattle Seahawks and one of the top young quarterbacks in the National Football League.
He always thought that Brown would be one of the best players in the league and maybe he would even get to throw to him in the pros.
It hasn't quite worked out that way.


Clayton Homes Inc.(CMH,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Kidder Scandal Tied to Failure Of Supervision
A three-month internal investigation by Kidder, Peabody &amp; Company mainly blames a complete breakdown in the firm's system of supervision, and two senior executives, for one of Wall Street's most spectacular trading scandals.
Wall Street traders and others have long questioned how hundreds of millions of dollars of phantom bond trades could have escaped the notice of the firm's top executives and its accounting systems.
Until yesterday, however, it was unclear how tough the internal study would be on the firm and its executives.


China Stock Most Active
The most active stock on the New York Stock Exchange yesterday was Shandong Huaneng Power Development Company, a new stock that completed its first day of trading with more than 14 million shares changing hands; it closed at $14.25, unchanged from the offering price.
CS First Boston, the company's underwriter, has called Shandong Huaneng, which operates power plants in China's Shandong province, the first mainland Chinese company to have its primary listing on the New York Stock Exchange.


Ramos, Still Recuperating, Gives Young Fans a Thrill
If he tries to pick up anything heavy, he gets a headache.
He can't run or exert himself, and even a little header for the benefit of photographers is out of the question.
Even so, a month after he caught an elbow that fractured a bone in his skull during the United States soccer team's 1-0 loss to Brazil during the World Cup, Tab Ramos is on the mend.


29 Years And Some Forgotten Words Later
There are few sure things at a Grateful Dead performance.
The band changes its set every night, plays for anywhere from two to four hours and gives performances that can vary from lackluster to appropriately mind-blowing.
It is probably the only surviving 60's band that can get away with not playing its most popular songs in concert, and the only one whose new songs are canonized immediately.
In fact, part of the excitement of a Grateful Dead concert is the hope that the band will unveil a new piece in embryonic form.
The Grateful Dead evolves through performances, not records, and isn't afraid to fall on its face during its live improvisations.
On Wednesday night at Giants Stadium in East Rutherford, N.J., in front of a sold-out house of 55,000, the Grateful Dead fell and picked itself up again.
Midway through the concert's opening song, "Mississippi Half-Step Uptown Toodeloo," Jerry Garcia, the 52-year-old guitarist and singer, seemed to forget the words, a trend that continued throughout the evening.


ECI Telecom Ltd.  (ECILF,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


HOUSE IS LETTING SENATE GO FIRST ON HEALTH CARE
House leaders today put off a vote on national health insurance until Aug. 19, a one-week delay that is likely to give nervous representatives time to see how the Senate votes before they have to stick out their own necks on the politically dangerous issue of requiring employers to insure their workers.
Democratic leaders in both the House and Senate insisted that they were not basing decisions on what was going on in the other chamber.
The reason given for the House postponement was the time it was taking legislative draftsmen and the Congressional Budget Office to process various alternatives.
But Democratic lieutenants made it clear that the delay would bring sighs of relief in the House.


How Profit Was Created on Paper
There were virtually no genuine profitable trades.
Joseph Jett, Kidder, Peabody's former bond-trading star, simply made up trades and marked them down as having made money.
In the meantime, his few real trades consistently lost money.
Those are the conclusions of Gary G. Lynch's study of the phony profits at Kidder.
While the report clears all of those above Mr.
Jett, the chief Government bond trader, of knowledge of what was going on, it sharply chastises Kidder as an institution for monumental failures in oversight and systems that kept it from catching on long before it did.


Art in Review
'Ship, Sea and Sky' 'The Marine Art of James Edward Buttersworth'  South Street Seaport Museum A. A. Low Building 171 John Street Lower Manhattan Through Aug. 24
Anyone interested in Old New York, maritime history, ship design or painting, and not necessarily in that order, should see the survey of the wonderfully precise, action-packed paintings of James Edward Buttersworth at the South Street Seaport Museum.
The outstanding marine painter of the late 19th-century, the English-born Buttersworth settled in Hoboken, N.J., in 1849, on the dawn of a great, highly competitive era in American shipping design.
Some of the most beautiful ships the world had ever seen came and went in New York Harbor and many of them made their way, usually by commission from their owners, onto Buttersworth's canvases.


Clearing the Road to Jordan


New Publisher For New York
Amy Churgin, associate publisher of Seventeen, has been named publisher of New York magazine, K-III Magazines. said yesterday.
She succeeds Richard Kinsler, who has left the company.
K-III also said that Janice Grossman, a K-III vice president and former publisher of New York, would assume group publisher responsibility for New York.
Ms.
Grossman oversees three other magazines: Seventeen, Soap Opera Digest and Soap Opera Weekly.


Pool Energy Services (PESC,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  *
EZ Communications Inc., Fairfax, Va., a radio broadcasting company, filed a registration statement with the Securities and Exchange Commission for the proposed sale of $110 million of senior subordinated notes.
*
May Department Stores Inc., St.
Louis, is selling $200 million of debentures due in 2024 at 100 to yield 8.375 percent through Morgan Stanley.
Callable in 10 years, the issue is rated A-2 by Moody's Investors Service and A by Standard &amp; Poor's Corporation.


SCI Systems Inc.(SCIS,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


People
*
Wendy Barrett was named director of public relations at Eric Mower &amp; Associates, Rochester, succeeding Cyndy Hennig, who left to join ICE Communications, Rochester, in a similar post.
Ms.
Barrett was previously a managing supervisor at ICE Communications.


Bible Doesn't Sanction Anti-Abortion Murder
To the Editor:
Like most thoughtful people of faith, I was horrified and saddened by the killing of Dr.
John Bayard Britton and his volunteer escort James H. Barrett by a fanatical former Presbyterian minister.
More perplexing is how purportedly Christian, anti-abortion leaders could claim that the Bible "mandates" or even sanctions the killing of doctors who perform abortions as justifiable homicide.


Top Winners Named For Package Design
Three innovative packages were named "best of show" at the third annual international award competition for package design.
Two of the three International Brand Packaging Awards, sponsored by Graphic Design U.S.A. magazine and Murray J. Lubliner Associates, both of New York, were awarded to designers based in the United States.
Gerstman &amp; Meyers of New York won for its bottle and label design for Intermountain Canola Oil, while the Weber Group of Racine, Wis., won for Glade Clip-Ons air fresheners from S. C. Johnson Wax.
The third winner was Lewis Moberly of London, for its bottle design for Dettling, a Swiss kirsch.


Auditors Say Poverty Line Should Vary Across Nation
For decades, the definition of poverty has been uniform throughout the country, but Federal auditors now say the poverty statistics should be adjusted to reflect differences in the cost of living in different areas.
Such a change, suggested recently by auditors from the General Accounting Office, could ultimately increase the flow of Federal money to New York City, Los Angeles, Connecticut and other places where living costs are high.
Southern states could lose money if the change occurred.


Risks of Russia's Young Markets
The collapse of the MMM investment pyramid has focused attention on the worst aspects of Russia's new and poorly regulated stock markets.
But the scandal also disguises the size and nature of the emerging Russian market, which is slowly drawing investors from abroad and has been almost untouched by the debacle at MMM and its credulous purchasers.
To Westerners, the securities market, like the entire business environment, can feel like the Wild West, circa Wyatt Earp.
While it may frighten those tenderfoots used to law, order and predictability, there are sectors of the market that are solid and significantly undervalued.


Smaller World Bank Will Do Less Harm
To the Editor:
Your reports on the Bretton Woods Commission (July 21) and the 50th anniversary of the World Bank (July 24) discuss the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund, but misrepresent what our campaign, 50 Years Is Enough, stands for.


Suspect in Fatal Fire Says He Set It to Get His Wife Back
The suspect in an apartment fire that killed five children here has told the police that he started the blaze in hopes of forcing his estranged wife, who he mistakenly thought was living there, to move back in with him, the police said.
"His ultimate goal was to reconcile," said Detective Lieut.
John W. Gierasch, commander of the homicide squad of the Suffolk Police Department.


Xtra Corp.(XTR,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Kimball International Inc.(KBALB,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Writer Joins 'Monday Night Football' Staff
Sports Illustrated's senior writer and resident football expert, PETER KING, will join the halftime show for ABC's "Monday Night Football" broadcasts as a studio reporter, the network and magazine announced jointly yesterday.
King will make his Monday night debut on Sept. 5 for the Los Angeles Raiders' game at San Francisco.
King, 37, will join the host, BRENT MUSBURGER, on the new Monday night halftime show. (AP)


Seven-Year-Old Murder Victim Is Buried


The Spoken Word
"BLACK SHORTS," Frederick Douglass Creative Arts Center, 270 West 96th Street, Manhattan.
The poets Jayne Cortez and B. J. Ashanti will read from their works.
Tonight at 8 o'clock.
Tickets: $10.
Information: (212) 864-3375.
JAZZ DEBATE, Lincoln Center, Stanley Kaplan Penthouse, 165 West 65th Street, 10th floor.
Wynton Marsalis, artistic director of Jazz at Lincoln Center, and James Lincoln Collier, author of books on jazz and jazz musicians, debate several points in Mr.
Collier's books about which they disagree.
Sunday at 5 P.M.
Admission: $10.
Part of the Classical Jazz Series.
Information: Centercharge, (212) 721-6500, or Jazz at Lincoln Center Hotline, (212) 875-5299.


Navratilova Will Probably Skip U.S. Open
MARTINA NAVRATILOVA will probably not play in the United States Open beginning Aug. 29, "and that's a pity," said the CBS tennis analyst MARY CARILLO.
"I'd be shocked if she shows up," Carillo said in a telephone interview from her Naples, Fla., home.
"I think the chances of her showing are infinitesimal."
Navratilova's name was entered, and she has said she would make an announcement soon regarding her intentions.
If she plays, it would probably be her last Grand Slam tournament.


Study Reports TV Is Considerably More Violent Despite Outcry
Despite all the attention the issue has received over the last two years, television violence has actually increased during that time, according to a study made public yesterday by a nonprofit research organization in Washington.
The study, conducted by the Center for Media and Public Affairs, monitored a single day of programming last spring on 10 broadcast and cable stations in Washington.
Compared with the programming on the same stations on the same date two years ago, when a similar study was made, the center concluded, "TV is considerably more violent today." For the 10 stations combined, the study recorded a 41 percent increase in the number of violent scenes shown, for a total of 2,605.


Toromont Indus reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Primary Rival Says G.O.P. Is Showing Favoritism to Pataki
The insurgent Republican running for governor today accused the party's state committee of illegally helping his opponent, State Senator George E. Pataki, and has asked the authorities to investigate.
Under state election law, party committees cannot contribute money or services to help a candidate in a primary.
But campaign officials for the insurgent, Richard M. Rosenbaum, said a lawyer for the state committee directed a challenge to Mr.
Rosenbaum's nominating petitions from the committee's offices in Albany.
They also said the state committee illegally donated $24,500 to Mr.
Pataki's campaign.


'Airheads.' Yes, Indeed. That and Even Less.
Maybe the rock-and-roll world has been so thoroughly satirized that it's parody-proof by now.
More likely, "Airheads" just isn't funny enough to get the job done.
"Airheads" tells what happens -- not much -- when three rock-star wannabes brandish toy guns and take over a radio station, demanding that their demo tape be played on the air.
The idea has anarchic possibilities, but the film itself is awfully tame.
With a cast of appealing actors (several of whom have "Saturday Night Live" credentials) and just enough gags to make a terrific two-minute trailer, "Airheads" may look like a lot more fun than it is.
Indeed, it starts promisingly, then begins to meander and never stops.
Having introduced the characters and set up the basic situation, the director (Michael Lehmann) and screenwriter (Rich Wilkes) seem almost to have bailed out in midmovie.
Mr.
Lehmann, remembered for the caustic edge of "Heathers," is also remembered for the hopeless chaos of "Hudson Hawk."


Sales 80,013,961 33,472,321


Weston (George) Ltd.(WN) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Caremark Is Indicted in Kickbacks
In what Federal officials said was the first in a series of indictments of home health care companies, a Federal grand jury in Minneapolis yesterday charged Caremark Inc. and a senior executive of Genentech Inc. with paying more than $1.1 million in illegal kickbacks to a Minneapolis doctor to encourage him to prescribe a genetically engineered human growth hormone made by Genentech and delivered by Caremark.
The indictments, which followed an investigation that had been under way since 1991, also named three Caremark executives and Dr.
David R. Brown of the Minneapolis suburb of Edina, who specializes in children's hormone problems.
The Genentech executive who was indicted was Edmon R. Jennings, vice president of sales and marketing.


Restaurants
My mother was in love with the idea of America.
She was constantly dragging us off to Shaker villages and restored homes, and on instructive forays through Amish country.
Married in a pre-Revolutionary tavern, Mom was constitutionally incapable of passing up any restaurant with a name like the Spinning Wheel or the Lighthouse Inn.
As a result, I spent a large part of my childhood in restaurants that prided themselves on pewter.
Some of it rubbed off.
Which means that when I join New York City's summer parade to the Berkshires, I almost always find myself screeching to a stop in front of a restaurant called the Old Mill.
The first time I saw it, I just couldn't resist.
After that, I was hooked.


ISM Information reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Corrections
An article on Saturday about a dispute on the House floor between a Congresswoman and a Congressman whom she accused of rudeness referred incorrectly to calls for order in the British Parliament.
It is the Speaker of the Commons who calls for order, not the Prime Minister.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Behind the Kidder Scandal
A three-month internal investigation by Kidder, Peabody mainly blames a complete breakdown in the firm's system of supervision, and two senior executives, for one of Wall Street's most spectacular trading scandals.  [ Page A1. ]


MDU Resources Group (MDU,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


RESULTS PLUS
GOLF  King Nudges Hall Door  With the Hall of Fame beckoning, Betsy King shot a career-best, 8-under-par 64 yesterday for a two-shot lead after one round of the McCall's L.P.G.A.
Classic at Stratton Mountain, Vt.
She led Kathy Guadagnino by two shots and Ellie Gibson by three.
King had eight birdies without a bogey as she birdied each of the four par-5 holes.
A victory in the 72-hole tournament would qualify King for the Hall of Fame with 30 victories, including two of the four major championships.
King has won 29 tournaments, including four majors. (AP) AUTO RACING  Brickyard Pole for Mast  Rick Mast is usually a second banana.
He is probably best known for pushing his teammate, Harry Gant, across the finish line to a victory.
But the 37-year-old journeyman earned a place in stock car history yesterday, winning the pole position for tomorrow's inaugural Brickyard 400 at the Indianapolis Motor Speedway.
Mast, whose racing career began at age 15 with the sale of a cow for his first race car surprised about 100,000 spectators -- a Nascar record for a qualifying day -- as the stock cars made their official Indy debut after months of anticipation.
Mast turned a lap of 172.414 miles per hour to take the top starting spot for the $3.2 million race, the richest in Nascar history.
Six-time and defending Winston Cup champion Dale Earnhardt took the outside position on the front row with a lap of 171.726 m.p.h. (AP) HORSE RACING  Copper Mount Rallies  Copper Mount, one of the season's stars among 3-year-old colts foaled in New York State, lagged for half a mile, but then made a strong move to the outside at the urging of Julie Krone to win the Albany Handicap at Saratoga yesterday.
The horse ran the mile and an eighth in 1:504/5 on a fast track, paid $3.80 for a $2 wager and earned $33,330.
EMPIRE STATE GAMES  Bowser Wins Jump  Ernest Bowser of Uniondale (L.I.) High School, won the scholastic men's long jump with a leap of 23 feet 5 1/4 inches in the first full day of competition at the Olympic-style games, which run through Sunday in Syracuse.
Adirondack's Erin Davis eclipsed the scholastic women's mark in the 10,000-meter run.
Davis, who set the 5,000-meter record last year in Rochester, finished the race in 35 minutes 24.97 seconds. (AP)


Network Systems Corp.(NSCO,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Sounds Around Town
Actor and Musician
Michael Moriarty, the Ballroom, 253 West 28th Street, Chelsea, (212) 244-3005.
More than a former star of the popular television series "Law and Order," Michael Moriarty is an artist of many parts, one of which is a fairly sophisticated jazz pianist, composer and quirky performer of his own songs.
In his new show, "Jazz Cabaret '94," Mr.
Moriarty sings, plays the piano and leads a quartet.
The sensibility here hovers in the vicinity of 1950's cool jazz.
Mr.
Moriarty is also to read humorous excerpts from "More Naked Than Most," his self-described "auto-mythography." Shows are tonight at 9 and tomorrow at 11:15 P.M.
There is a $20 cover charge ($25 at ringside) and a two-drink minimum.
STEPHEN HOLDEN


Mr. Arafat Tarnishes a Vision
Yasir Arafat likes to tell interviewers that the Palestinian state he envisions will not resemble the stifling autocracies so common in the Arab world.
And Palestinians who have seen close up the freedoms enjoyed by Israelis would like to hold him to that vision.
But the early evidence from the self-rule areas of Gaza and Jericho is discouraging.
Last week, reportedly on Mr.
Arafat's personal orders, officials of his Palestine Liberation Organization shut down An Nahar, one of the two main newspapers in the occupied territories.
It was a blatant case of political suppression.
An Nahar is pro-Jordanian.
Al Quds, its surviving rival, generally supports the P.L.O.


No Headline
"Nobody knows who's next. Everybody's afraid, not only me. My business is down 75 percent since the shooting, and it is not only here at my station. All the businesses in the area that are open 24 hours a day are dead after dark." SEFER KIR, a service-station owner on Long Island.  [ B2:1. ]


A Stubborn Killer of Refugees: Dysentery
Even though hundreds of refugees from Rwanda still die each day, doctors here said today that the cholera epidemic that has killed tens of thousands appeared to be under control.
With clean water and increased medical care reducing the cholera risks, doctors are paying particular attention to shigella dysentery, which is thought to have killed many of the 500 refugees who died on Wednesday.


Corrections
A sports picture caption yesterday with an article about the volleyball match between the United States and China at the Goodwill Games misidentified the American player.
She was Christine Garner, not Kimberly Oden.


U.N. Security Council Weighs Rewarding or Punishing Serbs
The Security Council would crack down on Serbia with even harsher sanctions involving financial assets, weapons, fuel and possibly even food, or would ease the sanctions that now exist, depending on the wording of two draft resolutions being unofficially circulated at the United Nations.
The carrot-and-stick proposals would be to punish Serbia if it fails to persuade the Bosnian Serbs to accept the latest international peace plan for Bosnia, or to reward the Serbs if their diplomatic efforts are successful.


Big Houses Guzzle Natural Resources
To the Editor:
"Building Small . . . Thinking Big" (news article, July 21) cites costs, demographics and environmental concerns as reasons for a trend toward smaller houses.


Bible Doesn't Sanction Anti-Abortion Murder; Giving In to the Violent
To the Editor:
In "The Debate Over Abortion Coverage: A Compromise" (Op-Ed, July 22), Henry T. Greely and Leigh S. Goodmark offer a compromise on the inclusion of abortion services in the proposed health care plan.
They suggest "conscientious objector" status for those who find abortion morally offensive, with a rebate paid to them by their insurers.


Telephone Accounts Are Placed in Review
The Southern New England Telephone Company, known as SNET, said yesterday that it had placed in review its in-state and out-of-state long-distance service accounts in an effort to consolidate.
Hill Holliday Connors Cosmopulos in Boston has handled the out-of-state business, while Marquardt &amp; Roche in Stamford, Conn., has handled the in-state account.
Billings were estimated at $5 million to $7 million.


Blood Plasma Officials on Trial in Germany
The latest chapter in Germany's biggest postwar pharmaceutical scandal opened today as five officials of a blood plasma company went on trial for allowing the sale of blood tainted with the virus that causes AIDS.
According to prosecutors, the Coblenz-based company UB Plasma repeatedly ignored information given by blood donors that suggested the donors might be carrying the AIDS virus.
The company is also accused of having abandoned normal blood screening tests as a money-saving measure, selling millions of dollars worth of untested blood products between 1987 and 1993.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
7.25
7.25
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.50
3.50
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
4.25
4.25
3.05
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.32
4.30
3.04
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.70
4.68
3.18
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.10
7.07
5.84
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.40
7.38
6.52
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.17
8.17
7.23
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.31
6.31
5.73
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Rio Algom Ltd.(ROM,A) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Accounts
*
Sandoz Animal Health, Chicago, to Eire Partners Inc., Chicago, to handle advertising for the pet care products marketer, previously handled by Joiner Rowland Serio &amp; Koeppel, Dallas.
Billings were estimated at $3.5 million.


Sounds Around Town
Jazz and Soul
Julius Hemphill, Brooklyn Museum, 200 Eastern Parkway, at Prospect Park, (718) 638-5000.
Mr.
Hemp hill, a founding member of the World Saxophone Quartet, has one of the most distinct harmonic palettes in jazz.
He has put together a sextet, which was a high point of this summer's JVC Festival, and for this series, called Soul Connection, he is investigating just that: jazz's connection to soul music.
Sunday's show is at 3 P.M.
The concert is free with admission to the museum: $6 for adults, $5 for students and the elderly; children 12 and younger are admitted free when accompanied by an adult.
PETER WATROUS Juju, Updated
Sikiru Ayinde Barrister, Tramps, 51 West 21st Street, Chelsea, (212) 727-7788.
African music, especially from Nigeria, had its moment here almost a decade ago.
Musicians in Nigeria haven't heard the news, thankfully, and here comes Barrister, who updates the basic juju sound with a heavier drum section.
It's trance music and dance music, and beautiful.
It's extremely rare to hear it, so the shows are something special.
Sets tomorrow are at 10 P.M. and midnight.
There is a $10 cover charge.
P.
W.
Randy Weston
Randy Weston, Sweet Basil, 88 Seventh Avenue South, above Bleecker Street, Greenwich Village, (212) 242-1785.
Randy Weston is among jazz's great living pianists, and would be just for his touch, which has the percussive qualities of both Duke Ellington and Thelonious Monk.
He's an exceptional composer as well, having written some of the better ballads of the 1950's; his modern writing is rife with the influence of his African travels.
As is his improvising: his rhythms, which he underscores with a judicious use of bright dissonances, can be thrilling.
Sets are tonight through Sunday night at 9, 11 and 12:30 (but no third set on Sunday).
There is a $15 cover charge and a $10 minimum.
P.
W.
Marion Brown Benefit
Benefit for Marion Brown, the Cooler, 416 West 14th Street, West Village, (212) 229-0785.
Mr.
Brown has one of the more limpid alto saxophone sounds to come out of the 1960's and a lyrical approach; his guitar playing is folky.
On Sunday, starting at 3 P.M., he is to auction his artwork, to music to be supplied by Archie Shepp, Reggie Workman, Andrew Cyrille, Amina Claudine Myers, Michael Gregory, Abdullah Ibrahim, Pharoah Sanders, Hamiet Bluiett and many more.
The event is to continue until 4 A.M., so take along coffee.
There is a $25 contribution; proceeds are to be used toward medical expenses for Mr.
Brown, who is recuperating from brain surgery.
P.
W.


Council Tightens a Law On Campaign Disclosures
The City Council agreed yesterday to tighten the city's campaign finance law by requiring candidates for citywide offices and the borough presidencies to make more frequent reports about their spending and the money they take in.
The measure, which was approved 36 to 9, would not apply to City Council members.


California Micro Devices
Shares of the California Micro Devices Corporation fell about 40 percent yesterday even though the company reported fourth-quarter earnings of 20 cents, up from 12 cents a share a year earlier.
Investors were wary because the company said it planned to end some distribution agreements.


Presidential Life Corp.(PLFE) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


CHRONICLE
Seemingly oblivious to the fuss, the Queen Mother went on her traditional birthday walkabout yesterday, venturing forth from Clarence House to greet the crowds of well-wishers carrying dozens of gifts.
People sang "Happy Birthday" to her, and she sipped Champagne from a plastic cup, the Press Association reported.


A Joyful Jack-of-All-Arts, Life Included
LUDWIG BEMELMANS, who died in New York City in 1962 at the age of 64, was an artist of many minor keys, all equally tuneful and infused with wit and joy.
As gifted with words as with images, he seems to have spent his life doing what came naturally, which was a lot.
He is known to New Yorkers as the creator of the charming murals at the Carlyle Hotel in Manhattan, in the cozy bar that bears his name.
And he is universally known for his Madeline books, whose rhyming narratives, easy, cartoonish drawing style and uncannily evocative depictions of Paris have mesmerized children and Francophiles for more than 40 years.


Echo Bay Mines Ltd. (ECO,A) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Rwandans Say the Victors Kill Many Who Go Back
For weeks, tens of thousands of Hutu, forced from their homes by the war, have been struggling to survive here in one of the harshest regions of Rwanda, selling cattle and clothes to buy small amounts of food and receiving minimal aid from international relief organizations.
Recently, hearing from the new Government in Kigali that it was safe to go home, some have tried.
And now they are coming back to the wretched refugee camps with reports that some Hutu returning to their villages are being killed by Tutsi villagers and soldiers of the Rwandan Patriotic Front, the Tutsi-dominated organization that is now the Government.


Grab a Broom Stick and Play Ball!


Leading Yanks Get a Reprieve
When the Yankees arrived at their hotel here Wednesday night, they heard rumblings that their strike date might be switched from Aug. 12 to today or Friday.
While a conference call helped avert that possibility, the Yankees experienced some anxious hours.
Manager Buck Showalter walked into the Metrodome at noon and wondered whether the Yankees had played their final game.
Jimmy Key had barely digested his breakfast when he realized the strike could be hours away.
Steve Howe and Paul Gibson worked the telephones with other team representatives to decide whether the strike date should be changed.


Consolidated Natural Gas Co.  (CNG,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


L.I. Woman Is Critically Injured In Third Nighttime Sniper Attack
A night-stalking Long Island sniper who apparently selects victims at random and fires through the windows of businesses struck again on Wednesday, the third time in 12 days, critically wounding a waitress in Stony Brook.
Other shootings in nearby Commack left a diner patron dead and a gas station attendant shaken but unhurt, the Suffolk County police said.
The police, who have sharply increased patrols at shopping malls, fast-food outlets, gas stations and other businesses in western Suffolk, said yesterday that the three shootings appeared to be the work of one assailant -- a skilled marksman, apparently armed with a high-powered rifle with a telescopic sight, and acting from unknown motives.


Pepsico's Taco Bell unit is dividing its $150 million plate between two agencies.
THE Taco Bell Corporation stepped into its advertising future yesterday, intriguing Madison Avenue by announcing that the company will not be awarding the whole enchilada to one agency.
For those cursed with short-term recall about fast-food news, remember that Taco Bell, a unit of Pepsico, put its account, estimated at $150 million in billings, up for review last month.


A Master of the Frame: Intricate Compositions From Lee Friedlander
Ample evidence of Lee Friedlander's importance in contemporary photography can be found this summer in New York City, where his quirky black-and-white images have been featured in four exhibitions, three of which are still on view.
This profusion of shows demonstrates, to anyone who still needs convincing, that Mr.
Friedlander is one of the current masters of the medium, as well as one of its most versatile and prolific practitioners.
The Museum of Modern Art is presenting pictures from Mr.
Friedlander's most recent book, "Letters From the People," published last year by Distributed Art Publishers, while a selection of Mr.
Friedlander's work from the late 1960's appears at the Pace/MacGill Gallery.
His images are also included in a survey of photographs of graffiti on view at the Zabriskie Gallery.
Earlier this summer, the Robert Miller Gallery exhibited landscapes taken by Mr.
Friedlander under a commission from the Canadian Center for Architecture, to document parks designed by Frederick Law Olmsted.


Mitchell's Attitude Adjustment On Hold
There is attitude -- the kind the Jets' rookie head coach, Pete Carroll, is looking for in his 1994 club, which flew to Detroit today for its first exhibition game against the Lions on Friday night.
And then there is attitude, as epitomized by Johnny Mitchell, the Jets' tight end, who in practice this week yelled at both the opposition Eagles and at his own teammates.
It was the kind of undisciplined emotion that Carroll isn't looking for.


Unitrin Adds 'Poison Pill' to Block Bid
Unitrin Inc., an insurance and consumer lending company trying to fend off an unsolicited $2.6 billion takeover bid by the American General Corporation, said today that it had adopted a "poison pill" shareholder rights plan.
Analysts said that Unitrin's resistance to the takeover bid -- which some viewed as slightly low in price -- could lead American General to sweeten its offer of $50.375 for each of Untrin's 51.8 million shares.
Analysts also speculated that Unitrin might solicit a higher offer from another bidder or offer its own alternatives to enhance shareholder value.


Bell Industries Inc.(BI,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Haitians Expel 3 American Journalists
Haiti's ruling military authorities expelled three American journalists today after they were caught filming in one of the special "strategic zones" recently declared out of bounds to foreign reporters.
Information Ministry officials said the three took pictures at the country's airport in violation of the recent decree establishing special exclusion zones in and around airports, military bases and installations, ports and communications hubs.


Berkley (W.R.) (BKLY,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


An Impresario's High-Tech Big Top
Paul G. Allen's private twin-engine Challenger jet is making its final approach to T. F. Green Airport.
On board, Mr.
Allen, the Microsoft Corporation's other co-founder, and David E. Liddle, head of Mr.
Allen's Silicon Valley research company, are harmonizing.
They emit an almost acceptable a cappella version of the Eagles' mid-70's hit "Seven Bridges Road."


Aaron Still Knows How to Swing Hard
"Talk to the average person in baseball today, and he'll tell you Hank Aaron is an angry man," said Hank Aaron, sitting in an office chair as he once stood at the plate, composed, relaxed, yet poised for quick response.
"Why should I be angry? I made a lot of money in baseball. I owe baseball every single thing that I have. But I am concerned.
"I'm concerned when I hear things like the Marge Schott situation, when I hear those remarks that should never be made, when I realize that baseball is still a country club where the members go their way and tell their little stories."


Florida Rock Industries Inc.(FRK,A) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


INSIDE
More Sworn Contradictions
A top White House official said the Deputy Treasury Secretary had informed the White House about a savings and loan investigation.
Page A16.
Making Poverty Relative
Auditors say poverty statistics should be adjusted to reflect differences in the cost of living.
Page A10.
Chaos at Bee Truck Accident
Thousands of angry bees fled an overturned truck in Westchester, snarling highway traffic for hours.
Page B5.
Freeing the Innocent
DNA testing is being used to free convicts who have been falsely convicted of serious crimes.
Page A20.


Bible Doesn't Sanction Anti-Abortion Murder; Let Objectors Pay More
To the Editor:
Henry T. Greely and Leigh S. Goodmark (Op-Ed, July 22) suggest an insurance rebate for those who object to abortion.
Once pregnancy occurs the outcomes are limited to spontaneous abortion ("miscarriage"), delivery or termination of the pregnancy.
The writers acknowledge that delivery is more expensive than termination (especially in the first trimester), which is one reason the majority of insurance companies now covers termination -- it is actuarially sound.
To expect an insurance plan to provide a rebate to those who choose a more expensive option flies in the face of fiscal reality.


TLC Beatrice Intl Holdings Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


In Shift, Immigration Service Won't Hold Stowaways
The Immigration and Naturalization Service has decided to take custody of stowaways and parole them while their requests for asylum are being reviewed, agency officials said yesterday.
The new policy represents a significant shift for the Federal agency, which had been requiring the owners of planes and ships that inadvertently brought stowaways to the United States to pay the cost of their detention.


METRO DIGEST
METRO DIGEST
SNIPER ON LONG ISLAND STRIKES 3D TIME
A night-stalking Long Island sniper who apparently selects victims at random and fires through the windows of businesses struck for the third time in 12 days, critically wounding a waitress in Stony Brook.
A1.


Has Drug-Use Study Really Told Us Anything?
To the Editor:
A Federal study has shown that the number of Americans who use illicit drugs rose from 1992 to 1993 (news article, July 21).
More precisely, the number of people in a sample of 26,000 who were willing to admit their drug habits to Federal researchers in door-to-door, face-to-face, nonanonymous interviews grew by about 35, or 0.13 percent of the sample.


Yankee Metronome Wins at Metrodome
In the fantasy world of George Steinbrenner, Buck Showalter and Don Mattingly, there would not be a players' strike next week and the Yankees would not return to the Bronx until they were equipped with a World Series trophy.
In this fantasy world, the season would not be interrupted and the Yankees would happily continue pummeling teams on the road.
Superstitions abound, even in dreams.
But this is no fantasy world even if the Yankees are zooming through a fantasy season.
This is reality.
The games before Aug. 12 have dwindled to seven, the doubts about the players and owners agreeing are mounting and the Yankees are sometimes unsure what to think about the future.


Art in Review
'Around the House'
Frumkin/Adams Gallery  50 West 57th Street  Manhattan  Through next Friday
Tranquillity is in short supply in this varied show of works on domestic themes.
Instead, a tone of distress runs through many of the paintings, drawings, sculptures and photographs on view.


CHRONICLE
It's been 50 years since SARAH McCLENDON, the Texas journalist famous for the directness of her questions, was accredited to cover Congress and the White House.
So on Wednesday, the Washington bureaus of The Houston Chronicle and The Dallas Morning News gave her a reception in the Senate press gallery.
In an extraordinary tribute for a reporter, the entire Senate rose to give Ms.
McClendon a standing ovation.
The Senate majority leader, GEORGE J. MITCHELL of Maine, and the minority leader, BOB DOLE of Kansas, both praised her, as did Treasury Secretary LLOYD BENTSEN, who had just testified at the Senate Banking Committee's Whitewater hearing.


Plains Resources Inc.(PLX,A) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


A Violinist Is Ill, Not a Sore Loser
To the Editor:
Your report on the International Tchaikovsky Competition (news article, July 2) stated that Jennifer Koh, the 17-year-old violinist who shared second prize, left Moscow early and before the winners' recital because she was upset that the judges had not awarded a first prize.
Ms.
Koh contracted food poisoning on arriving in Moscow and was very ill for most of the competition.
She left for home immediately after on the advice of her family physician and after a visit to a Moscow hospital.


Executive Changes
AT&amp;T CORP., Basking Ridge, N.J., named Jorge Escalona president and managing director of AT&amp;T Mexico, Mexico City.
DIANON SYSTEMS INC., Stratford, Conn., appointed John P. Davis president and chief executive.


Software Spectrum reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


COMPANY BRIEFS
ECC SIMULATION LTD., Shoreham, England, a subsidiary of ECC International Corp., Wayne, Pa., a developer of simulators and related training programs, received a $19.5 million contract from Loral Asic.


Consoltex Group reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Inside Art
I.B.M.'s Collection
The belt-tightening continues at I.B.M.
While the company hasn't formally announced it, Tracy O'Neill, an I.B.M. spokeswoman, confirmed this week that Sotheby's would sell at least some of I.B.M.'s extensive collection of North American and Latin American art.
The auction house declined to comment.
The reason the news has been kept so quiet is that I.B.M. hasn't decided if it will sell the entire collection, which experts estimate could be worth $40 million to $100 million.
The core consists of about a dozen masterworks by such American artists as Edward Hopper, Childe Hassam, Winslow Homer and George Bellows.
I.B.M. has strong Latin American holdings, including paintings by Rufino Tamayo, Frida Kahlo and Diego Rivera.


Camille Lehman, Interior Designer, 84
Camille Helene Block Lehman, a respected and innovative interior designer, died on Tuesday at her home in Atlanta.
She was 84.
A native of New York City, Mrs.
Lehman began her career at 16, designing for a bathing-suit manufacturer.
After graduating from the Parsons School of Design at 19, she was hired by the dress and jewelry designer Hattie Carnegie.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-9  DEADLY REPRISALS IN RWANDA  Members of Rwanda's ethnic majority, the Hutu, have in some cases been wounded or killed in trying to return to their homes, refugees say.
Refugees identified some of the attackers as members of the Rwandan Patriotic Front, the Tutsi-led movement that now rules Rwanda.
A1  A cholera epidemic seems to be under control, doctors say.
A6


Serbia's Leader: Not 'a Single Promise Kept'
Following are excerpts from a statement yesterday by the President of Serbia, Slobodan Milosevic, after the Bosnian Serbs' rejection of an international peace plan.
The remarks were transmitted by the official Yugoslav press agency and translated by The Associated Press and The New York Times.
All explanations that the Serbian people would be threatened by accepting the peace plan become senseless and absurd when one considers they are refusing a secure border guaranteed by the international community; they are refusing a border across which no grenades can fly and over which nobody would be killed.


Citizens Utilities Co.  (CZN.A,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Delchamps Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to July 2


Where the Words Are the Thing, And Trippingly
"THE COMEDY OF ERRORS" has always been the cheap date of the Shakespearean canon: a play directors could take where they wanted and use as they would.
A manic farce with an absurdly Byzantine plot and minimal psychological shading, this early product of a young playwright has mostly spawned productions that run merrily over the text like a speeding Keystone Kops car.
The fact that language and characterization have tended to get lost in the traffic of the stage seems to bother no one.
It isn't, after all, something that anyone ever quotes from to impress people.
Now this giddy trollop of a play is getting a little respect.
The astonishment of the outdoor production of "Comedy" from Shakespeare and Company, the repertory troupe based at the Mount, the former Berkshires estate of Edith Wharton, is that the spoken lines get more laughs than the sight gags.


Market Place; Wireless cable, a hot technology and hotter securities fraud.
THE hottest form of securities fraud in the country today -- scams involving so-called wireless cable -- may have reared its ugly head in New York.
Yesterday, the Securities and Exchange Commission filed a complaint against a New York man named Robert Moses, two limited partnerships he promoted and the general partnerships he controlled, charging them with securities laws violations.
The S.E.C. said that more than 150 investors put almost $2 million into partnerships that were unregistered and misused the money.
Neither Mr.
Moses nor his lawyer returned telephone calls.


For Pataki, a Life Story More Than a Record
When George E. Pataki was an undergraduate at Yale in the mid-1960's, the college's Political Union sponsored a debate on whether outside agitators did more harm than good in the civil-rights movement.
On the left was the Rev.
William Sloane Coffin Jr., the university's chaplain and a prominent civil-rights advocate.
On the right was William F. Buckley Jr., the darling of Yale's Conservative Party, which was led by Mr.
Pataki.
But when it came time for the students to rise and cast their votes, Mr.
Pataki did not stand for Mr.
Buckley.
"I just couldn't vote with him," Mr.
Pataki explained.
"I happened to think that we needed the civil-rights crusades and the demonstrators to break down the state barriers to equality. All the liberals gave me a standing ovation."


Canadian Tire reports earnings for Qtr to July 2


Pentagon Worries About Cost of Aid Missions
Defense Secretary William J. Perry warned today that the military's relief mission for Rwanda was bleeding the Pentagon's budget and threatening combat readiness.
"We're an army, not a Salvation Army," Mr.
Perry told the House Appropriations subcommittee on military spending, where he went hat in hand today to ask for $270 million more in emergency aid for Rwanda.


Run-and-Shoot Guru Can't Run and Hide
The Houston Oilers entered last season still mesmerized by their 41-38 overtime playoff loss to the Buffalo Bills.
We all know that the Oilers blew a 35-3 lead in that debacle, earning National Football League history as the team to squander the largest lead ever in an N.F.L. game.
There was no where else to go but up in 1993 for the Oilers.
There would be nothing that the Oilers could possibly do to top that playoff nightmare.


Critic's Choice/Music; A Rare Rumba Display
Call it diversity or call it a hodgepodge, but this weekend's opening programs at Lincoln Center Out of Doors should fill the plaza with good-natured summer music, all of it free.
The most tropical show takes place tonight at 8:15 at the Damrosch Park Band Shell, in a summit of Caribbean rhythm and melody.
It features a rare United States appearance by Los Munequitos de Matanzas, one of the few Cuban groups allowed to tour this country in recent years.
Los Munequitos, formed in 1952, are a traditional rumba group that knows old-style rumbas, like the yambu and columbia, which are increasingly rare.
It plays sacred and secular rhythms, from Santeria ceremonies and street-corner parties, that are at the root of salsa, Latin jazz and all kinds of dance music.
The drumming is intricate and kinetic, with dancing to match; even a slight overlay of theatricality can't separate the band from its roots.
Sharing the bill are Phantom, an up-and-coming Haitian rock band carried by a different variant of those African cross-rhythms, and D'Ivan, playing Trinidadian-style calypso and soca.


For Stern, It's Balk Radio: He Ends Bid for Governor
Declining to put his money where his mouth was, Howard Stern abandoned his campaign for Governor of New York yesterday, refusing to accept the financial disclosure required of candidates and leaving the Libertarian Party, which has supported him, in the lurch.
This is what talk radio's top bad boy told his listeners yesterday morning: "While I've told you everything about myself, and I've been telling you about myself since the first day I started broadcasting, there's only one fact I never revealed. I never told you how much money I made, I never told you how much money I have in the bank. And the reason I never told you how much money I have in the bank is because it's none of your business."


Tests Show Probert Had Used Cocaine
Laboratory tests suggest that the trouble-plagued National Hockey League veteran BOB PROBERT ingested cocaine hours before he crashed his motorcycle last month, a Michigan State Police official said.
Capt.
RICHARD LOWTHIAN said that Probert probably ingested the cocaine within two hours of being admitted to a hospital after his July 15 crash in suburban Detroit, The Detroit Free Press reported yesterday.
Probert also had a blood-alcohol level of 0.31 percent, more than three times the legal limit.


White House Cites Economy To Bolster Clinton's Ratings
Stepping up its campaign to bolster President Clinton's sagging public standing, the White House today paraded out eight top economic officials who touted their agencies' accomplishments over the last year and a half.
President Clinton highlighted the economy's performance in the opening statement of his prime time news conference on Wednesday, the third of his term.
Administration officials said this evening that he would hold another news conference in the Rose Garden on Friday morning just to discuss the economy.


Investigating Lawyer Is Well Acquainted With the Misdeeds of Wall Street
Gary G. Lynch, the attorney who conducted the investigation into trading fraud at Kidder, Peabody &amp; Company, is no stranger to the misdeeds of Wall Street.
As enforcement chief at the Securities and Exchange Commission until 1989, Mr.
Lynch is credited with bringing Wall Street criminals of that era to justice -- including those who once worked for his current client, Kidder, Peabody.
Today, he is a securities lawyer at Davis Polk &amp; Wardwell, the Wall Street law firm, and is applying what he learned from 13 years of pursuing securities fraud for the Government to a new set of clients.
The Kidder assignment may be his most visible, but in the last few years he has represented Prudential Securities in its problems with failed real estate limited partnerships, and the law firm of Kaye Scholer Fierman Hays &amp; Handler, accused of lying to savings and loan regulators.
He has also represented several securities dealers in the wake of the Treasury bond scandal at Salomon Brothers.


Marino Interested in Buying Pirates
Miami Dolphins quarterback DAN MARINO said yesterday that he was part of a group interested in buying the Pittsburgh Pirates.
The group is led by LARRY LUCCHINO, like Marino a Pittsburgh native.
Lucchino was the Baltimore Orioles' chief executive officer from 1988 to 1993.
Others identified as being involved with the group include the Pittsburgh Penguins' owner, HOWARD BALDWIN, and JOHN RIGAS, chairman of Adelphia Communications.
The Pirates' board of directors put the team up for sale Wednesday.


Lynx Cites Joint Venture
Lynx Therapeutics Inc., a privately held biotechnology company based in Hayward, Calif., said today that it had a joint agreement with Wellcome P.L.C. to develop a new drug for the treatment of restenosis, a narrowing of blood vessels that can occur after balloon angioplasty and surgical procedures.
As part of the agreement, Wellcome will invest up to $30 million in Lynx, which was spun out of Applied Biosystems Inc. last year to develop drugs based on anti-sense technology.
Anti-sense seeks to treat disease at the genetic level, by neutralizing genes that code for the production of harmful proteins in cells.
Lynx's antisense restenosis treatment has shown positive results in tests in pigs and will soon begin human trials.


Universal Corp.(UVV,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Harris Steel Group reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Diner's Journal
Crossed Wires
"I'd like the scamorza, please."
"You want the scarola?"


Woman Pleads Guilty in Welfare Fraud Scheme
A woman who collected welfare under 15 different names and for 73 fictitious children pleaded guilty yesterday in a Manhattan courtroom to grand larceny.
She faces three to six years in prison.
The woman, Shirley Simmons, stunned investigators when they learned the extent of her deception, which was uncovered by an investigator for the State Department who found discrepancies in her application for a passport.


Tracor Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Hanover Direct Inc.(HNV,A) reports earnings for Qtr to July 2


Critic's Choice/Theater; Double Scoop of Musical Americana
All right, maybe you've seen them both already.
But there's the usual summer drought in New York theater.
And "Carousel" and "Damn Yankees," two of the rare Broadway musicals whose performers seem more like humans than electronic puppets, are very much worth revisiting, preferably back to back, for purposes of comparison.
Both products of this country's postwar boom years, they were standouts in a season flooded with images of mid-century America (think of "Picnic" and "Grease").
Both are set in worlds cherished by nostalgic believers in a lost American Eden: small-town, turn-of-the-century New England and the baseball fields and suburban homes of the 1950's.


Congress Threatening Specialized Residents
Before noon on a recent day, Dr.
Salvatore Caruana had already made his usual morning rounds, attended an academic conference on facial reconstructive techniques and diagnosed a recurrence of throat cancer.
By 7 that evening, en route to perform an emergency tracheotomy -- his third surgery of the day at St.
Vincent's Hospital in Manhattan -- he said he had not yet had time to eat, but had gulped three cups of coffee.


Noble Affiliates (NBL,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Big Band, Big Sounds and Some Big Names
The recording eye of television at a concert often alters the outcome of the proceedings.
The first musical offering of the season by Jazz at Lincoln Center was structured expressly for "Live From Lincoln Center" on PBS, and it produced, at least in the first half, a set of near-perfect music, shortened, rehearsed and audience-friendly.
And since the show, on Wednesday night at Alice Tully Hall, was meant to present a tableau of jazz's riches (it also previewed future Lincoln Center performances), each musician or band had its one piece, eliminating the development of more complex interaction.
According to Lincoln Center, 10 million people watched the program, and what they heard and saw was a series of performances that moved from the industrial rhythms of Duke Ellington's "Happy Go Lucky Local," a big-band piece based on the rhythms of a train, to "Blue Port." The latter, an introspective, melancholic and spare piece by Art Farmer on fluegelhorn and Gerry Mulligan on baritone saxophone, backed by Ron Carter on bass and Lewis Nash on drums, was a reprise of a group Mr.
Mulligan led in the 1950's.
The endpiece of the set, "Jelly, Jelly," featuring the singer Milt Grayson, has become the orchestra's roof raiser, and on cue, Mr.
Grayson, with his deep baritone, did just that.


The Woodstock Notion
Exactly 10 years ago, Abbie Hoffman lectured a young reporter in the show room of Grossinger's, the Borscht Belt hotel near Max Yasgur's farm, site of Woodstock, the holy quagmire.
"Wise up, man," he said.
"Woodstock was shuck and jive, a TV commercial about money!"
It was the 15th anniversary of the epochal 1969 rock festival, and the moribund Catskills resort, desperate to attract a younger clientele, was putting on a weekend celebration featuring performances by some original Woodstock musicians.


Madison Gas &amp; Electric Co.(MDSN,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Bert Freed Is Dead; Character Actor, 74
Bert Freed, a character actor who appeared in "Detective Story," "Wild in the Streets," "Billy Jack" and about 75 other films, died on Tuesday while on vacation in West Sechelt, British Columbia.
He was 74 and lived in Los Angeles.
The cause was a heart attack, said his son, Carl.


Giovanni Spadolini, 69, Dies; Was Key Politician in Italy
Giovanni Spadolini, a former Prime Minister, a prolific author and a stalwart of many Italian administrations, died here today.
He was 69.
His office said he died of respiratory failure while recovering from a stomach operation last month.


Konstantin Kalser; Film Maker Was 73
Konstantin Kalser, a writer, producer and director of documentary films, died on Saturday at Southampton Hospital on Long Island.
He was 73 and lived in Amagansett, L.I.
The cause was kidney failure, said his wife, Martha.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article on Wednesday about the Times Square redevelopment project characterized the stance of the Municipal Art Society incorrectly.
Although the group has criticized some aspects of the project over the years, it is not a longtime opponent.
It had supported the overall plan, but recently withdrew its support after the state relieved the developers of their obligation to start construction of four office towers according to a set timetable.


Parker Hannifin Corp.(PH,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Voting Rights, Still Alive
Only a year ago the Supreme Court seemed ready to nullify or at least cripple the Voting Rights Act of 1965.
The Court found that two oddly shaped Congressional districts in North Carolina, drawn to give blacks a fair chance to elect representatives of their choice, smacked of apartheid.
It said the districts could stand only if the state justified them under strict scrutiny in a full-scale trial.
That command struck many as part of a drive to reverse the dramatic political gains the voting law has brought to citizens long denied both the ballot and a place in American political life.
But the trial has now produced a ruling upholding those strangely shaped districts, suggesting that the voting law may still be very much alive.


Newly Arrived Immigrant Kills Himself at Shelter
A newly-arrived immigrant from Russia jumped to his death yesterday from a third-floor window of a homeless shelter in lower Manhattan, and his 7-year-old daughter was seriously injured when she fell while struggling to stop him, the police said.
The two had been placed in the Catherine Street Family Respite shelter, on the grounds of the Alfred E. Smith Housing Project at 78 Catherine Street, about 3 A.M. yesterday.
They were referred there by the Emergency Assistance Unit of the New York City Department of Homeless Services, said Sam Szurek, a spokesman for the department, which oversees the shelter.


A Quest for Yesterday's Innocence
"Is that a cowlick, or are you just glad to see me?" Reba McEntire asks Alfalfa (Bug Hall) in "The Little Rascals." Well, a cowlick is all it used to be.
But this quaint material has been dragged into the present, picking up an overproduced visual style and the occasional phrase like "bite me" or "boy toy." Along the way, a little innocence is lost, and none of what's gained is worth having.
Visual ideas don't get much simpler than those of "The Little Rascals," which once depended on raffish children to behave in funny, precocious ways while the camera rolled.
Now, on the big screen, the precocity becomes exaggerated and the children are aggressively cuter.
Most of the wide-eyed kiddie actors seen here have worked in commercials, which gives "The Little Rascals" a slick, adorable style devoid of spontaneity.If you can, stick around for the much funnier out-takes that accompany the closing credits, with the kids behaving normally and Penelope Spheeris, the director, heard saying things like "Don't look at the camera, sweetie."


A.L. Laboratories Inc.(BMD,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


For Retailers, Few Patterns In July Sales
The nation's large retail chains reported a grab bag of sales results in July, giving little indication of where sales are heading.
"The trend in July is no trend," said Susan Silverstein, a retail analyst at Gruntal &amp; Company.
"Sales are really all over the board."


Butler International Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


DNA Tests Provide Key to Cell Doors for Some Wrongly Convicted Inmates
In a telephone interview from prison, Edward Honaker said he was flabbergasted when a jury convicted him of rape and sodomy 10 years ago.
But his assertions of innocence had been of no avail.
He has served more than nine years of his multiple-life-term sentence at Nottaway Prison in Virginia and will not be eligible for parole until 2001.


Getting Outs Instead of Getting Out
It is a dreaded chore, charting pitches, one that starters do out of a sense of duty, not out of love for the job.
Jason Jacome does not seem to mind.
Recently, Jacome, the young left-hander, has pitched the day after Bret Saberhagen, the ace of the Mets' staff.
That means he charts the games that Saberhagen throws.
And in this season, charting Saberhagen has been a pleasure, particularly for a 23-year-old rookie who wants to learn.


Cineplex Odeon (CPX,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Dames &amp; Moore Inc.(DM,N) reports earnings for 14wks to July 1


Opponents' Aim Is to Topple This Favorite
Before last Saturday, Victory Dream had been so dominant that some compared him with Mack Lobell, one of the greatest horses in the history of harness racing.
After finishing fourth in the Beacon Course Trot here last weekend, though, he is no longer the feared opponent he once was at the $1.2 million Hambletonian, the most prestigious harness race.


Exchange To Build And Stay In Manhattan
A day after it formally completed its merger with the Commodity Exchange, the New York Mercantile Exchange announced yesterday that it would build a new office tower in lower Manhattan, keeping its headquarters and 8,100 jobs in the city.
The exchange, which has been in the World Trade Center since 1977, decided to build the tower beside the Hudson River in Battery Park City after ruling out another site in Manhattan and one in Jersey City, its chairman, Daniel Rappaport, said.


Pollster Advises Democrats: Don't Be Too Close to Clinton
Acknowledging that the Democrats face a grim political environment this fall, President Clinton's pollster is advising that those seeking re-election should emphasize their own records rather than link themselves too closely to Mr.
Clinton or even their own party.
He also recommends that they make crime the central issue, not health care or the economy.
While the pollster, Stanley Greenberg, stopped short of saying that candidates should distance themselves from the President, his recommendation amounted to a tacit recognition that Mr.
Clinton's weaknesses could damage Democrats' prospects in November.
It is also at odds with comments by officials like David Wilhelm, the Democratic chairman, who has publicly urged Democrats in Congress to run proudly with their President.


Cyrk Inc.(CYRK,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League
BOSTON RED SOX -- Purchased the contracts of Todd Frohwirth and Ricky Trlicek, pitchers, from Pawtucket of the International League.
Optioned Tim VanEgmond and Nate Minchey, pitchers, to Pawtucket.
Placed Mike Greenwell, outfielder, on the 15-day disabled list.
Activated Andre Dawson, designated hitter, from the 15-day disabled list.


MGM Grand in Joint Casino Venture
Six months after opening the country's biggest casino resort, MGM Grand Inc. announced plans yesterday to open a second, albeit much smaller, gambling center, across the street from its $1 billion complex on the Las Vegas strip.
The new casino, to be called New York-New York, with a facade modeled after the New York skyline and 1,500 rooms, is banking on a continued national gambling craze and on boom times in Las Vegas, which is having a record summer.
It is one of three new properties to be announced in recent months, scheduled to be completed starting in 1996.


SERBIA ISOLATING ALLIES IN BOSNIA
The President of Serbia announced today that most political and economic links with Serbian nationalist rebels in Bosnia were being severed because the Bosnian Serbs had rejected an international plan for ending the war here.
In a statement this morning, the Government of Yugoslavia, the rump state made up of Serbia and Montenegro and dominated by Serbia's President, Slobodan Milosevic, announced that it would bar Bosnian Serb leaders from entering Serbia and ban all trade with Serb-controlled parts of Bosnia except for shipments of food and medicine.  [ Excerpts, page A9. ]


Promotion at Fortune
John Huey, senior editor at Fortune, has been named an executive editor of the magazine.
He joins Allan T. Demaree, who has taken a sabbatical to write a book, in the No. 2 editorial position at Fortune behind Walter Kiechel, the managing editor.
During his six years as senior editor, Mr.
Huey, 46, has written cover articles on subjects that include the Coca-Cola Company and McKinsey &amp; Company.
He is the co-author of "Sam Walton: Made in America," which was on the New York Times best-seller list for several months.


Stop Witch Hunts for Uninsured Drivers
To the Editor:
The police road blocks for uninsured drivers in New Jersey are reminiscent of the Gestapo in 1930's Germany.
The stoppages are essentially a witch hunt against decent, working people, who because of the escalating cost are priced out of auto insurance.


Amoco Oil Assigns Projects to Fallon
The Amoco Oil Company assigned unspecified advertising and design projects yesterday to Fallon McElligott of Minneapolis, a shop that previously handled Amoco's motor oil line.
Billings were not disclosed.


Sico Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to July 1


Miscellany
*
Publishers Information Bureau, New York, said magazine advertising pages rose 8.0 percent in July, to 11,076.8, from July 1993.
For the first seven months of 1994, total pages rose 5.1 percent, to 97,782.5, from the corresponding period a year ago.


Art in Review
Ann Agee and Julie Trager
Yoshii Gallery  20 West 57th Street  Manhattan  Through tomorrow
Julie Trager's sculptures are made of flax and wool, braided and combed to suggest human hair, an overused image in the body-conscious art of the past few years.
Ms.
Trager pushes its fetishistic possibilities in "Betrayal," a 20-foot-long plait of white wool suspended from the gallery's ceiling, and in "Disturbance," a short, arched length of dark braided wool that sits in the middle of the floor.


Bad Dream? Just About, But the U.S. Wins Debut
Forget about Michael, for the time being, at least.
Forget Magic, and, while we're on the subject, don't even mention Charles or, for that matter, Scottie.
Forget all comparisons with Dream Team I because after 40 inaugural minutes of international competition, the worst suspicions about The Next Generation have already been realized.
From the many tracts of empty seats here at Copps Coliseum to the cool 100 points Spain rung up against the supposed best the National Basketball Association has to offer, it was obvious tonight that so-called Dream Team II is a sequel you wouldn't rush to see just because the original was so tantalizingly good.


Playboy Enterprises Inc.(PLAA,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


H. W. Heilman, 79; Was Former Leader Of Order of Moose
Herbert W. Heilman, former head of the Loyal Order of the Moose, died on July 27 at a retirement community in Tucson, Ariz., where he had moved three years ago from his longtime home in Batavia, Ill.
He was 79.
The cause was Alzheimer's disease, the fraternal order, now renamed Moose International, reported at its headquarters at Mooseheart, its big campus just west of Chicago.


On My Mind; Who Pays China's Army?
Two months ago, President Clinton wiped out Asian human rights as a political, economic or diplomatic concern of his Administration's foreign policy.
He did this with the help and guidance of the American China lobby, which pays for its business profits in China by supporting the interests of the Government in Beijing.


Bonnie Raitt, a Balladeer for the 90's
Bonnie Raitt started out in the 1970's as a blues singer.
Two decades later, her songs still hold on to the forthrightness and the pained determination of the blues.
But at Radio City Music Hall on Wednesday night, when she opened a two-night stand, the most telling moments came during her ballads.
Ms.
Raitt is one of the least showy singers in rock; she makes the song seem to tell its story by itself.
Her voice has a girlish sweetness deepened by a grainy sense of experience; it can cut through a full band in a rock song, but it can also make ballads float in their own world.


Bible Doesn't Sanction Anti-Abortion Murder; Religions For Choice
To the Editor:
The Roman Catholic bishops have sent a letter to Congressional leaders warning that they will "vigorously oppose" any health care plan that includes abortion coverage.


Syratech Corp.(SYR,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


The Terror of the Thruway: Liberated Bees Go Berserk
It was a scene made for a B movie.
Early yesterday morning, a truckload of 24 million honeybees bound for Florida crash-landed in New York instead when their flatbed trailer overturned on a highway near Tarrytown.


Physicians Health Services (PHSV,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Defusing Korea's Nuclear Crisis
he United States resumes high-level talks with North Korea in Geneva today with some hope that the new Korean leadership will stay on a constructive negotiating path.
But a deadline looms that could throw the talks off track.
The hope stems from the North's readiness to resume talks so soon after the death of Kim Il Sung, the only leader it had ever known, and from an editorial in the Government-run newspaper that is unusually conciliatory by Pyongyang standards.


New Zodiac Killings Claimed in a Letter
Someone claiming to be the Zodiac gunman who stalked New York City in 1990 claims to have attacked five more people, killing two of them, since 1992.
The New York Post reported today, and the police confirmed, that someone sent a letter to the Post purporting to be from the Zodiac, and giving details of five attacks in the area around Highland Park in Ridgewood, Queens.


Corrections
An article on the Media Business page on Monday about Time Inc.'s new magazines misstated the circulation of Managing Your Future, a newsletter published by Money magazine.
Company officials say the newsletter's current circulation is 511,000, not 326,000.


Abroad at Home; The Grassy Knoll
The desperate nature of the Republican effort to make something of Whitewater was on naked display in the Senate hearing on the death of Vincent Foster.
Partisan zeal would not yield to elemental human decency.
Ever since the assistant White House counsel committed suicide in July 1993, the political right has tried to use the death to attack President and Mrs.
Clinton.
Conservative commentators claim that Mr.
Foster killed himself over the Whitewater affair, or was murdered.


Slain Clinic Escort Saw Job as a Mission
James H. Barrett flew in northern Africa in World War II, in Korea and in Vietnam, and he retired as a lieutenant colonel in the Air Force after 28 years of service.
Then he took up a second career as a schoolteacher in Texas and Maryland.
So when he finally retired for good here two years ago, he joked to his friends in the North that he had earned the right to tee off on every single hole of every single one of the 41 golf courses in the Pensacola area.


Auto Stocks Lead Market In a Selloff
The stock market sagged under the weight of a selloff in auto stocks yesterday after total sales from Detroit's Big Three auto makers came in weaker than expected on Wednesday.
The July sales were the lowest annual rate in 10 months.
Market analysts said the drop in auto sales might have caused investors to be concerned that the corporate profits of companies in segments like autos, building products and semiconductors could peak sooner than expected.


Health Care Tug-of-War Puts A.M.A. Under Strain
The American Medical Association has been split by bitter fights over health care legislation, as Republican members of Congress complain that the organization has been too eager to support proposals like those offered by President Clinton.
Stung by such criticism, the doctors said today that they had not endorsed any specific health care bill, particularly not the one put forward last week by Representative Richard A. Gephardt, the House Democratic leader.


Urban Grow-It-Yourselfers Cash In on Majijuana
When the police and firefighters were called to a loft apartment on lower Broadway on Wednesday night by reports of a fire, they were stunned to discover that most of the place -- above a jeans shop, an art gallery and offices -- had been turned into an elaborate greenhouse filled with rows of luxuriant marijuana plants.
It was a rare find.
But the police say that with fine, domestically grown marijuana bringing up to $6,000 a pound these days, they believe the city is dotted with similar indoor marijuana plantations.


Liberty Corp.(LC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Noram Energy Corp.(NAE,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


United Healthcare Corp.(UNH,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Home Oil Co. (HO,A) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Parish Signs Multiyear Deal With Hornets
ROBERT PARISH insists he doesn't mind taking a backup role with the Charlotte Hornets.
"My ego has been in check for a long time," the nine-time All-Star center of the Boston Celtics said yesterday after signing a multiyear contract with the Hornets.
"Coming off the bench behind a fine young center like ALONZO MOURNING fits my style," said the 7-foot Parish, the National Basketball Association's oldest player, who will turn 41 on Aug. 30.


Ludwig Lustig; Musicians' Representative, 94
Ludwig Lustig, a manager of opera singers and other classical musicians, died on Saturday at Roosevelt Hospital.
He was 94 and lived in New York City.
During the 1960's and 70's, Mr.
Ludwig managed the careers of many New York opera singers, including more than 250 City Opera members.
Among the artists he represented were Beverly Sills, a client for 23 years, along with Nico Castel, Johanna Meier and Judith Raskin.


Great Lakes Power reports earnings for Qtr to June 30





Calisle Moves From Nets to Blazers
RICK CARLISLE, an assistant coach with the New Jersey Nets since 1989, was hired yesterday as an assistant with the Portland Trail Blazers.
Carlisle is the second assistant hired by coach P. J. CARLESIMO this week.
Former Blazer JOHNNY DAVIS joined the staff Monday.
Carlisle was drafted by the Boston Celtics in 1984.
He also played with New York and New Jersey in a five-year career. (AP)


Arkansas Carries Out Nation's First Triple Execution in 32 Years
Opponents of the death penalty, a group whose influence has dwindled amid growing public concern about violent crime, claimed new moral ground on Wednesday when Arkansas executed three men in less than three hours.
"At what point will they stop?" asked Kika Matos of the NAACP Legal Defense and Educational Fund.
"It will soon be the mass lynchings of not so long ago." She argued that a multiple execution "takes away from the individuality of the person" sent to his death.


Mervin M. Jules, 82, Artist and Educator
Mervin M. Jules, a graphic artist, painter and teacher, died last Friday at his son's summer home in Provincetown, Mass.
He was 82 and lived in Forest Hills, Queens.
He died after a long illness, said his daughter Gabriel Jules Zepecki.


Cotton and NBC Left Out in Bowl Shuffle
The Sugar, Fiesta and Orange Bowls were selected yesterday to rotate an annual matchup of the season's two top-ranked college football teams to determine an undisputed national champion.
During a two-hour telephone call, conference commissioners approved the three-bowl coalition, which will start on Dec. 31, 1995.


For Children
Ice cream is democratic enough to help any man, woman or child of any age climb out of a bad day.
It's an indulgence that will, one hopes, never be banned despite concerns about butterfat.
Here are places that take the treat seriously, presenting servings in silver containers that remind you of a time when flavor was the only thing you had to worry about.
Henry's Confectionery and Luncheonette
8 Glen Street  Glen Cove, L.I.
(516) 671-3222


When Lawyers Go After Their Peers: The Boom in Malpractice Cases
Hilton L. Stein, a gregarious fellow, seems an unlikely candidate to be an outcast, but he revels in the role.
"I'm never invited to any golf outings, I can tell you," he said, laughing.
Edward Freidberg is no less a pariah, excluded from the lunches and dinners at which contacts are made and deals done.
But then, he said, "I'm not a very social creature."


Trimas Corp.(TMS,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Transactions
Baseball  American League AL -- Upheld the five-game suspension of Boston Red Sox manager Butch Hobson for making contact with umpires during a game on June 28.
Basketball  National Basketball Association MIAMI HEAT -- Signed Matt Geiger, center, to a multiyear contract.
MILWAUKEE BUCKS -- Signed Marty Conlon, forward, to a two-year contract.
MINNESOTA TIMBERWOLVES -- Announced the sale of the team to businessman Glen Taylor, pending NBA approval.
Hockey  National Hockey League DETROIT RED WINGS -- Signed Bob Rouse, defenseman, to a multiyear contract.
WINNIPEG JETS -- Named Terry Simpson assistant coach.
College  DELAWARE VALLEY -- Named Mark McDonald women's volleyball coach.
FAIRFIELD -- Named Dave Tanner women's soccer coach.
GEORGIA SOUTHERN -- Named J.C.
Andersen athletic trainer.
MONMOUTH, N.J. -- Named Shari Krasnoo women's lacrosse coach.


POP
Just Five Notes Provide A World of Images  S.O.B.'s


Progress in Midtown
Times Square is another step closer to renewal, and none too soon.
It has been 10 years since New York City and the state's Urban Development Corporation struck their first deal with developers, and twice as long since a neighborhood priest organized community pressure to clean out the area's crime and sleaze.
From the beginning, this project has been a magnet for controversy, particularly its soaring office towers at the intersection of Broadway and 42d Street.
Construction of the towers is now on hold, because the last thing midtown Manhattan needs is four new empty skyscrapers.
But plans for upgrading the once tawdry, now deserted block between Broadway and Eighth Avenue are well underway.


Plexus Corp.(PLXS,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


No Headline
"All it took to get this started was one spark of violence. And because of the violence, we were going to get every fanatic on both sides of the issue coming into town. It's like when a train starts. Everyone just jumps on." -- BRENDA STARKEY of Pensacola, Fla.  [ 1:6. ]


Policy Management Systems Corp.(PMS,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Albany Limbo: A Bill Passes, Then Just Sits
Call it the case of the disappearing bill.
It was a measure to require large cities to spend about the same amount of local money on schools as they had in previous years.
Lawmakers publicly endorsed it (good for education), privately denounced it (badly drafted) and ultimately passed the bill, S. 3248, on June 6.


Teva Pharmaceutical Industries(TEVIY,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Can Fund Prospectuses Be Written in English?
IT is not exactly a secret that few investors read prospectuses before they buy shares of mutual funds.
Nor is it a mystery why: the documents are written by lawyers, for lawyers (and even lawyers think they are stultifying).
Now Mark Green, the New York City Public Advocate, is joining the chorus asking for change.
Last week, he issued a report criticizing many prospectuses and urging fund companies to adopt a new, standard label that would summarize a fund's goals, strategies, risks and costs on the cover.
The label, as he envisions it, would be a cross between a page from the Morningstar Mutual Funds guide and the nutrition information on the back of a soup can.


Offer Made To Acquire Source One
Fund American Enterprises Holdings Inc. said yesterday that it had received an unsolicited proposal to buy its Source One Mortgage Services Corporation, another example of merger activity surging through the mortgage industry as interest rates rise and home sales level off.
Shares in Fund American, a holding company based in Norwich, Vt., soared as much as 12 percent yesterday, closing at $74.875, up $3.85, on the New York Stock Exchange.


Pensacola's Decade of Violence: Escalating Battle Over Abortion
The roots of violent confrontation over abortion in this graceful city on the Gulf of Mexico run deeper than the killing of a doctor and his escort last week and of another doctor last year.
They go back at least a decade, to Christmas Day 1984, when all three abortion clinics here were firebombed, an act that one of the four people convicted of the crime described as "a gift for Jesus on his birthday."


It's the Lifeguards' Turn to Play on the Beach


Yankees Aren't to Blame for State of the Bronx
To the Editor:
Re "Bombing in the Bronx" (Op-Ed, July 26): I do not disagree with all of Matt Bai's points, but he wrongly gives much of the blame to the New York Yankees for the moral and social decay not only of the area surrounding Yankee Stadium, but throughout the Bronx as well.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 2-5  POLITICAL DIVIDE IN RURAL MEXICO
As close as Mexico's presidential race is believed to be, analysts agree that deeply rural areas, mostly in central and southern states, will be critical.
After a violent uprising this year in southern Chiapas, the countryside is deeply split.  1


Police Start New Inquiry In Zodiac Case
Four years after an elusive gunman who called himself Zodiac claimed to have carried out four shootings that were never solved, the New York City Police Department yesterday started a new investigation in response to a letter taking responsibility for five more attacks.
Senior police officials said they were taking seriously the latest claims, which were made in a letter sent to The New York Post and passed on to investigators.
One reason, they said, was that the letter writer had suggested special knowledge of the shootings by providing details of cases that had not received wide publicity.


Dr. Luigi Pollara, 80, Founder Of Polymer Research Unit, Dies
Dr.
Luigi Zummo Pollara, provost emeritus of the Stevens Institute of Technology and founder of its Polymer Processing Institute, died on July 29 at his farm in Wall Township, N.J.
He was 80.
The cause was a heart attack, the institute said.


Yankees Aren't to Blame for State of the Bronx; A Bridge Too Far
To the Editor:
The New York State Department of Transportation proposal to build a bridge from the Harlem River Drive in Manhattan to a parking garage in the Bronx, so that those going to Yankee Stadium do not have to set foot or auto in the Bronx, is inane, fiscally irresponsible and shows how the Yankees' owner, George Steinbrenner, manipulates spineless politicians (news article, July 28).


Liberals Back Senate Health Bill in Hope of Gains Later
Liberal senators and organizations unhappy with elements of Senator George J. Mitchell's health insurance bill are coalescing behind a strategy of defending the bill while it is on the Senate floor and hoping to get something they like better out of a House-Senate conference committee later.
Most of them speak of trying to strengthen the bill with amendments that move toward universal coverage sooner, or enhance its benefit package.
A few insist that their ultimate support cannot be taken for granted unless the bill moves in their direction, although even Senator Paul Wellstone, a very liberal Minnesota Democrat, stops short of saying he will vote against it if his amendments fail.


Public &amp; Private; The Passion to Keep Them Safe
My kids keep trying to convince me that there are two separate parts of their stomachs, one dedicated to dinner and the other to dessert.
I don't know why I'm so skeptical; after all, I sometimes think there are two distinct parts of my mind, the columnist part and the parent part, and that they are occasionally filled with quite different things.
Take the case of Megan Kanka, age 7.


New Choices in Bonds, Gold and Real Estate
The new Franklin/Templeton Strategic Income Fund aims for income by investing in issues of the United States and foreign governments, junk bonds, mortgage-backed securities, preferred stocks and convertible securities.
Strategic income funds are a form of one-stop shopping, providing bond investors broad exposure around the world.
But given the possibilities of currency moves, economic changes or political shifts in the issuing countries, the fund's share price may be volatile.
The Gabelli Gold Fund is managed by Caesar Bryan, who recently resigned from Lexington's Goldfund and Strategic Investments fund.
The Lexington Strategic fund was the best-performing mutual fund in 1993, as Mr.
Bryan nimbly rode rising gold prices.
His fund was highly leveraged to gold, making share prices volatile; witness Strategic's 11.7 percent decline in the first six months of 1994.


Bosnia: Two Right Responses
NATO and the United Nations sent a timely military message to the Bosnian Serbs yesterday.
And Secretary of State Warren Christopher followed it up with a useful reminder that continued Serb rejection of an international peace plan could make a U.N. decision to lift the arms embargo restraining Government forces "unavoidable."
In recent days the Bosnian Serbs launched a string of provocations against U.N. forces, culminating in the brazen theft of a tank and other weapons from U.N. custody in the Sarajevo exclusion zone.
Yesterday, the U.N. called in NATO warplanes, who hit a nearby Bosnian Serb antitank vehicle.


Adjustable Mortgages Are Making Comeback
AFTER falling out of favor during the home refinancing boom of 1992 and 1993, adjustable-rate mortgages are making a comeback, thanks to their rather modest rate increases, a spate of new loan products and heightened competition among lenders.
Although fixed-rate mortgages are still more popular, the Federal Housing Finance Board recently reported that 43 percent of the mortgages closed in June had adjustable rates, the highest percentage since June 1989, when it was 47 percent.


Harvard Industries Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Telus Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


GBC Technologies reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Stein Mart Inc.(SMRT,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to July 2


Business Digest
The Economy
The economy continued to produce jobs at a brisk pace in July, causing drops in financial markets as investors feared the Federal Reserve might raise interest rates again soon to prevent any increase in inflation.
Employment grew by 259,000 jobs last month while average hourly earnings rose 4 cents, to $11.12.
President Clinton welcomed the news, saying that nonfarm employment had now risen by 4.1 million jobs since he took office, half of the 8 million jobs that he promised to create during his first term.  [ Page 1. ]  While the national unemployment rate for July rose to 6.1 percent from 6 percent in June, New Jersey's unemployment rate dropped to 6.4 percent from 7.1; New York State's edged up to 7.1 percent from 7 percent, while New York City's jobless rate climbed to 8.8 percent from 8.5 percent.  [ 44. ]
The White House is doing little to fight protectionist provisions in the legislation Congress must pass to underpin the new GATT pact, say many who wish to bring down trade barriers.  [ 33. ]
U.S. monetary authorities bought a total of $2.81 billion through the sale of German marks and Japanese yen in May and June to support the dollar.  [ 42. ] Companies
The F.C.C. sternly admonished high bidders at its recent auction for slices of the broadcast spectrum to meet their obligations when their 10 percent down payments are due Monday.  [ 33. ]
Nextel agreed in separate stock deals valued at $2.4 billion to acquire Dial Page, a wireless operator in the Southeast, and the remaining American wireless licenses owned by Motorola.  [ 33. ]
Simon Property will buy 19 regional shopping malls and a management company for $1 billion from Equitable.  [ 35. ]
Fund American Enterprises said it had received a proposal to buy its Source One Mortgage Services unit.  [ 35. ] International
Millions of Chinese have learned a lesson about how quickly prices can climb, collapse and climb again on what has become one of the most volatile stock markets in the developing world.  [ 33. ]
Brazil has become the South American magnet for computer companies from around the world; many have set up local production, with the broader Latin American market in mind.  [ 33. ] Markets
Stocks fell on fears of another rate increase.
The Dow dropped 18.77 points, to close at 3,747.02.  [ 34. ]
Prices of Treasury securities tumbled after the monthly employment numbers for July showed the economy adding jobs at a fast pace.
The 30-year bond fell 114/32 of a point, to 8428/32 , for a yield of 7.54 percent.  [ 41. ]
The dollar fell against most major currencies after the bond market's sharp decline.  [ 42. ]
Oil prices plunged after a Nigerian court ordered the release of a politician whose imprisonment had set off strikes that crippled oil production in the West African nation.  [ 42. ] Your Money
A new business structure that is taking the accounting profession by storm is also being recommended for a host of businesses.
Called a limited liability company or limited liability partnership, the structure assures owners or partners that their personal assets will be protected if their businesses are sued.  [ 30. ]
New York City's Public Advocate wants mutual fund companies to adopt a new, standardized label that would summarize a fund's goals, strategies, risks and costs.  [ 30. ]
Adjustable-rate mortgages are making a comeback, thanks to their modest rate increases, a spate of new loan products and heightened competition among lenders.  [ 31. ]


Giuliani Got Private Data About Aides
Aides to Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani have received copies of confidential background reports on several people who were recently hired by the city's top elected officials, a practice the elected officials and others criticized as improper.
Randy M. Mastro, chief of staff to Mayor Giuliani, said yesterday that no one in the Mayor's office had requested the information, which was compiled by the Department of Investigation, but that the department's investigators had inadvertently sent over copies of the findings they made in routine background checks.


Shelter Components Corp.(SST,A) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Man Who Harassed Mogilny Deported
A man who helped Buffalo Sabres star ALEXANDER MOGILNY defect from the Soviet Union and then allegedly tried to collect $150,000 for his efforts has been ordered deported.
SERGEI FOMITCHEV was to be shipped back to Sweden, assistant United States Attorney KATHLEEN MEHLTRETTER said yesterday in Buffalo.
Fomitchev pleaded guilty on Wednesday to visa fraud.
On Thursday, Immigration Judge MICHAELANGELO ROCCO ordered him deported. (AP)


A Lifetime of Living the Hippocratic Oath


National Western Life Insurance Co.(NWLIA) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


In Quarterback Duel, It's Now Graham's Turn
The pressure is on.
It may not be fair.
It may not be right to say or think.
But when quarterback Kent Graham walks onto the Giants Stadium turf Saturday night, the simple fact is that it will be the biggest game of his young career.
If he does well, the fight continues.
If he doesn't and his competitor does, the fight may be over before it really gets started.
The quarterbacks will once again be the story.
The Giants play the Cleveland Browns at 8 P.M.
Dave Brown must simply be steady after his superb performance in a starting role last week against Miami; most observers think he has a slim lead in the derby to replace Phil Simms as the starter.


Healer, 93, Retires? Not Quite
FIRST, do no harm.
Some doctors would rather first look at the purse, but Matthew Warpick is the kind of physician who lives by the Hippocratic Oath.
He went one step further and swore allegiance to an entire neighborhood, staying put for 67 years in the same five-room doctor's office in West Harlem, despite the break-ins and muggings that became frighteningly frequent.


Mayflower Group Inc.(MAYF) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Principal Players of Watergate Reprise Perfidies and Inanities
Many a former President's man can be seen and heard over the next few evenings telling of his part in the follies and felonies known as Watergate.
Here are H. R. Haldemann (in his last television interview), John D. Ehrlichman, John W. Dean 3d, Charles W. Colson, Jeb Stuart Magruder, E. Howard Hunt, G. Gordon Liddy and other embarrassed celebrities of the time who became involved in crimes at the behest of their boss.
Implicit in "Watergate" is the possibility that the best and brightest have been in fact the worst and the dimmest.
You may leave this tough five-hour account convinced that confinement to the Beltway strangles common sense as well as honesty.


No Moves Are Afoot To Modify Proposal
If anyone is waiting for a group of moderate owners to force a change in management's position that could avert a strike next Friday, it's not going to happen.
Several owners who fit that description made that clear yesterday.
"I don't think there's any chance for success, assuming that one or more of the more moderate owners are of a mind that that should be done," Peter Angelos of the Baltimore Orioles said in a telephone interview.
"There's unity among all the owners to the effect that something has to be done. The position of the union that the status quo should remain can't be fulfilled under these circumstances."


Fed Details Spending In Efforts to Aid Dollar
Monetary authorities in the United States bought a total of $2.81 billion through the sale of German marks and Japanese yen in May and June to support the dollar, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York said yesterday in its regular report on foreign exchange activities.
The New York Fed, which conducts foreign exchange operations on behalf of the Treasury and the Federal Reserve, said it intervened to support the dollar on May 4 and June 24.


Camp for Writers Offers Bright Lights, No City
Opening her green, cloth-covered journal, Natasha Mack cannot help feeling a bit of relief.
Not because of what's written inside, but because of what the words signify: a mellower outlook.
"In New York, most of my writing is of rage," said Ms.
Mack, 16, who is from the South Bronx.
"But here I'm actually able to think about what I'm writing."


Yankees Aren't to Blame for State of the Bronx; Unappreciated Fans
To the Editor:
Yankee management keeps looking in the wrong places to explain low attendance.
Fear of crime and insufficient parking just don't cut it.


Record Force Hunts Sniper In Suffolk
Using helicopters, undercover officers and stepped-up patrols along commercial strips in Suffolk County, the police here continued their search today for a sniper who has attacked three times in 12 days, killing one person and critically injuring another.
"Right now this is the top priority of the department, and everyone is involved," said the Chief of Patrol, Edwin Michel, the commander of the sprawling suburban force's 1,700-member patrol division.
He added, "I think you could safely say it's the largest commitment of personnel to a single criminal case" since the Suffolk department was founded in 1960.


Don't Judge Police by Actions of Corrupt Few
To the Editor:
Jonathan Rubinstein, in "Feckless Mayor, Unfit Cops" (Op-Ed, July 15), contends that the public display of a half-dozen officers during the Mollen Commission hearings reaffirmed what many New Yorkers have known for decades: "any cop can be a brutal criminal if he want to be."


After Scandal, a Precinct Recasts Its Image
In the four months since 12 officers in the 30th Precinct in Harlem were taken away in handcuffs for dealing cocaine and protecting drug dealers, the station house has been painted, its sidewalks replaced, the lighting improved.
Officers now wear their shoes shined like Marine boots and their hair cut as short as golf course fairways.
That's just the cosmetics.
Where spotty supervision once led to illegal drug searches -- "booming doors," it was called -- there is today at least one sergeant at every drug arrest.
Each platoon has a full-time lieutenant.
New narcotics strategies are in place, and arrests are up 24 percent in the last four months, compared with the same period last year.


JUDGES APPOINT NEW PROSECUTOR FOR WHITEWATER
A Federal appeals panel today replaced the independent counsel for the Whitewater inquiry, Robert B. Fiske Jr., with Kenneth W. Starr, a former Bush Administration Solicitor General and Federal Appeals Court Judge.
The panel, a special court appointed by Chief Justice William H. Rehnquist, rejected a request by Attorney General Janet Reno that it reappoint Mr.
Fiske, whom she originally chose in January.
In a brief opinion, the panel said it would be inconsistent with the independent-counsel law for the Clinton Administration to play a part in the selection of the person to head the investigation.


Hallan Cemi Journal; At Dig, a Race Against Water and War
It is a hot summer morning in the brown foothills of the Taurus Mountains, and Hallan Cemi is probably as busy as it has been in 10,000 years.
Kurdish workers tear the earth with picks and shovels.
Others kneel in excavation trenches, using trowels and brushes to uncover what remains of the earliest known village in southeastern Anatolia.


Bond Prices Off Sharply On Jobs Data
Prices of Treasury securities tumbled yesterday after the monthly employment numbers for July showed the economy adding jobs at a fast pace, once again raising investor fears of inflation.
And the data could turn out to be a pivotal factor if the Fed decides to raise rates again.
The Labor Department reported that last month's payrolls rose a higher-than-expected 259,000, with hourly earnings rebounding by 4 cents, to $11.12, also higher than expected.
The average workweek was unchanged and the unemployment rate edged higher, to 6.1 percent.


United Wisconsin Services Inc.(UWZ,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Public Service Co. of N.C.  (PSNC,NMS) reports earnings for 12mo to June 30


White House Counsel Criticizes Altman
As Congress closed its first round of Whitewater hearings, the White House counsel, Lloyd N. Cutler, said today that a ranking Administration official, Roger C. Altman, was wrong to have consulted the White House in February on whether to step aside from any involvement in the case.
Mr.
Cutler also said the White House would soon issue new guidelines governing when Federal agencies might inform the White House about their legal investigations -- the kind of "heads up" that touched off eight days of hearings in the House and Senate.


POP
Madder Rose Reaches Across the Spectrum of Rock  Mercury Lounge


Pinkerton Security &amp; Investigation Services reports earnings for Qtr to June 17


INSIDE
Health Bills and Tactics
As lawmakers plotted strategies to alter or kill House and Senate health care bills, the scores of Congressional aides who actually wrote the bills continued to fine-tune and reinvent their concoctions.
Articles, page 7.
Hard Choices on Rwanda
Relief organizations must decide whether to encourage Rwandan refugees to stay in the camps or prod them to go home.
Page 3.
A Lesson in Investing
Millions of Chinese have learned how quickly stock prices can climb and fall, and climb again.
Page 33.


Corrections
A review yesterday of a concert by Bonnie Raitt at Radio City Music Hall on Wednesday misidentified Linda Ronstadt's record producer in the mid-1970's in some copies.
He was Peter Asher, not Peter Allen.


Sports of The Times; Toronto, Dream Team, The World
MAPLE LEAF GARDENS never rocked liked this not during summer at least.
On the first day of the world basketball championships here Thursday, Greek fans, despite being a fraction of the 7,000 in attendance, made the arena sound as if it were sold out as Greece battled Germany.
The cheering began before Greece even took the court, just after intermission of Puerto Rico's game with Egypt.
Fans blew horns and whistles.
One group at courtside boldly unfurled a banner that proclaimed "There Is Only One Macedonia -- the Greek Macedonia."


After Routing China, U.S. Can Feel Dreamy
The combination of more effort and less opposition gave the United States more of a Dream Team look tonight as it blistered China, 132-77, for its second victory in two world championships games.
Things got better for Coach Don Nelson's team after Shawn Kemp began the game by hitting the back rim on an uncontested dunk, sending the ball deep into the crowd.
Stung by the 100 points Spain scored against their porous defensive pressure on Thursday night, the Americans collected 18 steals and blew China out with a 26-5 flourish at the end of the half.


Kukoc Preparing to Take Center Stage
When he emerged from the locker room after overwhelming South Korea in the name of Croatia, Toni Kukoc proceeded to talk about becoming the highest-paid player in the history of the Chicago Bulls.
He acknowledged today that he has agreed to terms on a six-year contract, reportedly for $26 million, which is more Bulls money than Michael Jordan ever earned, and more than Scottie Pippen currently receives.
There is an irony to this that makes Kukoc shake his head, as if in disbelief.
Two years ago this month in Barcelona, Spain, he found himself squeezed into a Jordan-Pippen sandwich, as those two original Dream Teamers declared war on the player their Chicago general manager, Jerry Krause, seemed to be pursuing to the ends of the earth.


Nascar Beats the Heavy Brickyard Traffic
In the end, stock car racing's best drivers defended their turf, even if it was foreign ground for them.
The final 23 spots in the 43-car lineup for the inaugural Brickyard 400 were filled today.
And even though Saturday's race is the first stock car race ever at the Indianapolis Motor Speedway, only A. J. Foyt and Danny Sullivan, a couple of Indy 500 winners, were able to prevent the regular Winston Cup tour drivers from filling out the lineup.


For Ruling Party of Mexico, South Is No Longer So Solid
A hint of the raw political power that has helped keep the same party in control of Mexico for 65 years was reflected in the face of the small woman shouting at the sun as a campaign rally got under way near here.
"Long live the PRI!" she screamed, using the acronym of the governing Institutional Revolutionary Party.
"We are PRI-istas all!"


Moog Inc.(MOG.B,A) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


METRO DIGEST
IN TARNISHED PRECINCT, LIFE HAS CHANGED In the four months since 12 officers in the 30th Precinct in Harlem were taken away in handcuffs for dealing cocaine and protecting drug dealers, the station house has been painted, the lighting improved.
Officers now wear their shoes shined like Marine boots and their hair as short as golf course fairways.
Where spotty supervision once led to illegal drug searches, today there is at least one sergeant at every drug arrest.
Life in the precinct has changed, and many say it is for the better.
Page 1.
EDUCATION BILL PASSES, THEN LANGUISHES It was a measure to require large cities to spend about the same amount of local money on schools as they had in previous years.
Lawmakers publicly endorsed it (good for education), privately denounced it (badly drafted) and ultimately passed the bill.
Now it sits in legislative limbo.
Lawmakers don't want to send the bill to Governor Cuomo, Mr.
Cuomo hasn't asked for it, and the reasons say much about Albany's partisan politics in an election year.
Page 1.
NEW YORK CITY  ZODIAC KILLER CASES CLAIMED IN A LETTER Four years after an elusive gunman who called himself Zodiac claimed to have carried out four shootings that were never solved, the New York City Police Department has started a new investigation in response to a letter taking responsibility for five more attacks.
Senior police officials said they were taking the latest claims seriously.
Page 23.
HEALER, 93, RETIRES?
NOT QUITE Last week, with tears rolling down his cheeks, Dr.
Matthew Warpick slid the key into the lock and closed his West Harlem office.
A man who had devoted his life to a neighborhood's well-being was outwitted by a social illness that defied even his healing touch.
"I was determined to stay there until I drew my last breath," he said.
"But after I saw the shootings and holdups and my office was trashed, I decided this was the end." Well, almost.
About New York, page 23.
REGION  FORCE HUNTS SUFFOLK SNIPER Using helicopters, undercover officers and stepped-up patrols, the Suffolk County police continued searching for a sniper who attacked three times in 12 days, killing one person and critically injuring another.
"Right now this is the top priority of the department, and everyone is involved," said the Chief of Patrol, Edwin Michel.
Page 24.
AN ESCAPE FROM CITY STREETS Opening her journal, Natasha Mack cannot help feeling relief.
Not because of what's written inside, but because of what the words signify: a mellower outlook.
"In New York, most of my writing is of rage," said Ms.
Mack, 16, who is from the South Bronx.
"But here I'm actually able to think about what I'm writing." Since Monday, she has been taking part in a reading and writing camp in New Jersey.
Page 24.
WHITMAN URGES NOTICE ON SEX OFFENDERS Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman of New Jersey joined a growing chorus of elected officials in demanding new laws requiring that parents be notified when a convicted sex offender moves into a community.
Mrs.
Whitman said that she had asked Deborah T. Poritz, the state Attorney General, to examine laws in other states that require such notification.
Page 24.
MOTHER SAYS TEEN-AGER ADMITTED KILLING His mother had a feeling that Eric Smith knew something about the slaying of a 4-year-old boy, so she peppered him with questions.
Out of the blue, Tammy Smith testified, her son "turned to me and said he did it." Page 22.


Moore Medical Corp.(MMD,A) reports earnings for Qtr to July 2


Bearings Inc.(BER,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Shaw Indus reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Simon to Buy $1 Billion Portfolio From Equitable
Simon Property Group Inc., one of the country's largest real estate investment trusts, has announced it will buy a portfolio of 19 regional shopping malls and a management company from the real estate arm of Equitable Companies Inc. for $1 billion.
The deal would be one of the largest acquisitions ever made by a listed property trust.
It would give Simon an interest in a total of 133 properties with more than 67 million square feet of retail space in 32 states.


No. 2 Ivanisevic Isn't Aiming for No. 1
He may be the second-ranked tennis player in the world, but GORAN IVANISEVIC says he does not have his sights on PETE SAMPRAS's top-ranking just yet.
"No. 1 is not so important," the 6-foot, 4-inch left-hander said yesterday via teleconference from Kitzbuhel, Austria, where as the top seed he defeated Fernando Meligeni, 6-1,6-4, to reach the semifinals of the EA Generali Open.
"Before I become No. 1, I would like to win one Grand Slam." The next Grand Slam event is the United States Open, where Ivanisevic has never advanced past the fourth round.
He was a semifinalist at last year's Hamlet Cup on Long Island, where he will again prepare for the Open.
The Hamlet Cup runs from Aug. 22-28.


Flowers Industries Inc.(FLO,N) reports earnings for Qtr to July 2


Health Care Developments
YESTERDAY  Although they dislike much of the measure, liberals are coalescing behind a strategy of defending the health insurance legislation put forward by the Senate majority leader, George J. Mitchell, in hopes that a bill more to their liking will emerge from a House-Senate conference.


Sterling Electronics Corp.(SEC,A) reports earnings for Qtr to July 2


CHRONICLE
Notes from a continuing honeymoon: MICHAEL JACKSON and his bride, LISA MARIE PRESLEY-JACKSON, arrived in Budapest last evening on their first foray out of New York and the Trump Tower since confirming earlier this week that they had been married.
In a telephone conversation from Budapest yesterday, Lee Solters, Mr.
Jackson's publicist, said crowds had started gathering around the Hotel Kempinski at about 8 A.M.


In Business: Protecting Personal Assets
A business structure that is taking the accounting profession by storm is also being recommended for a host of businesses, from mom-and-pop stores to doctors' offices to real estate ventures.
Called a limited liability company or limited liability partnership, the structure assures owners or partners that their personal assets will be protected if their businesses are sued.
Only the assets of their businesses can be placed at risk.


Grey Advertising Inc.(GREY,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Tennant Co.(TANT,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Rwandan Hospital Overwhelmed
In one of the best-equipped and most modern hospitals in Africa, the doctors at King Faisal Hospital Center here draw a neat circled "X" on a map of Kigali to mark the spot where each victim of a land-mine explosion was wounded.
Under the crush of a caseload averaging 100 patients, Dr.
Fernando Olinto at midday had not found the time to record the day's incidents.


CHRONICLE
VAN CLIBURN remarked at a wake for his mother on Thursday that he had had a "mystical experience" on stage half a continent away the day before she died.
At the wake for Rildia Bee O'Bryan Cliburn in Fort Worth, the pianist described having an overwhelming feeling about his mother as he walked on stage at the Metropolitan Opera House in New York on Tuesday, The Associated Press reported.
She had suffered a stroke five days earlier.


CHRONICLE
Nine civic, political and labor leaders are to receive the Presidential Medal of Freedom, the nation's highest civilian award, from President Clinton on Monday at ceremonies in the White House.


CLASSICAL MUSIC
Rossini, Mozart, Viotti By Mostly Mozart Ensemble  Avery Fisher Hall


Beliefs
In the spring, a book called "Before the Shooting Begins" took up the question of whether democracy could survive the kind of apparently intractable differences that divide Americans over abortion.
At the time, the title seemed alarmist.
Now, a week after an abortion doctor and his 74-year-old security escort were shot to death in Pensacola, Fla., it seems prophetic.
The author, James Davison Hunter, a sociologist at the University of Virginia, continues what he began in "Culture Wars" (Basic Books, 1991), an examination of the escalation of rhetoric by contending advocacy groups.


NPC Intl reports earnings for Qtr to June 28


Modifying Mr. Mozart So He'll Feel at Home In the New Salzburg
On paper, the new production of Mozart's "Don Giovanni" here at the Salzburg Festival looked like another intriguing attempt by Gerard Mortier to shape a new artistic culture for this tradition-minded town: a staging of Mozart's greatest opera by Patrice Chereau, the same Mr.
Chereau who in 1976 radically transformed Wagner's "Ring" for Bayreuth.
What could be more provocative?
Mozart, after all, is the symbolic heart of this festival, Salzburg's reigning son.
His visage is wrapped around chocolates and peers out from lingerie displays as well as from concert hall posters.
When the festival was begun in the 1920's, it was meant to be Salzburg's answer to Bayreuth, replacing Wagner with Mozart, creating a mythic marriage between Austrian music, religion and the life of the people in this beautiful city of Baroque churches.


First Site Called Off-Limits
Officials of Sullivan County, in upstate New York, urged people yesterday to stay away from the site of the original Woodstock festival, Max Yasgur's Farm in Bethel, next weekend.


Noma Indus reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Man in the News -- THE WHITEWATER INQUIRY: THE COUNSEL; A Prosecutor Overnight -- Kenneth Winston Starr
Few Democrats or Republicans who have worked with Kenneth W. Starr expressed any doubt today that he would be a fair and thoughtful prosecutor in the Whitewater case.
But several voiced surprise at his selection because his new role is a decided departure in a distinguished career: his first time ever as a prosecutor at any level.
A respected Washington insider and several times a contender for a nomination to the Supreme Court under Republican Presidents, Mr.
Starr carries a reputation as a soft-spoken, even-tempered professional whose work is marked by thoroughness.


Health Systems International Inc.(HQ,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Echo Bay Mines Ltd. (ECO,A) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Waldheim Knighted by Pope, Drawing Protests From Israel
Pope John Paul II has drawn Jewish and Israeli outrage by conferring a papal knighthood on the former Austrian President, Kurt Waldheim, who has been accused by the United States Justice Department of serving with a German Army unit that committed atrocities in the Balkans during the Second World War.
The bestowal of the Order of Pius IX in the Vatican's embassy in Vienna on July 6 seemed a remarkable contrast to efforts at reconciliation between the Vatican and Israel, which established diplomatic relations in June after centuries of animosity between Catholics and Jews.


SNC-Lavalin Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Carter-Wallace Inc.(CAR,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


SkyWest Inc.(SKYW,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


A Warning By F.C.C. On Auction
The Federal Communications Commission's experiment in auctioning off the nation's airwaves took another surprise twist today, as the agency found it necessary to warn recent winners not to renege on their obligation to pay for more than $200 million worth of licenses for interactive television.
The F.C.C., responding to a potential bidder revolt, told the dozens of auction winners that if their 10 percent down payments were not received by the deadline on Monday the commission would impose financial penalties.
The F.C.C. issued its warning after a winner of 20 regional licenses worth $40 million sought a 60-day extension of the deadline and faxed a letter to other winners urging them to seek similar extensions.


Kodak Hasn't Cut All Ties to Tobacco Industry
To the Editor:
A July 23 correction on questions raised by New York City pension system trustees about investments in tobacco-related stocks implies the Eastman Kodak Company is no longer connected to the tobacco industry.


Jets Show Flashes of Improvement but Are Dashed by Turnovers
The plays had all worked so wonderfully well in practice: the scrambling for the loose ball, the perfectly executed field goal operation, the on-target passes by Boomer Esiason, the leaping deflections by the 5-foot-9-inch top draft pick, Aaron Glenn.
The Jets made a mess of things tonight, though, as they opened their exhibition season with the rookie coach Pete Carroll.
They were defeated, 26-13, by the Lions.


Minnesota Man Buys the Timberwolves
The Minnesota Timberwolves announced yesterday that the team was being sold to GLEN TAYLOR, 53, a businessman from Mankato, Minn., whose estimated wealth is $400 million.
The sale is pending National Basketball Association approval, but Commissioner DAVID STERN said in a statement, "We're pleased that an agreement has been made for the Timberwolves to be sold and kept in Minnesota." The team was sold last spring to a Louisiana group planning to move the club to New Orleans, but the league refused to approve the deal. (AP)


Correction
A letter Aug. 1 by George R. Allen on the 1944 anti-Hitler plot misidentified the writer.
He was a sergeant in the 101st Airborne Division's counterintelligence corps.


Saberhagen Shows He's Worth an Award
Bret Saberhagen felt alone, no longer in control of the game.
He clenched his teeth and grabbed a beverage.
With with knots welling in his stomach, Saberhagen sat in front of the clubhouse television and watched as the Florida Marlins scored five runs in the eighth inning.
A 10-2 Mets lead was shrinking rapidly.
Not to worry.
The Mets always seem to find a way to win a game in which Saberhagen starts.
Last night he was nearly untouchable for five innings -- he left after seven innings, leading 10-2 -- and won his 13th game of the season as the Mets held on for a 10-7 victory at Shea Stadium.


End the Dominican Charade
The last time the United States invaded the island of Hispaniola -- shared by Haiti and the Dominican Republic -- was in 1965.
U.S.
Marines stormed into the Dominican Republic and helped install Joaquin Balaguer after a military coup had unseated his democratically elected but leftist opponent, Juan Bosch.
It was an ill-advised foray, motivated by exaggerated fears of an imminent Communist takeover.
In successive elections Mr.
Balaguer claimed victory amid allegations of fraud.
Now 87 and blind, he has done it again.
It is time to stop the charade.
Last spring Mr.
Balaguer ran a campaign against Jose Francisco Pena Gomez in which he constantly referred to Mr.
Pena Gomez's race (he is black) and his Haitian background and accused him of practicing voodoo.
Mr.
Pena Gomez claimed that 200,000 people were denied the right to vote in the election; Mr.
Balaguer claimed victory by a margin of 22,000-odd votes.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
7.25
7.25
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.50
3.50
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
4.25
4.28
2.96
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.45
4.32
3.02
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.89
4.70
3.18
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.27
7.10
5.84
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.54
7.40
6.53
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.31
8.17
7.23
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.37
6.31
5.73
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Another Work in Progress: Another Mess in Manhattan


Campaign Workers Got Usual Rent Concession
To the Editor:
"Rooms for the Few" (editorial, July 23) is insulting and inaccurate.
I examined the rent rolls and 59 leases entered into by corporations in which William Koeppel has an interest for three buildings on Manhattan's East Side for a 16-month period from January 1993 to April 1994.
Those corporations entered into 48 leases with new tenants that had rent concessions.
The concessions were similar in amount and duration to the 11 apartments rented by 14 campaign workers and public employees.


Bridge
The most brilliant defensive play at the American Contract Bridge League's Summer Nationals in San Diego, which ended last weekend, will very likely prove to be the best of 1994.
It occurred on the diagramed deal from an early round of the Spingold Knockout Team Championship, and the hero was Zia Mahmood, a colorful Pakistani expert who lives in Manhattan but is usually playing bridge somewhere else.
He held the East hand, and defended three no-trump.
North's two-diamond bid at his second turn was "new minor forcing," asking South for information about his major-suit holdings.
West therefore led a diamond, since that was the only suit that had not been genuinely bid.


Yankees Aren't to Blame for State of the Bronx; Giving Time and Money
To the Editor:
"Bombing in the Bronx" (Op-Ed, July 26) attempts to characterize the New York Yankees as uninvolved, uncaring members of our community, who provide no support to our neighborhood and its children.


Denver Goes Back to Basics For Baggage
Frustrated by persistent delays in opening the new Denver International Airport because of a malfunctioning system for moving luggage between planes and terminals, city officials have adopted a low-tech solution to a high-tech problem.
Rather than waiting until the airport's computerized, high-speed network is repaired, Mayor Wellington Webb of Denver said on Thursday that the airport would spend about $50 million to build a conventional luggage system using baggage tractors and carts.


Watsco Inc.(WSO.B,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Brazil Luring Computer Companies
When 25 small computer companies from Silicon Valley in California showed the flag for the first time at Brazil's annual computer fair, their booth was nearly lost in a flood of exhibitors and visitors almost as large as the population of Delaware.
Over four days last month, 623,417 Brazilians paid the equivalent of $10 each to attend what was billed as the world's largest computer show.
Computer-related sales and larger business deals, together worth about $2.5 billion, were concluded at Fenasoft, as the eight-year-old computer fair here is called, underlining the dynamism of Brazil as one of the world's fastest-growing computer markets.


Many Germans Atone For the Holocaust
To the Editor:
Re "Burden of Holocaust" (letter, July 30): My family and I had to leave Germany in 1939 and lost many relatives and friends in concentration camps.
Yet I have returned many times and have noted a contrition for what occurred, perhaps not by all Germans, but by many good people who have become friends and acquaintances.
To realize there are moral people in today's Germany does not play into the hands of Holocaust deniers.
To insist Germany is evil does little for victims or those trying to atone for the abuses of their elders.
FRED A. ROSENBERG  Boston, Aug. 1, 1994


Q&amp;A
Investing for College  Q. Our 23-year-old nanny is saving money to be used in the next four years for her education.
Would a conservative stock mutual fund be good, or would another type of investment be better?
LISA G. MATTHEWS, Darien, Conn.
A.
Each year, the stock market may go down, as well as up.
At present, prices of stocks are high relative to dividends, and interest rates have been moving up.
So people who will need money in a short time would be safer choosing investments with less risk than stocks.
If your nanny will need money in each of the next four years, she should predict her annual cash flow and invest so that money will be available as required to pay tuition bills and other costs.
"Invest your money to earn the highest interest for the longest time with little or no risk to principal," advised Madeline I. Noveck, president of Novos Planning Associates.
"For example, money needed in one to three years might be invested in Treasury bills or short-term target maturity funds. For the money needed in four years, you may want to take more risk for the potential of higher return by investing in a conservative stock fund with good performance in down markets or preferably a global asset allocation fund." Earnings Up, Shares Down  Q. Why does a stock's price decline when a company does well in a quarter, but its reported earnings fall below analysts' predictions?
DANIEL S. JACOBY, East Williston, L.I.
A.
The price of a stock typically reflects investors' perceptions both about the company's immediate prospects and long-term potential.
Earnings that are positive, but below the consensus of analysts' estimates, are disappointing.
Some investors who have read news reports that earnings fell below forecasts may decide to shed their shares, as may some clients of brokerage houses whose analysts have reduced their ratings on the stock.
Such selling, of course, depresses the stock price.
"Below-estimate earnings can cause price weakness because the anticipated earnings are probably built into the stock price," said Robert H. Stovall, president of Stovall/Twenty-First Advisers.
"Investors worry about additional disappointments."  Limitations on I.R.A.'s  Q. Can I contribute $2,000 to my I.R.A. if I am not working and receive income only from Social Security and investments?
Can I deduct my contribution from my income for tax purposes?
BERNARD SCHER, Margate, Fla.
A.
A taxpayer's annual contribution to an individual retirement account can be made only from earned income.
The contribution is limited to the amount earned or $2,000, whichever is less.
"Social Security and investment income do not qualify as earned income," said Martin Leventhal, head of a New York accounting firm bearing his name.
"Hence, no I.R.A. contribution, whether deductible or nondeductible, may be based upon income from those sources."


New Jersey's Jobless Rate Fell in July
New Jersey's unemployment rate dropped to 6.4 percent in July from 7.1 in June, while the rates in nearby states and for the nation were rising, the Labor Department reported today.
The national unemployment rate rose to 6.1 percent from 6 percent in June.
The rate in New York State edged up to 7.1 percent from 7 percent, while Pennsylvania's rate rose to 6.5 percent from 5.9 percent.


OM Group Inc.(OMGI,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Some Republicans May Break Impasse on Anti-Crime Bill
As President Clinton lashed out at the National Rifle Association for blocking the crime bill, a handful of Republicans appeared poised today to defy their party and help break the logjam that has kept the bill from moving to the House floor.
In addition, one member of Congress indicated that the Democratic leadership and some swing members were discussing the sort of low-level favors that are often made to win votes.


QUNO Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 26


A SURGE IN HIRING CHEERS PRESIDENT BUT ROILS MARKETS
The economy continued to produce jobs at a brisk pace in July, the Government said today, prompting drops in financial markets as investors expressed fear that the Federal Reserve might raise interest rates again soon to prevent any increase in inflation.
Employment grew by 259,000 jobs last month while average hourly earnings rose 4 cents, to $11.12, the Labor Department announced.
President Clinton welcomed the news, saying that nonfarm employment had now risen by 4.1 million jobs since he took office, half of the 8 million jobs that he promised to create during his first term.


Scholastic Corp.(SCHL,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article yesterday about Congressional action on health care legislation misstated the party affiliation of Senator Frank R. Lautenberg of New Jersey in some editions.
He is a Democrat.


Corrections
An obituary on Tuesday about Paul Roebling, 60, a stage, film and television actor, omitted a survivor.
She is his mother, Mary G. Roebling, of Trenton.


After Killings, Abortions Are Resumed In Pensacola
Under the watch of armed Federal marshals and the escort of a team of female volunteers, 34 women received abortions today at a Pensacola clinic.
The abortions were the first at either of Pensacola's two licensed abortion clinics since one week ago, when an abortion doctor and his escort were fatally shot.


An Even More Independent Counsel
The U.S.
Court of Appeals in Washington has shown care and responsibility in its decision to appoint a new independent counsel to complete the Whitewater criminal investigation.
The decision is in no way a reflection on the current investigation.
A new team is simply the best way to assure everyone that the investigation will not only be wholly independent of the White House, it will appear wholly independent as well.
The court's choice of Kenneth Starr, a Republican former judge and Solicitor General, as the independent counsel is safe and nonpartisan.
Though not known for criminal law work, Mr.
Starr is a seasoned courtroom lawyer who can be expected to move easily to replace Robert Fiske at the head of the probe.


Turning a Home Into a Summer Rental
Jeanette Dupee, a real estate saleswoman and a divorced mother of two, owns a 5-bedroom, 3-bath home with a pool in Water Mill, a resort community on the east end of Long Island.
Eights years ago, when her children were grown, she decided to rent the house out for the summer season and has been doing so ever since.
To prepare for her annual move, Ms.
Dupee cleans out closets and moves some personal belongings to a safe place.


Observer; It's a Clipping Penalty
Just when it looked as if Los Angeles had cinched the national nuttiness championship, along comes dear old Dixie titillating American lust for the clownish with an uproar about whether a female skull may be shaved bare as a brass doorknob.
Naturally a law court has already had to intervene.
Where would American farce be without the courts?
If he had had a firmer grasp on the American character Stephen Sondheim would have titled his famous ballad "Send In the Judges."


The Yankee Bats Are Doing the Striking, and Hard
The process has become routine, numbing and embarrassing to the opposition.
Whenever the Yankees rush to the plate lately, there are visions of destruction in their eyes.
All opponents can do is play deep, pray for some strikes and maybe wear batting helmets on the field.
There are no more surprises when the Yankees batter pitchers.
They scored eight runs in the fourth inning tonight and breezed to a 12-3 rout of the Twins at the Metrodome.


Charter MedicalCorp.(CMD,A) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Woodstock: The Fortress; In '69, Rules Were Few; In '94, They May Outnumber Fans
For at least a few days next week, the sixth-largest city in New York will be a rural fortress ringed by nine miles of chain-link fence, secured by 1,200 security guards and governed by dozens of restrictions.
Those who want to get in will have to go through metal detectors, and the National Guard will be standing by in case there is trouble.
This is Woodstock '94 -- the three-day commemorative festival of the music, mud and, of course, the mythology created at the original Woodstock in 1969.


ShowBiz Pizza Time Inc.(SHBZ,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to July 1


America's Tinkers
To the Editor:
Socially deprived populations similar to Ireland's "tinkers" (news article, July 21) are found in the United States.
Among them are the poor white "river rats" living along the Mississippi, trailer park people of the southern Appalachians and the infamous "Jukes" and "Kallikaks," whose poverty, social dysfunction and mental retardation were ascribed to inbreeding.
While the causes are complex, one part is a communal expression of fetal alcohol syndrome.
With opportunity, but without alcohol, their lives would change.
ROBERT KARP, M.D.
Assoc.
Prof. of Clinical Pediatrics Children's Medical Center, SUNY Brooklyn, July 21, 1994


RESULTS PLUS
GOLF  Azinger Returns From Cancer With a 76  In perhaps the most memorable round of his life, Paul Azinger shot a 76 yesterday to mark his return to golf after a nine-month bout with cancer.
That Azinger was 10 shots out of the lead held by Fred Funk's 66 in the Buick Open in Grand Blanc, Mich., mattered not at all to the gallery that cheered him as he started play and stood to applaud at the 18th hole as he made the turn to the front nine.
"Physically, I'm tired and emotionally I'm tapped out," Azinger said.
"After that big ovation at the start, I just walked around in a bit of a haze for a while. I think tomorrow will probably be a little bit easier." Pavin and Russ Cochran shared second at 68. (AP) King Holds Lead Despite Triple Bogey: Betsy King survived a disastrous triple-bogey 7 on the 12th hole and raw weather yesterday to retain a one-stroke lead after two rounds of the McCall's L.P.G.A.
Classic in Stratton Mountain, Vt.
Nancy Ramsbottom birdied her final hole for a second 69 and 138. (AP) PRO FOOTBALL  Faulk Off and Running for the Colts  The rookie running back Marshall Faulk set up two first-half field goals, and Leonard Humphries returned a pass interception 52 yards for a touchdown in the fourth quarter as the Indianapolis Colts beat the Seattle Seahawks, 13-9, last night in Indianapolis.
Faulk, the second player taken in the National Football League draft last spring, rushed for 38 yards on 15 carries. (AP) Patriots Take the Handoff: Taking advantage of an opponent as sloppy as the rainy weather, the New England Patriots opened their preseason with a 24-6 romp over the fumbling New Orleans Saints in Foxboro, Mass.
The Patriots scored all their points on short drives following New Orleans turnovers.
The Saints fumbled four times and were intercepted twice. (AP) HORSE RACING  Dispute Wins in Her Return  Dispute, one of the country's prize fillies of 1993, made a smashing comeback to the races yesterday after four months on the sideline as she outran three rivals by six lengths at Saratoga Race Course.
The 4-year-old daughter of Danzig didn't get to run on the grass as planned by her trainer, Shug McGaughey, since rains forced all the turf races onto the dirt track, causing many scratches.
In fact, the field of 12 was reduced to just 4.
But Jerry Bailey led Dispute to an easy victory as she ran the mile and an eighth in 1:523/5 as the 1-5 favorite, finishing a half-dozen lengths ahead of Avie's Daisy.
EMPIRE STATE GAMES  Three Female Gold Medalists Repeat  Three reigning track and field gold medalists held onto their medals at the 1994 Empire State Games at Syracuse yesterday.
Sprinter Monique Coleman of A. P. Randolph in New York City repeated in the scholastic women's 200-meter dash and Sharline White and Zakiah Modeste, both of Hudson Valley, won a second straight gold in the open women's triple jump and scholastic women's long jump.
EQUESTRIAN  American Woman Wins 100-Mile Test  Valerie Kanavy of Fort Valley, Va., won the gold medal in the 100-mile test yesterday at the world equestrian games in the Hague.
Kanavy rode her 12-year-old Arabian, Pieraz, through the finish line in 6 hours 6 minutes 56 seconds.
The silver went to Dennis Pesce of France, slightly less than six minutes behind Kanavy.
GOLDEN HOOPS TOURNAMENT  Marbury Leads Gauchos to Crown  Point guard Stephon Marbury had 22 points and 8 assists in 26 minutes as the Bronx Gauchos defeated Westchester's Young Life/Cardinal Sheehan, 107-65, last night in the title game at Columbia University.
Gary Saunders of the Gauchos also had 22 points.
Marbury was named the tournament's most valuable player.


Sister Sues Henderson, Charging Rape
RICKEY HENDERSON's half sister has filed suit in Oakland saying that he regularly raped her over a two- or three-year period beginning in the mid-1970's when she was 12 and he was 16.
Henderson, 35, baseball's leader in career stolen bases and a member of the Oakland Athletics, strongly denied the allegations contained in court papers filed on Thursday in Alameda County Superior Court by PAULA HENDERSON, 31, seeking unspecified money damages and alleging that in 1975, when she was 12, Henderson routinely climbed into her bed and raped her.
Her lawyer, DAN HOROWITZ, said yesterday that his client would withdraw the civil suit if criminal charges are filed.
"She really wants him punished," he said.
Criminal prosecution is unlikely: the one-year criminal statute of limitations may have expired.
Although Paula Henderson says she has always known of the sexual assaults, Horowitz said, it was not until a year or so go, when she became pregnant, that she first became aware of the full harm the incidents had caused her.
Under California's three-year statute of limitations in civil cases, Horowitz said, the clock begins with the onset of awareness.


Dixie Yarns Inc.(DXYN,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to July 2


Spelling Entertainment Group Inc.(SP,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Rwanda Camps: Long-Term Refuge?
Now that the initial shock of the relief disaster of the Rwandan refugees has subsided, international organizations find themselves faced with two unpalatable choices over the future of the 900,000 people camped on the border here.
The refugees can be encouraged to dig in and become entrenched in the sordid camps, where military and civilian resources have been dispatched to keep the refugees afloat.
Or they can be prodded, but not pushed, to go home.
In recent days, the preference has become to prepare for the refugees to stay for the long haul, even though this was not the first choice and the implications are unappealing.
Already, refugee officials are wondering if the Rwandan refugees will become a prolonged presence, like the 13 years the Cambodians stayed on the Thai border or the 30 years the Eritreans camped in the Sudan. 'Genuine Fear' of Returning
"In the beginning of the cholera epidemic, I thought the refugees would get up and go home," said Mike McDonagh, an experienced hand in refugee crises in Africa and Asia and the director of the relief agency Irish Concern.
"I thought this was the best thing. But I think there is a genuine fear of going back."


A Father's Troubled Odyssey From Belarus to His Suicide
On the afternoon of July 26, a rumpled man and an exhausted young girl speaking only Russian appeared at the offices of a Jewish aid agency in Brooklyn with a tale of despair.
The man said that he and his 7-year-old daughter had arrived three days earlier from Minsk, Belarus, where he was an architect.
The people who had invited them to the United States had not shown up at the airport, he told counselors at the agency, the Jewish Community House of Bensonhurst.


Mapco Inc.(MDA,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Rostenkowski Files a Broad Challenge to His Indictment
Lawyers for Representative Dan Rostenkowski fired the opening salvo in his defense today, asking a Federal district judge here to throw out the indictment that charges him with defrauding the Government of more than half a million dollars.
In motions filed with the court, the lawyers contended that the indictment accused him of offenses that were nothing more than violations of House rules and that it was therefore decisively flawed.


Nellcor Inc.(NELL,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to July 3


Norcen Energy Resources reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


A Masterly Artist Comes Into His Own
There hasn't been a jazz musician alive as undeservedly ignored as the saxophonist and composer Jimmy Heath, at least until recently.
It wasn't for lack of admiration from his peers, or even from critics; the jazz industry hadn't figured out what to do with him, and the support system for orchestral jazz, which is slowly coming into place, hadn't been set up yet.
In 1991, Mr.
Heath's career seemingly began all over again with a fine concert by the American Jazz Orchestra that brought his considerable abilities to center stage.
Other big-band dates followed, as well as a recording, "Little Man Big Band" (Verve), that garnered a few Grammy nominations, and the reissue of classic albums he made for the Riverside label.
Mr.
Heath, 67 years old and a college professor, has become one of jazz's major figures, albeit without a record contract.


Prince Valiant, Virtue and Page Boy Unruffled in 3,000 Tales
King Arthur knew Prince Valiant was a knight beyond reproach.
But could he have predicted the warrior with the silly-looking haircut would last 3,000 episodes?
Tomorrow Val will unsheath the Singing Sword, flex his muscles and fight the good fight, as he has every Sunday since Feb. 13, 1937, when his creator, Harold Foster, gambled that Americans would want to follow the adventures of a young knight in the Dark Ages.
He was right.
Today the strip appears in 350 newspapers in 18 countries, reaching an audience that its syndicator, King Features, estimates at 44 million.


U.S. Hits Bosnian Serb Target in Air Raid
American fighter aircraft attacked a Bosnian Serb anti-tank vehicle near Sarajevo tonight, hours after the Serbs tested NATO's resolve by seizing weapons that had been impounded by United Nations troops and attacking a United Nations helicopter.
The United Nations commander in Bosnia, Lieut.
Gen.
Sir Michael Rose, said he had called for the attack because Serbian nationalist forces violated a NATO order prohibiting heavy weapons in a zone around Sarajevo.
This morning Bosnian Serbs seized a T-55 tank, two armored personnel carriers and an anti-aircraft gun from a weapons impoundment area in Ilidza, a Serbian-held town north of the Bosnian capital.


Corrections
An article yesterday about Howard Stern's withdrawal from the New York governor's race misidentified the chairman of the state Libertarian Party.
She is Gail Bova, who was chosen to replace Ludwig Vogel at the party's convention in April.


3 Judges With a Mandate
The three-judge panel that threw the Whitewater inquiry into turmoil today by appointing Kenneth W. Starr independent counsel is known in legal circles as a crusty group whose head, David B. Sentelle, has a track record of challenging independent counsels.
Judge Sentelle cast the deciding vote in two separate decisions throwing out the most celebrated convictions won by the Iran-contra independent prosecutor, Lawrence E. Walsh.
They were the convictions of Oliver L. North, the former National Security Council aide, in July 1990, and John M. Poindexter, President Ronald Reagan's former national security adviser, in November 1991.


Scientific-Atlanta (SFA,N) reports earnings for Qtr to July 1


Corrections
A picture caption yesterday about a plan to refurbish Yankee Stadium and its environs described the team's attendance incorrectly.
It has risen slightly, not fallen, from the same time last season.


Santa Fe Energy Resources Inc.(SFR,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Clinton Goal: Avoid a War
The last thing President Clinton wants this week or this month is a war.
Not in Haiti, not in Bosnia, and certainly not in both at the same time -- not while he is struggling to wrest from a recalcitrant Congress a health-care program that will fulfill his campaign promises.
In the minds of Democratic strategists, at least, the political situation comes very close to a matter of life and death: fail on health care, they say, and the President's chances of winning a second term, let alone limiting his party's anticipated losses in the November Congressional elections, will be severely eroded.


NS Group Inc.(NSS,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 25


Robot Falls In Volcano
The eight-legged robot dispatched to explore the inside of an active Alaskan volcano fell on its side Friday with 550 feet still to go in its climb out of the rock-strewn crater, scientists monitoring its progress said.
The mishap, which officials attributed to shifting soil, would probably end the mission of the spider-like machine dubbed Dante II.


With Long Hours and Little Fanfare, Staff Members Created a Health Bill
The ambitious health care bill going soon to the floor of the House of Representatives is called the Gephardt bill, in honor of the majority leader, Richard A. Gephardt of Missouri.
But it is really the work of the Democratic staff of the House Ways and Means Committee.
The staff includes a half-dozen experts on health policy, people who have years of experience analyzing how to regulate health costs, how to pay doctors and hospitals, how to provide care to more people.


Important Dates in the Investigation
October 1993 -- The Resolution Trust Corporation, the agency overseeing the savings and loan bailouts, formally asks the Justice Department to conduct a criminal investigation into Madison Guaranty, a thrift owned by the Clintons' partner in the defunct Whitewater Development Company.
Paula J. Casey, the United States Attorney in Little Rock, Ark., begins investigating Madison.


Important Dates in the Investigation
October 1993 -- The Resolution Trust Corporation, the agency overseeing the savings and loan bailouts, formally asks the Justice Department to conduct a criminal investigation into Madison Guaranty, a thrift owned by the Clintons' partner in the defunct Whitewater Development Company.
Paula J. Casey, the United States Attorney in Little Rock, Ark., begins investigating Madison.


No Resolution of Nuclear Issue in Korea Talks
The United States and North Korea met here today to resume high-level negotiations interrupted by the death of President Kim Il Sung last month, but no breakthrough was reported on the central issue of North Korea's nuclear ambitions.
After eight hours of talks, Robert L. Gallucci, the chief American negotiator, said there was common ground in some areas, like the need to improve bilateral relations, reduce tensions on the Korean Peninsula, bolster security in the region and respect the Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty.


A Nail-Biting Ride in Shanghai
Every few weeks for a year now, Li Shangjing has gathered up his nerve and wandered into the offices of a large brokerage firm in Shanghai to see how much further the stock market has fallen -- and how much more of his life savings have disappeared.
And even now, looking at a glowing video monitor that charted this week's phenomenal recovery on the Shanghai Stock Exchange, Mr.
Li could barely manage a smile.


NATO Bombs Serbs' Vehicle
Hours after Serbs tested NATO by seizing impounded weapons, American planes blasted a Serbian anti-tank vehicle near Sarajevo.
Page 4.


An End Run on GATT
The White House fights to open trade; Congress fights to close it.
Or at least that's the way it has been for the last half a century -- and the way it was when the Clinton Administration did battle to win passage of the North American Free Trade Agreement last year.
But to the surprise and anguish of many who wish to bring down trade barriers, the White House is doing little to fight protectionist provisions in the legislation that must be enacted to underpin the new GATT pact.
Indeed, key Administration players on trade seem bent on including what Gary Hufbauer, an economist at the Institute for International Economics, calls "tools of choice for protectionists" in the bill expected to emerge from a House-Senate conference committee early next week.


Yankees Aren't to Blame for State of the Bronx; On Road to Recovery
To the Editor:
"Bombing in the Bronx" (Op-Ed, July 26) raises an issue that is central to the episode involving Richard Kraft, the Yankees' official whose remarks about area residents resulted in his resignation.
There has been bias against the people of the South Bronx for decades.


A Race Against Rain


COMPANY NEWS
CATERPILLAR INC., Peoria, Ill., the heavy-equipment maker, said its shareholders had approved a 2-for-1 stock split.
ROCKWELL INTERNATIOANAL CORP., Seal Beach, Calif., has been awarded a $4.7 million contract to help Russia modernize its air-traffic management system.
TANDY CORP., Fort Worth, a retailer of consumer elctronics, will sell the assets of its Lika unit, a manufacturer of printed circuit boards, to Viktron L.P. for about $17 million.
TRANSCANADA PIPELINE LTD., Calgary, Alberta, a natural gas transmisson and natural resources concern, andIPL Energy Inc. tentatively agreed to take a 40 percent stake in the $2.4 billion pipeline project being developed by a partnership consisting of Triton Energy Corp., Dallas, affiliates of British Petroleum P.L.C., London, Total S.A., France, and Ecopetrol, Colombia.


Time for U.S. to Sit Down With the New Japan; Socialists? Not Really
To the Editor:
The recently established Socialist-led coalition Government in Japan is not "socialist" at all.
It is important that Americans understand that no fundamental change in the Japanese political system has occurred.


UP AND COMING: Max McCarter; Jim Carrey's Lively Sidekick
THIS IS SAM PECKINPAH territory, the high desert where dusty houses sit low to the ground at the edge of endless dirt roads, and the nearest neighbor is miles away.
It is horse country, coyote country, and Max McCarter revels in it.
It is doubtful whether any other young actor spends more time outdoors, running for the sheer joy of running.
Max, a 5-year-old, 17-pound Jack Russell terrier, earned his role as Jim Carrey's fierce companion in "The Mask" (which was No. 1 at the box office last weekend) because Chuck Russell, the movie's director, found him "the most perky and alive" of the hopefuls he auditioned.


Fashion Statement


Joshua D. Koskoff and Darcy A. Hicks
Darcy Anne Hicks, the daughter of J. Portis Hicks of New York and Julie G. Hicks of Westport, Conn., was married last evening to Joshua David Koskoff, a son of Michael and Rosalind Koskoff of Westport.
Rabbi Burt Aaron Siegel performed the ceremony at the Belle Haven Club in Greenwich, Conn.
Ms.
Hicks, 27, is keeping her name.
She graduated from Smith College and received a master's degree in education from Lesley College.
She teaches the third grade at the King's Highway School in Westport.
Her father is a founding partner of the New York law firm of Boulanger, Hicks, Stein &amp; Churchill.
Her mother is an artist in Westport.


Ideas &amp; Trends: Government Health Insurance; An Idea Whose Time Has Come? It Came in 1965.
OF the many strange experiences in the health care struggle of 1994, several lawmakers have found this to be among the strangest: an angry encounter with an elderly constituent, railing against the idea of government involvement in the health care system, declaring categorically, as one woman did to Representative Louise Slaughter, "I don't want government messing in health insurance."
The elderly are, of course, beneficiaries of a government health insurance program, one of the most popular domestic programs around, signed into law 29 years ago after a long debate on the very question of whether government should be involved in guaranteeing health care to a vast segment of the American people.
Sometimes, a frustrated group of Democratic lawmakers say, it as if the debate over Medicare never happened; how else to explain why it is happening all over again?


Top Woe: Health or Crime
Health care and crime are clearly the priorities on the American public's agenda.
But which ranks first, and which second, depends on how the question is asked, according to the latest poll by Louis Harris &amp; Associates.
When asked to name the "most serious problems facing the country," 46 percent said crime, while 23 percent said health care.
Other problems like drugs, jobs and the economy followed.


Robert E. Frye, Diane Love
Diane Love, a painter, and Robert Emmett Frye, a television producer, were married yesterday at their house in Millerton, N.Y.
Town Justice Sanford Kaplan of Millerton performed the ceremony.
Ms.
Love, who is keeping her name, formerly owned Diane Love Inc., a New York boutique known for its silk flowers.
She graduated from Barnard College.
The bride is the daughter of the late Mr. and Mrs.
George Stewart.


July 31-Aug. 6; Forecast: Elvis Sighted During Baseball Strike
NEXT Friday, three weeks after a pitcher threw a perfect game, two weeks after a shortstop played his 2,000th consecutive game and right in the middle of three sluggers' pursuit of Roger Maris, baseball fans may be reduced to watching Elvis movies and a former basketball player trying to blast his way to a .200 batting average -- in the minors.
That's right.
If Major League players go on strike this week, as they have threatened to, baseball fans face a summer torment: 57 channels and no baseball on.


Colombia's New Leader Vows To Crack Down on Cali Cartel
With Washington worried about Colombia's commitment to keep battling the export of cocaine, President-elect Ernesto Samper vowed today to "pressure the cartel leaders until they surrender or are captured."
"The way Gaviria fought against drug terrorism, my goal is to fight against drug corruption," Mr.
Samper said in an interview a day before his inauguration for a four-year term.
Mr.
Samper was referring to Cesar Gaviria Trujillo, the departing President, who worked closely with the United States to destroy the Medellin cartel.


Donna Kaye and Allen Werter
ALTHOUGH she grew up on Long Island and is only 34, friends describe Donna Francesca Kalinowska Kaye as their favorite Old World Polish grandmother.
Dedicated to preserving the Polish heritage of her parents, she wears babushkas on special occasions, regularly eats cabbage soup for lunch and leads a professional Polish folk-dancing troupe, called Wawel.
On Saturday nights, she is less likely to be out in the club scene than in her tiny West Village apartment studying up on an obscure mazurka, a folk dance, with Polish music blaring from her stereo.
And like many grandmothers, she shops the old-fashioned way, often bargaining fiercely with street vendors in a voice as hoarse and as soulful as Janis Joplin's.


When in Doubt, Try a Few Choice Words
I KNOW just enough of a few other languages to be dangerous.
People overseas have told me my English is very good, since my Spanish-Italian-French is so fractured.
Until recently, I managed to force myself to speak out anyway by thinking the same reassuring thought that gets me through any small humiliations in Manhattan: I'll never see these people again.
But since my last trip to Spain I have a better rule: Don't get lyrical.
Get mad.
The sad part of this story is that I actually entertained fantasies of majoring in language in college.
Thanks to silly crushes on both my Spanish teachers in high school in Arizona, I had gotten amazingly facile at my second language by the age of 18.


How About More Classes for the Money?
To the Editor:
"One Top College's Price Tag: Why So Low, and So High?" (front page, July 27), on Swarthmore, offered a good insight into the finances of the small, elite private colleges.
My daughter attends a similar school with an identical price tag.
It is easy to see where the money goes.


Correction
A letter to the editor on April 10 responding to an article about a report on the CBS news magazine program "Eye to Eye With Connie Chung," about the Behavior Research Institute, a Rhode Island treatment center for autistic people, characterized the relationship between the center and the State of Rhode Island incorrectly.


The World; Mexicans' Dark Motto: In Little We Trust
JUST as the votes were being counted in a hotly contested state election in Yucatan last November, the electricity was mysteriously knocked out in the capital city and large areas of the state.
Officials said it was a mechanical defect, which almost no one believed, and when the lights came back on the long-ruling Institutional Revolutionary Party, the PRI, was ahead.
When the PRI presidential candidate Luis Donaldo Colosio was assassinated in Tijuana in March, so many people doubted the official explanation -- that a deranged gunman had acted alone -- that questions arose over whether the accused assassin held in a central Mexico jail was the same man who had been taken into custody seconds after the shooting.
One had a mustache and one did not.
Officials said the suspect had shaved.


Sociology, Economics and Art Pottery
PROVING that there can be more to a pot than its shape, glaze and function, an exhibition of American art pottery at the Newark Museum provides insights into the sociology and economics of potters and the ceramic industry from 1880 to 1930.
And a display of vessels of contemporary work focuses on the esthetic goals of today's clay artists.
Dull and pedantic?
Decidedly not.
The work is of top quality and surprisingly varied.
The show's title, "American Art Pottery: An Uneasy Evolution," hints at the obstacles faced by Victorian china painters and potters who endeavored to raise the quality and taste of handmade ceramics above the level of industrial products.


Health Care and the Generation Chasm
To the Editor:
M.
L.
Mitchell and Richard Thau worry that younger people will subsidize those who are older if community rating is adopted.
They ignore some fundamental facts.


Woodstock: The Search For Meaning
ONE thing for sure about Woodstock '94: No rock concert in history will attract so many expounders, pundits and plain reporters, all eager to define its meaning with a capital M. Organizers have issued an astonishing 1,200 press credentials and turned away 1,000 others.
"The satellite dishes have already eaten into half of Eco-Village," moaned a festival aide.
The concert, of course, offers a fresh opportunity to look back and see whether the old Frye boots and tie-dyed shirt can be pulled on today, and if not, whether they might fit a younger, allegedly soulless generation.


Votes in Congress
Tally Last Week in Connecticut, New Jersey and New York  Senate
1.
Schools: Vote on an amendment to a bill reauthorizing the Elementary and Secondary School Act for another five years that would cut off Federal money to schools that teach acceptance of homosexuality as a way of life.
Approved 63 to 36, Aug. 1.
2.
Space Station: Vote on an amendment to an appropriation bill that would cut financing for the further development of the space station from the National Aeronautics and Space Administration budget.
Rejected 64 to 36, Aug. 3.
1
2
Connecticut
Dodd (D) . . .
Nay
Nay
Lieberman (D) . . .
Yea
Nay
New Jersey
Bradley (D) . . .
Nay
Yea
Lautenberg (D) . . .
Nay
Yea
New York
D'Amato (R) . . .
Yea
Nay
Moynihan (D) . . .
Nay
Yea


Rent Deregulation of the Wealthy Creeps Forward
TO explain how a certain 51-year-old stockbroker at a downtown investment house came to buy a co-op for $1 million on Madison Avenue last May, it will be necessary to honor his insistence on anonymity.
It seems that he was at the beach on eastern Long Island one day last summer when he heard from a friend in the real-estate business of the state's new high-rent, high-income decontrol law.
The law said that if a regulated rent was at least $2,000 a month as of Oct. 1, 1993, and the income of primary residents in that apartment totaled at least $250,000 a year for two years in a row, the apartment would become deregulated.


Virtual Relationships
To the Editor:
Advertising, public relations and other marketing professionals have long been pioneers in the flexible business relationships described in "Virtual Companies Leave the Manufacturing to Others" (July 17).
But as advances in information technology make it easier to link far-flung consultants, we are losing something.


North by West: Fare From All Over
DOCKS OYSTER BAR AND SEAFOOD GRILL *  (212) 724-5588; 2427 Broadway near 90th Street; $$; all major credit cards


Fresh Air Family and Child Learn Lessons From Each Other
About two weeks ago, Hamisu Ango toted his new fishing equipment to a dock near the Ferry Terminal on Staten Island, where he cast a line into the Upper New York Bay.
No luck.
The lack of success, however, did not diminish his enthusiasm.
"I can see fish in there, like bluefish and bass. I know I'll catch something."
Dion Wixted, 32, of Danbury, Conn., taught Hamisu how to fish, a pastime that has become his passion.
On July 15, this 11-year-old returned to Staten Island a fully equipped angler and very anxious to pursue the sport in New York waters, thanks to gifts from Mr.
Wixted and his wife, Kelley.
"They bought me a fishing rod with a tackle box, weights and hooks and lures and stuff," Hamisu said.
Fishing in New York City?
"The people at the bus stop thought it was funny," said Mrs.
Wixted, who is 30.
"They said, 'Where is he going to fish in New York City?' "
Hamisu has spent two weeks with the Wixteds and their children each summer for the last three years through the Fresh Air Fund's Friendly Towns program.
This summer the fund will send 7,200 children from New York City to stay with volunteer host families in Canada and in 13 states from Maine to Virginia.


A Dog, a Horse, a Dervish and a Human or Two
Lassie  Thomas Guiry, Helen Slater, Jon Tenney Directed by Daniel Petrie PG 95 minutes


Judge Denies North Pistol-Permit Renewal
A Virginia judge has denied Oliver L. North, the state's Republican nominee for the Senate, a permit to carry a concealed weapon "on the ground that the applicant is not of good character."
The judge, James L. Berry of Clarke County Circuit Court, cited Mr.
North's conviction for obstructing Congress during the investigation into the Iran-contra affair, which took place when Mr.
North was on the staff of the National Security Council in the Reagan Administration.
Mr.
North, who lives in Berryville, in Clarke County, succeeded in having the conviction overturned on appeal.


Free Help From Lawyers Helps Tenants Avoid Eviction
LIKE many tenants involved in feuds with their landlords, Vilmarie and Hector Vasquez decided not to pay their $700 rent until long-needed repairs were made in the four-room apartment they share with their two teen-age children here.
Their landlord, Target Realty of Yonkers, responded by serving them with eviction papers.
If it were not for a controversial program begun by Westchester-Putnam Legal Services in White Plains, the Vasquez family, which is on welfare, might by now be homeless, like nearly 3,800 other people in the county.


Late Russian Rally Upends Canada in Championships
Russia 73, Canada 66
Russia outscored Canada by 10-2 in the final 1 minute 35 seconds last night on the way to a 73-66 victory in the world basketball championships in Hamilton, Ontario.
The triumph put the Russians in first place in Pool C of the championships.


Business Diary: July 31 - August 5
THE ECONOMY July Employment Numbers Add Up to Higher Rates Job growth is going up, up and away -- so that the inflation-fighting Fed is likely to act this month to raise interest rates a fifth time this year.
President Clinton was quick to point out that more than four million new jobs -- the number he pledged to produce by the end of this year -- have been created since he took office.
That's all well and good, but he can't take all the credit.
Last spring, the economy proved it sometimes has a life of its own; before the Administration was able to present its ill-fated stimulus package to Congress, payrolls jumped in May.
Labor Secretary Robert Reich warned then not to "put too much weight on a single month's numbers." Last week, he said figures for July are "further proof that job growth is continuing its solid, steady course." In July, the economy created 259,000 new jobs, about 60,000 more than consensus forecasts.
Average hourly earnings rose by 4 cents, to $11.12.
Japan Trade Is a Sticky Situation  Talk about bad timing.
The Clinton Administration has decided it's time to get tough with Japan on trade.
Last week, it formally accused Japan of discriminating against American companies in awarding some contracts.
But the Administration is putting on the gloves amid such dizzying political turmoil in Japan that the Asian target's outline is fuzzy: Japan has had four Prime Ministers in a little more than a year.
A former United States trade official said prodding a decision out of the "collection of ministries" was like "punching a marshmallow." In the process, experts say, the dollar could spill the most blood -- if the United States gets so frustrated it drives down the dollar's value to sell more goods in Japan.
Paul Allen's Gizmo Search  Some Lollapalooza goers are getting more than they bargained for this year.
Besides jamming to their favorite alternative-rock bands and hanging loose in the summer heat, some will likely help determine what will be the next gadget or two appearing on store shelves everywhere.
Last week, Paul Allen -- a software billionaire who cofounded Microsoft and owns Ticketmaster and part of Egghead Software -- flew to Providence, R.I., to check out his $3 million technology exhibition roaming the country with the music fest.
His goal is to discover the next big hit in consumer electronics.
Among the computerized offerings the concertgoers experienced was the "Baby Maker" software program, which lets a couple -- regardless of sex -- combine their images digitally to see what their offspring would look like.
Clinton Wants R-E-S-P-E-C-T  Dissatisfied with the little bit of commendation he's getting for the economy's performance, President Clinton last week held a news conference to sing his own praises.
The White House also brought out backup vocals: eight top economic officials who touted their agencies' successes in the last 18 months.
Commerce Secretary Brown harmonized: "I don't think that the President has gotten the credit that he has deserved." Dog Days of Retail  The Gap made a little money in July.
The Limited lost a little.
But Sears and Woolworth lapped up gains.
"The trend in July is no trend," one retail analyst remarked.
"Sales are really all over the board." Those erratic sales leave few clues about where sales are headed.
The only thread of the retail story is that diversified retailers -- discounters and department stores -- are doing better than stores that simply sell clothing.
Sometimes, much better.
The merchandise group at Sears, Roebuck announced it sold more appliances the last week of July than in any other week in its history.
COMPANIES Upjohn Pays its Probers  Did too!
Did not!
Did too!
Did not!
Whatever happened, Upjohn last week agreed to pay $650,000 to several state investigative agencies.
In New York, the Attorney General said Upjohn violated state laws against deceptive and misleading business practices when, from September 1992 to March 1993, it paid pharmacists $8 every time a patient they consulted switched from one diabetes drug (Micronase, which lost its patent protection two years ago) to another (Glynase, which is still protected).
Upjohn said last week it did nothing wrong in its marketing plan but it would pay eight states -- Arizona, Iowa, Minnesota, Missouri, New York, North Carolina, Texas and Wisconsin -- about $84,000 each for their investigative costs.
Time Out at Nasdaq  For 34 minutes one day last week, Nasdaq trading was interrupted after a squirrel chewed through a power line and the stock trading system's backup power system failed to kick in.
The hapless squirrel can be forgiven.
But can the nation's second-largest stock market?
It has, after all, donned the garb of a technological leader and seduced leading high-tech companies -- Intel and Microsoft -- that look mighty alluring on its arm.
And the outage was only one of three technological breakdowns at Nasdaq since July 14.
Cyanamid Gets the Looks  Not long ago, American Cyanamid's dance card was empty. (Earlier this decade, when the company's focus was on manufacturing chemicals, it was an outcast that watched its stock price slide for two dreadfully long years.) In came a new C.E.O., who in the last 18 months has transformed the concern into a health care and agricultural products company by cutting costs and shedding sorry divisions.
The makeover worked.
Last week, American Home Products presented American Cyanamid with a surprise, $8.5 billion cash takeover offer, causing the company's stock to soar more than 40 percent.
Several more suitors may be lining up.
Securities experts say European drug and chemical concerns like Bayer, Ciba-Geigy, Hoechst and Zenaca could offer even better propositions.
MGM Puts Faith in Vegas  How obsessed are Americans with gambling?
Very, MGM and Primadonna Resorts suggested last week when they bet $300 million on yet another Vegas gambling center. (MGM itself just opened the nation's biggest casino resort there six months ago, at a cost of $1 billion.) The latest casino -- New York-New York -- is also one in a string of projects taking shape while Las Vegas luxuriates in a record summer.
"This is a sign of confidence in the Las Vegas market," said a University of Las Vegas professor, "but this rush-ahead, rush-ahead philosophy is a gamble, and the fact that MGM cut someone else in indicates that they think it is something of a crap shoot, too." What Now for Barry Diller?
It's a done deal -- unless a more generous offer surfaces in the next month.
Barry Diller's QVC, the home shopping channel, is set to be taken over by the cable television giants Tele-Communications Inc. and Comcast.
If a better bid does come along, QVC would pay TCI and Comcast a $55 million breakup fee.
Otherwise, as agreed last week, the cable duo will snare QVC for $2.5 billion.
Ever since Diller joined QVC as chairman about a year and a half ago, he has been seeking a partner.
He also courted Home Shopping Network, Paramount Communications and CBS.
The restless Diller is not expected to stay.
INTERNATIONAL Out of (South) Africa, Still  Jailed, he inspired song and sit-ins.
The personification of how blacks were persecuted under apartheid in South Africa, he was the torch investor activists and students carried to light fires under American companies to divest themselves of operations there.
But now that Nelson Mandela is free and leading his country, he can't get investors' attention.
Last week -- 10 months after he formally invited foreign business to return -- a snapshot of investment activity since April showed more foreign money flowing out than in, despite the fact that advance scouts of Western dough last year promised investment if peace prevailed and Mandela embraced the free market.
Now, potential investors complain about things like a costly labor force and trade barriers.
China Market's Painful Start
When the Chinese Communist Government held its reborn stock market by the feet and slapped its bottom to get it breathing in 1990, China was unprepared for the challenge -- and pains -- the market would bring once it started walking.
While the market created quick fortunes for a handful of investors and hit record highs early last year, it wasn't long before it took a fall.
Recent months brought a near collapse, and when many first-time Chinese investors panicked and sold off shares, they lost their life savings.
Last week, however, the index for the Chinese-only A shares more than doubled.
Some frustrated investors vowed to abandon the market and its vagaries.
And others talked about "winning" back their losses.


'9 Highland Road'
To the Editor:
While reading H. Jack Geiger's review of "9 Highland Road" (July 10), Michael Winerip's book about a home for the mentally ill, I was reminded of my recent visit to the Art Brut museum in Lausanne, Switzerland.
The museum had its genesis in the mind of the French painter Jean Dubuffet.
He wanted to call attention to the sometimes brilliant artistic creations of mentally disturbed people.
He believed that these people, by the very fact of their illness, were unencumbered by societal pressures or expectations, and hence could work with limitless freedom of expression.


Chihuly Glass Brightens Neuberger Lobby Walls
FOR anyone who has yet to discover the precedent-shattering works on the leading edge of "studio glass," a group of blown-glass vessels by Dale Chihuly at the Neuberger Museum could provide a succinct, authoritative introduction.
On view through Sept. 4, they enliven the museum lobby with the distinctive quality of light transmitted through colored glass.
The 10 pieces represent a narrow sampling of Mr.
Chihuly's ambitious output, which most recently has expanded exponentially into a series of dramatic environmental installations.
Nevertheless, this selection, organized by the museum's curatorial staff, identifies some of the major directions and influences of an artist whose flamboyant, overscaled works push the limits of this medium and have earned international acclaim.
Most specifically, the exhibition points up Mr.
Chihuly's proclivity for drawing inspiration from European decorative arts and non-Western vessel traditions, as well as from rocks, shells and other natural forms.


The Newest Moynihan
I DON'T THINK THE AIR-CONDITIONER ADDS MUCH," Daniel Patrick Moynihan says, his long, slim fingers fiddling with the vents of a rental van on the morning after Memorial Day. "I'm going to suggest we turn the air-conditioner off.
It's a beaut-i-ful day.
We don't get many.
We just open the windows, you see, and air comes."
The Moyni-van is rolling out of Binghamton, an old shoemaking city in the Southern Tier of New York State, toward the Democratic State Convention in Buffalo.
The candidate has just held a small rally on the courthouse lawn in front of a bronze statue of Daniel S. Dickinson, the last New Yorker before him to head the lordly Finance Committee of the United States Senate, in 1850.
With that event, Moynihan has formally begun his campaign for a fourth term in an office it once seemed entirely improbable that he would win.


The Beige Days of Summer
The sandman has sprinkled sand over the fashion world.
A whole range of beige and ivory has replaced white as the summer color, easy to mix in a palette of neutral tones like the ecru, caramel, cinnamon, khaki and cafe au lait.
Eight women from Philadelphia, top left, were recently window-shopping on 57th Street dressed in variations of beige.
They said that the color coordination was not pre-planned but that those were the colors available in stores.
The monotony is broken with a mix of tones and textures of linen and cotton, matched with summer shoes and bags.


A Socratic Grilling
THE Socratic method is alive and well at the Bronx High School of Science -- with a twist: The students are asking the questions.
A Bronx Science math teacher, Judith Engel, has developed what she calls Students Questioning Students, in which students ask each other questions based on their algebra and trigonometry schoolwork.
"The students construct their own knowledge," Ms.
Engel said.
"The class lessons aren't like a Shakespearean soliloquy where the teacher talks and the students listen; students are expected to read and explain what they've learned."


After Loss, Carroll Can See A Plus Side
What an upbeat loss.
Asked to grade his maiden effort Friday night, the Jets' rookie coach, Pete Carroll, good-naturedly gave himself a C plus.
That their opening exhibition game was a loss to the Lions, 26-13, at the Silverdome really didn't matter.
In these summer affairs the operative word is progress.
And also discovery, good and bad.
Even Boomer Esiason, technically intercepted twice in the debut of the Jets' new 49er-style offense, brushed off worrying about a sputtering attack.


NEW YORKERS &amp; CO.
Kiss This Times Square Amusement Arcade Goodbye After 40 years in business, one of the last of the Times Square amusement arcades, Playland, has closed.
"It's over," said Stanley Schaffer, an owner, as he packed up Playland's paraphernalia last week.
"We can't relocate. Our license doesn't allow us to move to another location."


Mexico's Drug Fight Lagging, With Graft Given as a Cause
More than a year after the Government vowed to redouble its fight against illegal drugs following the killing of a Roman Catholic Cardinal here by suspected traffickers, American officials and some of their Mexican counterparts say that those efforts have faltered and that the trade is thriving as much as ever.
While Mexican drug-control agencies still trumpet occasional blows to the mafias that smuggle most of Colombia's cocaine into the United States, the violence of the traffickers and their corruption of the authorities have burst back into view, forcing the issue into the campaign for the presidential election on Aug. 21.


Corrections
An answer in the Question and Answer column on July 17 about restrictions on dogs in co-ops misidentified the law that applies to co-ops and condominiums in New York City.
It is part of the administrative code of the City of New York.
It is not a state law, and is not applicable outside the five boroughs.


Inga M. Walter, Bradford Van Siclen
Inga Maria Walter, an associate at the Standard &amp; Poor's Ratings Group in New York, was married yesterday to Bradford Davis Van Siclen, an account officer at Waterhouse Securities in New York.
The Rev.
Michelle Grube, a Methodist minister, performed the nondenominational ceremony at Wilson Memorial Chapel at Ocean Point in East Boothbay, Me.
Mrs.
Van Siclen, 28, graduated from Lehigh University and received an M.B.A. from New York University.
She is the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Ingo Walter of Upper Montclair, N.J.
Her father is the Charles Simon Professor of Applied Financial Economics and the director of the Salomon Center at the Stern School of Business at N.Y.U.


Victory Dream Wins Trot Denied Sire
Valley Victory, who met with so much misfortune five years ago that he never competed in the Hambletonian that he was expected to win, justified his reputation as a top sire in harness racing this afternoon.
Victory Dream, who captured the $1.2 million Hambletonian at the Meadowlands, was one of five horses that were sired by Valley Victory in the field of 10 in the most prestigious event in harness racing .


Leslie Crames, Randall Rainer
Leslie Ann Crames, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Michael J. Crames of Scarsdale, N.Y., was married last evening to Randall Reese Rainer, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert R. Rainer of Baton Rouge, La.
Rabbi Martin Zion officiated at the St.
Regis Hotel in New York.
The Rev.
Stephen Bauman, a United Methodist minister, took part in the ceremony.
The bride, 28, graduated from the University of Vermont and is studying for an M.B.A. at the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill.
Her father is a managing partner and the chairman of the executive committee of the New York law firm of Kaye, Scholer, Fierman, Hays &amp; Handler.
Her mother, Ellie Crames, is a travel consultant in Harrison, N.Y.


Finding a Stallion a Stable in the State
MOTORISTS traveling on Interstate 91 south of Hartford can't help but notice the blue, onion-shaped dome on top of the old Colt armory.
But the statue of a rearing stallion, which crowned the star-spangled dome for more than a century, is there no more.
The Rampant Colt, with a broken spear in its teeth, symbol of Col.
Samuel Colt's gun manufacturing business and Connecticut's industrial age, was taken down four years ago.
Its fate now is uncertain.
In 1990, an art dealer who lives in Litchfield, Peter Tillou, paid $500,000 for the statue.
After attempts to sell it fell through, he loaned it to the Museum of Connecticut History (part of the State Library in Hartford), where it will be on display until the end of the year.
The stallion, Mr.
Tillou said, should really become part of the museum's permanent collection.
And indeed, the museum is trying to raise $700,000 to buy it.
So far, $185,000 in cash donations and pledges have been received, said Richard G. Akeroyd Jr., the State Librarian and a member of the fund-raising committee.


SUNDAY, August 7, 1994; The Divorce Game
More bad news for satirists.
Television, this time in England, continues to mock the efforts of parodists by exceeding all imaginable bounds of taste.
A British company is developing a game show, called "Divorce Me," in which divorcing couples compete to answer typical quiz show questions.
The brilliantly perverse twist is that the contestants vie for things they already own, the winner getting a better divorce settlement.
One supposed plus is that playing the game is cheaper than court.
At the risk of being proven right, might a personal injury game be next, with the title "Sue Me"?


Cruising and Dancing
For sybaritic dance aficionados, American Ballet Theater is offering a Caribbean cruise to St.
Barts accompanied by dancers, March 8 to 11, 1995.
On board the Cunard Sea Goddess, a luxury liner with 50 cabins, will be the company's artistic director, Kevin McKenzie, and six principal dancers -- Julie Kent, Susan Jaffe, Cynthia Harvey, Guilluame Graffin, Gil Boggs and Victor Barbee.
Besides meals and unlimited caviar and champagne, activities include stretch classes, demonstrations and dancing with the performers after dinner.
The cruise costs $3,500 a person ($1,500 tax deductible), including air fare from New York, with a 10 percent discount for bookings before Sept. 1.
Call Annie Matson at (212) 477-3030.


Lisa F. Gursky, Jerome D. Sorkin
Lisa Francine Gursky, a daughter of Leonard and Sheila Gursky of East Brunswick, N.J., was married last evening to Jerome Daniel Sorkin, a son of Marshall Sorkin of Cranbury, N.J., and the late Esther Sorkin.
Rabbi Eric Milgrim performed the ceremony at the Livingston (N.J.) Country Club.
The bride, 28, who will be known as Lisa Gursky Sorkin, is studying for a law degree at Yale University.
She graduated from the University of Michigan, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa.


Residential Resales
In the following reports, the "listed at" price is the asking price when negotiations began that ended in the sale.
Time on market is from most recent listing to contract.
MANHATTAN
CHELSEA  $229,000
114 West 27th Street  1,600-sq.-ft. open-space co-op in a loft building; elevator, 11 1/2-ft. ceilings; maintenance $642, 73% tax-deductible, listed at $229,000, 8 weeks on market (Broker: Bascom &amp; Sears)


Serial Dresser
The French, when they can't remember something, blame it on "a hole in the memory." Through the hole in my memory have passed not only the names of people I met 10 minutes ago, the combination for the lock on my suitcase and the plots of Henry James's novels, but also some inner sense of who I was at various times in my life.
Looking back over my shoulder, I regard whole chapters of my past as the misadventures of a stranger, though of course the stranger was me.
A woman I once met told me that she'd been approached at the race track by an attractive gentleman who looked not even vaguely familiar.
"I beg your pardon," he said, "but didn't we used to be married?" She was by this time on her third husband; he had been her first, 20 years before.
It was bad enough that she didn't recognize him, she later admitted, but even worse that she had such a hard time recognizing herself as his former wife.
I sympathized.
The older I get, the more it seems that I have been not so much one continuous person as several people, in sequence.


Correction
An answer in the Q &amp; A column on July 10 about shots required for visitors to India, Nepal and Kenya misstated some precautions recommended by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.
Specific vaccines prevent typhoid fever and hepatitis B, according to the centers; an inoculation of immune serum globulin is not the correct precaution.


Benny Ong, 87, the Reputed Godfather of Chinatown Crime
Benny Ong, a Manchurian-born immigrant who rose through underworld struggles in New York to become what law-enforcement officials called the leader of the most powerful organized crime group in Chinatown over the past 20 years, died early yesterday at New York Downtown Hospital.
He was 87 years old.
The cause of death was not disclosed, but Mr.
Ong's family, who had kept a vigil at his bedside in recent days, had said in an interview with The Daily News earlier in the week that he entered the hospital two weeks ago, suffering from prostate cancer and pneumonia.
The family made no statement yesterday.


Husband and Wives
To the Editor:
I enjoyed reading Adrienne Edgar's review of Fatima Mernissi's memoir, "Dreams of Trespass: Tales of a Harem Girlhood" (July 17).
However, toward the end Ms.
Edgar writes, "As Ms. Mernissi . . . points out, polygamy has yet to be legally banned in Morocco."


SUNDAY, August 7, 1994; How to Film a Stove
Greg Ramsey is a specialist in macro film photography, extreme close-ups of very small scenes.
A common task is to build tension with everyday objects, as he did in a scene in the movie "Blown Away," in which a kitchen stove that may have a bomb in it takes on an aura of inanimate menace.
Q: How did you film the stove?
A: In the scene where you imagine that everything in the kitchen might be rigged with a bomb we used just an everyday suburban stove that by the end became your worst nightmare.
We tore it completely apart to get the camera inside there -- in Hollywood they have special guys who take apart stoves.
The lens I use the most" -- (above) -- "is called a Superscope, and because it's about 18 inches long and very narrow, you can get the camera between and inside things you normally couldn't.
We got one big unexpected bonus in the way the pilot light, an electronic 'glow coil,' just heated up to a bright glowing white hot, and in a flash there was fire all over the place.
That was a great surprise.
I'd stuck my head in an oven a few times before that, pulling a pie out or whatever while filming a commercial, but I really didn't know what was inside."


UP AND COMING: Tiffani-Amber Thiessen; Moving Into Shannen's Room
THIS IS NOT A CINDERELLA story, not by a long shot.
When Shannen Doherty, the excessively newsworthy female star of "Beverly Hills 90210," the Fox network's most successful show ever, finally exited that long-running series last season, the last thing its producers wanted was to replace her with an unknown quantity, a tube-struck starlet or a potential loose cannon.
Enter Tiffani-Amber Thiessen, seasoned professional actress.
Don't be fooled by her filigreed first name (her parents liked Tiffani; her grandparents liked Amber), her distressed jeans and scuffed Doc Martens or her utterly unlined heart-shaped face.


Eviction Simmers Over a New Stove


Rebecca Safran, Louis H. Cohen
Rebecca Meredith Safran, the daughter of Edward and Harriet Safran of Wayland, Mass., is to be married today to Dr.
Louis Henry Cohen, a son of Charlene and Dr.
George Cohen of East Northport, L.I.
Rabbi Herman Blumberg is to perform the ceremony at the Ritz-Carlton Hotel in Boston.
The bride, 25, is studying for an M.D. degree at Boston University, from which she received a master's degree in medical science.
She graduated from Tufts University.
Her father is the president of the Merganser Capital Management Corporation, an investment advisory concern in Cambridge, Mass.
Her mother is the principal of Wilson Middle School in Natick, Mass.


Southwest Hues, Chilies and a Lively Bar
WHEN Tucson opened seven years ago in Greenwich, it was the first area restaurant to introduce a Southwestern theme in food and decor.
It was also a pioneer in Greenwich's outdoor dining.
Over the years, Tucson has thrived as a hangout for young professionals, with a noisy, popular bar and a two-tier dining area in the turquoise, buff, corn yellow, rose red and sky blue colors of the Southwest.
On cool days, the outdoor area, which seats 25, is packed, giving a lively, almost European sidewalk cafe flavor to the block.
The menu has changed somewhat over the years (and seems less inventive now), as has the youthful service staff (which is still friendly and willing, though subject to gaffes like bringing entrees while guests are still consuming appetizers).
The Southwest specialties remain Tucson's strong suit, though there are a few other choices as well.
The food served is best suited to snacking and light dining.


New &amp; Noteworthy Paperbacks
FOXFIRE: Confessions of a Girl Gang By Joyce Carol Oates.
William Abrahams/Plume, $10.95.
This fictional reminiscence concerns a group of working-class teen-age girls who band together in the 1950's in a show of prefeminist power and disdain for the abusive world of men.
Last year our reviewer, John Crowley, said, " 'Foxfire' burns brightly; it is completely assured and occasionally exhilarating."


Corrections
The Perspectives column last Sunday about the business strategies employed by N. Anthony Rolfe misstated his relationship to the late Edward Sulzberger.
Mr.
Rolfe was Mr.
Sulzberger's son-in-law, not his brother-in-law.
The article also misstated the year of Mr.
Sulzberger's death.
It was 1988, not 1986.


Some Gazans Fearful Arafat Could Choke Off Democracy
Late one night last week, the publisher of a daily Palestinian newspaper in Jerusalem received a telephone call from a clerk at the office saying several masked men were outside with a message: Cease publication, or else.
The order had come from Yasir Arafat, chairman of the Palestine Liberation Organization, which accused Osman Hallak, the publisher of the newspaper, An-Nahar, of being "pro-Jordanian" and of engaging in "anti-Arafat propaganda."


Cheryl Silbert and Theodore Schnitzer
Cheryl Joy Silbert, the daughter of Drs.
Linda and Alvin Silbert of Mahopac, N.Y., is to be married today to Theodore Newman Schnitzer, a son of Pattee C. Schnitzer of Chappaqua, N.Y., and the late Ronald Schnitzer.
Rabbi Melvin N. Sirner is to perform the ceremony at Beth El Synagogue in New Rochelle, N.Y.
Mrs.
Schnitzer, a cum laude graduate of Skidmore College, is to begin doctoral studies in physical chemistry at Tufts University in September.
Her parents are educational consultants and the authors of books for children, teachers and parents.


The Bug Battle, With Natural Weapons
HOLES in leaves are discouraging evidence for any gardener.
They indicate that some unwanted creature is about.
Time was that a pesticide was the solution.
But times have changed.
Creepy crawlers are still about, but instead of rushing for a quick solution, one seeks the identity of the enemy and a safe way to eradicate it.
Quite often all-out war is not really necessary.


A Fair on a Cool Day Thrives on Family Warmth


This Woodstock Won't Inhale
IT WILL PROBABLY GO SOMETHING LIKE THIS: YOU ARRIVE at a parking lot somewhere in the Hudson Valley and show a $135 ticket to a security guard.
You have already been "discouraged," as the promoters put it, from bringing young children or any food not necessary for a special diet.
Whatever you're carrying is searched to make sure you don't have alcohol, weapons, video cameras, tent stakes or other contraband.
A shuttle bus carries you to Winston Farm in Saugerties, N.Y., where you show your ticket again.
You are outfitted with a wristband that you must not remove and are told that if you leave, you're out for the day.
You may see a sign announcing that by your attendance, you consent to being filmed and videotaped.
Through a perimeter of fences and campgrounds, you will find licensed souvenir vendors and corporate caterers, there to serve all your earthly needs for a price, payable in the festival's own scrip. (Drinking water will be free.) Welcome to Woodstock '94, where you are not just an audience member but an extra in the pay-per-view telecast and, for three days beginning on Friday, a captive market.
Hey, party down!


PLAYING IN THE NEIGHBORHOOD
PROSPECT HEIGHTS In a Lazy Summer Grove, Dance With a Latin Flair  The Horse Chestnut Grove in the Brooklyn Botanic Garden is the site of weekend walks, dreamy afternoons spent reading the newspaper in the grass and perhaps even a marriage proposal or two.
Next Sunday, the grove will be the setting for a dance performance.


Anne C. H. Paris, Barclay Collins
Anne Claire Hammond Paris, the daughter of Neal L. Paris and Lucinda M. Paris, both of Durham, N.C., was married there yesterday to Jennings Barclay Collins 3d, a son of Mr.
Collins 2d and Dr.
Janna C. Collins, both of New York.
The Rev.
Phyllis M. H. Kort performed the ceremony at the First Presbyterian Church.
Ms.
Paris, 28, is keeping her name.
She was until recently a teacher at the Trinity School in New York.
Next month, she is to begin teaching at the Potomac School in McLean, Va.
She and her husband, 27, graduated magna cum laude from Brown University.
Her father is the associate director of academic computing at Duke University in Durham.
Her mother is a writer.


Haggling: Do's and Dont's
DO you like gambling?
Making split-second decisions you have to live with for years?
Playing hard-ball on a dark field at midnight?
If the answer is yes, you probably love the thrill of negotiating for a house or apartment.
But brokers say today's home buyers -- first-time buyers especially -- are much more cautious than they were even five years ago.
Often, they say, they worry that they will lose the deal by offering too little -- or make the other kind of mistake and pay too much.


In Yankee Trade Annals, 2 Pitching Deals Won't Rank High
The Yankees are fortunate they didn't have to rely on General Manager Gene Michael's two major off-season pitching trades to "win" the American League East.
Michael acquired Terry Mulholland as a supposedly solid veteran to plug a hole in the starting rotation and Xavier Hernandez as a supposedly effective relief pitcher who the Yankees hoped would become the closer.


The Quiz
We sit on it, walk on it and live in it.
We wear and write on its byproducts, and touch it for insurance against bad luck.
The only way you can escape it is on the sand dunes of the Sahara.
So take a risk.
Check out your blockhead quotient and see how many answers hit the mark.
Fran Handman 1.
Ships were first made with wooden planks about 3000 B.C., by: (a) Phoenicians; (b) Greeks; (c) Egyptians.  2.
Elm logs were used by the Romans as piles (which were found to be still intact during a refurbishing project in the 1960's) in the construction of the original London Bridge.
The Venetians also built their city on elm logs because: (a) elm trees were plentiful; (b) elm wood does not rot in water; (c) The logs were lighter to transport.  3.
The process of making paper from wood was invented in A.D. 105 in what country?  4.
"Softwood" and "hardwood" refer to the degree of hardness of the wood; true or false?  5.
In the 19th century, the fuel British locomotives ran on was coke, while American locomotives ran on wood: hardwood or softwood?  6.
Which man-made fabric is produced from wood pulp: nylon, acetate, rayon or orlon?  7.
What is the lightest wood?  8.
Cork grows on trees; true or false?  9.
Teak is often used in shipbuilding because: (a) it is decorative; (b) it contains an oily substance that resists water, insects and decay; (c) it is inexpensive.  10.
What is ironwood?  11.
Bamboo comes from the bamboo tree; true or false?  12.
Bentwood furniture is made of wood that is flexible enough to withstand steam-bending without snapping.
What is the most common wood used for this purpose: oak, ash or mahogany?  13.
For its exceptionally resonant qualities, the wood used in Stradivarius violins was: (a) spruce; (b) birch; (c) pine.  14.
The wood of preference used by Thomas Chippendale (1718-79) in his furniture was: (a) ebony; (b) fruitwood; (c) mahogany.  15.
What is the origin of the saying "touch wood" or "knock on wood"?  16.
What country is the leading producer of lumber in the world: Russia, the United States or Canada?  17.
Every year nearly 40,000 square miles of forest are cut down worldwide.
How much of that is replaced with new trees?
One-third; one-half; three-quarters.


Cynthia A. Smith And Paul J. Deen
Cynthia Ann Smith, a cytogenetic technologist at New York University Medical Center, was married yesterday to Paul Joseph Deen, an associate at Alvarez &amp; Marsal Inc., a consulting company in New York.
Chaplain Ann Dunkley performed the Unitarian ceremony at the Museum of Nature in Ottawa.
Mrs.
Deen, 29, graduated from Algonquin College in Ottawa.
She is a daughter of Reginald H. J. Smith of Montreal and Barbara J. Smith of Ottawa.


State Offers $3 Million in Loans to Help Stem Vacancy Tide
After years of watching moving vans going in a single direction -- away -- officials at Co-op City have begun to reverse that trend.
And with a $3 million grant from the state, announced last week, they hope to attract more newcomers to the 15,372-unit, middle-income complex in the northeast Bronx.
The State of New York Mortgage Agency plans to earmark $3 million in mortgage loans for Co-op City, enabling buyers to take advantage of lower interest rates and longer amortization periods of 20 to 30 years, said John G. Martinez, the agency's president.
The agency was asked for help, he said, after the vacancy rate rose last summer to an all-time high of about 1,500 apartments, about 10 percent of the total.


Sports of The Times; Sympathy For the Real Labor Force
"HEY, Vecsey, what do you think, is there going to be a strike?"
The man works at one of the ball parks. He lives on the tips people give him.


James Vacca, the King of Clean
Spotting an abandoned car on a Pelham Bay side street, James Vacca stomps on the brake, whips out a pen and scribbles the location and license number on a takeout menu.
Later, driving slowly through a housing project in Throgs Neck, his normally cheerful face looks chagrined as he sees candy wrappers and newspapers flutter along the sidewalks.
"But," Mr.
Vacca, the district manager of Community Board 10, quickly assures his passenger, "my streets are 90 percent clean."


Foreign Slam Looms, And That Isn't Grand
Unprecedented occurrences always attract bated-breath attention in golf, and we're on the verge of one right now as the P.G.A.
Championship looms this week at Southern Hills Country Club in Tulsa.
Here is something to ponder while Dream Team II is running roughshod over the rest of the world: For the first time in golf history, the United States could be shut out in the major championships.
For American golf, this is not a dream year.
American players are 0 for 3 so far in the majors, something that has never happened before.
In fact, United States players have never even been 0 for 2 in the 60 years that all four professional major championships have been contested.
But this year, the victory list has an international accent: Jose Maria Olazabal of Spain in the Masters; Ernie Els of South Africa in the United States Open; Nick Price of Zimbabwe in the British Open.


Two Votes Against Robots
To the Editor:
Alex Roland reduced both books about America's dramatic, historic journey to the moon to that old debate about man versus machine in space.


Jocelyn Weiss-Sinclair, Brendan Kelly
Jocelyn Melissa Weiss-Sinclair, a mathematics teacher at Fluvanna County High School in Palmyra, Va., was married last Friday to Brendan Boyce Kelly, a student at the University of Virginia.
The Rev.
Stan Aronson, a Unitarian minister, performed the ceremony at the Waveny House in New Canaan, Conn.
Mrs.
Kelly, 25, graduated from Cornell University and received a master's degree in psychology from Columbia University.
She is a daughter of William Weiss of West Islip, L.I., and Esta Sinclair of White Plains.
Her mother teaches mathematics at Westchester Community College in Valhalla, N.Y.
The bride's stepfather, Leroy Sinclair, a former president of the New York State Power Authority, is a financial consultant in New York.


Corrections
An article on July 24 about the reaction of co-op boards to bribery charges against managing agents misattributed a quotation.
It was Marc J. Luxemburg, not Stuart Saft, who said that it was impossible to license honesty.


JUDITH REGAN
Regan says, "There is rampant misogyny in this country." As the editor of Howard Stern and Rush Limbaugh, she should know better than most!
M.
HUSSEY Nyack, N.Y.


As Anti-Militarism Grows, Spanish Draftees Get Weekends Off
Alarmed that nearly half of all young men in Spain who are eligible for the draft claim to be conscientious objectors, the Government has come up with a policy aimed at making obligatory military service seem less like, well, obligatory military service.
Under the policy, draftees will work only Monday through Friday for a total of 37.5 hours per week and, if they live within 40 miles of their barracks, they can sleep at home.
If they are in uniform but off duty, they need no longer salute officers.


Corrections
A picture caption last Sunday with an article about the former baseball pitcher Steve Carlton referred incorrectly to the victory that he and his catcher, Tim McCarver, were shown celebrating.
It occurred on the last day of the 1976 regular season, not in the playoffs.


Who's on the Liberal Line Becomes a Major-Party Issue
As a preliminary to their scheduled bout in November, Representative Carolyn B. Maloney and City Councilman Charles Millard, her challenger in the 14th Congressional District, are about to go to court over a potentially pivotal election-law question: Who will get the Liberal Party line?
Mr.
Millard, a Republican, won the Liberal Party's permission to run in its primary -- tantamount to an endorsement.
So Ms.
Maloney, a Democrat, circulated petitions among enrolled Liberals in her district to be a write-in rival in a Liberal primary.


Inconsistencies Mar Dining Experience
JOHN TESAR is the big news in Quogue this summer.
The chef, who owned Hampton Square in neighboring Westhampton Beach in the 80's, is now at the Inn at Quogue.
In between he was executive chef at the Supper Club in Manhattan.
The Inn at Quogue is a lovely backdrop for Mr.
Tesar's creations.
The quaint 200-year-old charmer boasts old-fashioned country gardens and summery dining rooms with floral wallpaper, black-and-white turn-of-the-century photographs, feathery palms and pale-wood floors and flowers everywhere.


Shannon-Erne Link Reopened in Ireland
After more than a century of disuse, the Shannon-Erne Waterway is once again open to boat traffic, providing a leisurely way to experience the unindustrialized western region of Ireland and Northern Ireland.
The canal, restored jointly by Ireland and Britain, opened this summer.
It is now possible to cover 470 miles between Belturbet on Lake Erne in County Fermanagh, Northern Ireland, and the mouth of the Shannon River west of Limerick in County Limerick, Republic of Ireland.
The $45 million project, which involved rebuilding more than 30 bridges, repairing 16 locks and landscaping canal banks, links three rivers and six lakes in County Fermanagh and Counties Leitrim and Cavan in the Republic of Ireland.
The canal between Lake Erne and the Shannon River was originally built between 1846 and 1860 but was abandoned in 1869 with the advent of rail transportation.


Court Victory Seen for Battered Women
A New Jersey judge has ruled that the battered woman's syndrome, a claim of self-defense raised by women charged with killing their abusers, may also be raised by them in lawsuits against their abusers.
Lawyers and women's advocates told The Associated Press that the ruling would enhance a battered woman's ability to seek redress from her abuser.
Barry D. Epstein, a lawyer who filed the suit against Wilson Pickett, the singer, on behalf of a former companion, Jean Marie Cusseaux, said the decision was the first in New Jersey.


Referendum on Nassau Legislature Faces an Uncertain Future
THE yearlong battle for a new Nassau County Legislature now shifts to the voters, most of whom appear to be unaware of what all the fuss and debate is about, and that throws the outcome in doubt.
When they go to the polls in November, Nassau voters will be able to mark their choices for governor at the top of the ballot, and somewhere at the bottom will be a referendum for a new 19-district Legislature to replace the Board of Supervisors.


Nintendo-Kid Word Processing
WORD-processing software that has simple commands and is easy to use has been around since the beginning of schoolroom-computer time.
For instance, "Bank Street Writer," which has not only survived the transition from Apple II's to PC's, is still being sold after nearly two decades.
In the software business, that is longevity of biblical proportions.
But the newest writing software, for Mac's and Windows-based PC's, is no longer a simpler, limited version of adult word processors.
It is as full-featured and robust as industrial-strength programs like WordPerfect or Microsoft Word.
These new children's programs can do everything that the heavyweights can do.
Both types can create documents with multiple fonts, complex formats, colorful clip art and even sounds -- in short, multimedia output.


Victoria
Victoria's greatest asset is its stunning setting -- a bustling Inner Harbour, dramatic southern coastline -- and lush private and public gardens.
A provincial capital with a small-town ambiance, the city has a charm that is enhanced by residents who seem invariably cheerful and polite, and streets that are safe and clean.
The Inner Harbour hub is a watery jumble where huge ferries mingle with pleasure boats, kayaks and floatplanes.
Along its eastern rim, a broad promenade attracts tourists and bureaucrats, street musicians and itinerant artists.
At night, impromptu concerts and magic displays add a festive air.
Six blocks south, Victoria's rocky shore stretches along the Juan de Fuca Strait, a rough patch of sea capped in the distance by Washington State's craggy, snow-capped Olympic Mountains.


'Mr. All-Good' of France, Battling English, Meets Defeat
Confident that history was on his side, Culture Minister Jacques Toubon braved mockery and abuse this spring when he promoted a law requiring that 3,000 English words widely used in France be replaced by newly created French equivalents.
After all, as far back as 1539, Francois I proclaimed French to be the official language of the land.
In 1635, the Academie Francaise was created by Cardinal Richelieu to define the rules of French.
In 1803, Napoleon clamped down on regional languages and dialects in the name of uniting France.


On the Beach
Ian and Rita Norona Schrager celebrate, July 30.


What's Rattling My Cage? Reflections of a Taxpayer
THE best thing that's happened to me so far this summer is my watch got sick.
It gave me an underwhelming little reason to feel so assailed, disjointed, out of sync.
It's not Con Ed's noise or Nynex (a late charge this month because, Nynex claimed, the Post Office sent back my last phone bill without delivering it) or the men living under a sidewalk construction shed on my street or the refugees from Methadonia, more every week peddling extra pills and getting jittery in my face.
Nope, I keep reminding myself, it's not the city rattling my cage, it's just the loss of my watch.
I have visited it once or twice every week since June, and the Clock Doc keeps putting me off.
He dismisses me, sometimes brusquely, tells me to come back later, maybe next week, to be patient, your watch needs a special wheel, a very hard part to find, but we can find it, you bet, when the parts people come back from vacation, don't you understand?


Ideas &amp; Trends; 'I Do Solemnly Swear to, Um, Tell the Truth. . .'
ONE of the images lingering from the last two weeks of Congressional hearings on the Whitewater case is that of Phil Gramm, the caustic Republican Senator from Texas, berating Deputy Treasury Secretary Roger C. Altman.
"The issue," Senator Gramm asserted shortly after the clock struck 1 o'clock Wednesday morning, "is do we have a right to expect people who testify before our committee to answer our questions fully and honestly?"


Burstein Brings an Edge to Attorney General's Race
Karen S. Burstein, candidate for state attorney general, stretched out her hand, but the man in the brown suit strode by without a smile.
"You know, that's rude," Ms.
Burstein said.
She repeated: "It is rude."
Another potential voter emerged from the Upper West Side subway station with three unlit cigarettes sticking from his lips.
"All three you're going to smoke?" she asked.
He did not look at her.


Enjoying the Abundance of Eggplant, Without the Oil
GLOSSY eggplants are a year-round market staple.
In summer, eggplants of every description are in the market, from typical dark purple large ones to slender, often lighter-colored Asian varieties and even some creamy white ones that look like ostrich eggs.
And this is when eggplants have more allure than ever.
Perhaps it's because the vegetables and herbs that complement them so well, like tomatoes, zucchini, peppers and basil, are also at their peak of freshness and quality.
The spongy texture of the eggplant's flesh can be daunting, however.
Consequently, many traditional eggplant recipes, like ratatouille, begin by requiring that eggplant slices be sauteed, a step that often calls for a half cup of oil or more.
Some cooks broil or grill eggplant slices after brushing them with oil, a technique that uses less fat.


A Dog, a Horse, a Dervish and a Human or Two
Black Beauty  David Thewlis, Andrew Knott Directed by Caroline Thompson G 87 minutes
Largely true to Anna Sewell's 1877 classic, the film tells the story of one horse's odyssey.
Black Beauty, captive but always loyal to his human owners, relates how it feels to have a bit placed between one's teeth and what life is like under the saddle.
Less successfully, he tries to demonstrate human characteristics like sadness or love.
VIOLENCE A horsebirth scene is particularly graphic, and there are several scary scenes, including a barn fire, but violence is mild and the effect is never gory.
SEX There is some muzzle-to-muzzle contact between Beauty and the hot-tempered Ginger, but that's about it.
PROFANITY None.
For Which Children?
AGES 3-5 Probably over their heads.
You'll have to answer a lot of questions about the cruelty of humans to animals and explain the flashbacks in which Beauty dreams of his colthood.
AGES 6-10 If they've never read Sewell, they will be moved by this heart-rending story.
If they know the book, they'll appreciate it all the more.
AGES 11-15 Not too long in the tooth for this one.
P.
S.
McC.


Wine and Caviar in the Woods
EVER since the Hudson's Bay Company first built a guest house at its Columbia River trading post facing Mount Hood, travelers to the Pacific Northwest have been able to take in some of the more sublime works of nature while sipping a decent wine.
The vintages were European, of course, when the Gentlemen Adventurers of England, as they were formally known, were building their trading network with the native people in the early 19th century.
But the food -- sturgeon caviar, five species of salmon, a dozen kinds of berries, exotic mushrooms, shellfish of all sizes and shapes -- was all part of the local bounty.
Nearly 150 years after England gave up its claim to the Northwest, people are still searching for the ultimate balance between nature and comfort.
The task for lodges is to be close to the scenery, using indigenous building materials, while being as unintrusive as possible.
For restaurants, the challenge is to serve local food in an original manner, avoiding East Coast or European imitations.


ALSO INSIDE
MAKING IT WORK 3  Dennis Holt is a captive of history.
With pen, paper and an old city directory, he is re-creating the north Brooklyn of 1885.
NEW YORKERS &amp; CO. 4  To immigrants desperate for work, the employment agencies of Chinatown are a lifeline -- often a very slippery lifeline.


JUDITH REGAN
Judith Regan professes independence, yet sidesteps the fact that her independence flows directly from the beneficence of Rupert Murdoch ("Going For the Lion's Share," by Susan Shapiro, July 17).


A Dog, a Horse, a Dervish and a Human or Two
It Could Happen To You  Nicolas Cage, Bridget Fonda, Rosie Perez Directed by Andrew Bergman PG 101 minutes


A Neighbor Says Squatters Improved Houses and Area
To the Editor:
In regard to the July 17 article, "Squatters Brace as City Focuses on East 13th St.," I live not far from the buildings at 535, 537, 539, 541 and 545 13th Street.
For well over 15 years they have been abandoned by the city.
They were uninhabitable, having been vandalized with much of their plumbing and wiring removed, and they became shooting galleries on a street that was a hang-out for dealers and drug addicts.


Two Votes Against Robots
To the Editor:
For the most part, Alex Roland's review of "A Man on the Moon" and "Moon Shot" (July 17) was good.
But when Mr.
Roland suggested that robots could have collected samples that were as good as those collected by a human observer, I became concerned.
We did send a certified geologist to the moon (Harrison Schmitt), and there was no robot at the time that could have made judgments about what was geologically significant on the moon.


Tai Solarin, 72, Nigeria Educator And Critic, Dies
Tai Solarin, one of Nigeria's best-known social critics and educators, died on July 27 in the town of Ikenne in southwestern Nigeria, where he had a home.
He was 72.
Mr.
Solarin was an intellectual guru for Nigeria's disenchanted and disfranchised for four decades.
His writings in magazines and newspapers, highlighting what he called the hypocrisy and vulgarity of the Nigeria of his day, frequently angered people in power.


Caroline O'Brien, Robert Thomas
Caroline Clare O'Brien, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Donal Clare O'Brien Jr. of New Canaan, Conn., was married yesterday to Robert McKean Thomas, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas McK.
Thomas of Doylestown, Pa.
The Rev.
Edward Anderson performed the ceremony at the Unitarian Church on Nantucket Island in Massachusetts.
Mrs.
Thomas and her husband, both 28, graduated from Colby College.
She is studying for a master's degree in developmental psychology at Columbia University, from which the bridegroom received a master's degree in historic preservation.
Mr.
Thomas is a project manager at Integrated Conservation Resources, an architectural restoration company in Brooklyn.


Laura Friedewald and Randolf Notes
Laura Elizabeth Friedewald, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
William T. Friedewald of New York, was married yesterday to Randolf Forrest Notes, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Richard D. Notes of Boca Raton, Fla.
The Rev.
James Walsh performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at Holy Trinity Church in the Georgetown section of Washington.
Mrs.
Notes, 24, is to become an assistant district attorney in the Bronx in September.
She graduated from Colby College, as did her husband, and received a law degree from American University.
Her father is a senior vice president and the chief medical director of the Metropolitan Life Insurance Company in New York.
Her mother, Jacqueline Friedewald, is a commercial real estate broker for Bernstein Real Estate in Manhattan.


If You're Thinking of Living In/Peapack and Gladstone; Fox-Hunting and High-Priced Homes
RESIDENTS of the Borough of Peapack and Gladstone in Somerset County pride themselves on being nonchalant about the many celebrities who live in the borough and surrounding municipalities.
Mayor Mary Hamilton said famous people were "not singled out and can remain as public or as private as they like here."
She does have a story about Aristotle Onassis, who rented a home in neighboring Bernardsville with his wife, Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis.
"He was an insomniac," Mrs.
Hamilton said, "and he would go walking in the borough at 2 in the morning with no identification. To Mr. Onassis's embarrassment and to the embarrassment of the police chief, he was once taken in for questioning before his habits were known."


This Year's Model
Some engineers and artists were renovating the Panorama of New York, and I went to their workshop expecting to be disappointed.
I couldn't imagine how the new Panorama -- or any other worldly object -- could look as good as the original.
For one thing, I was no longer 11 years old, the age at which I had seen the original at the 1964 World's Fair.
It was billed as "World's Largest Scale Model." You paid a dime, got into a little car moving along a track, and heard the famous voice of the newscaster Lowell Thomas: "Let's get ready for take-off for a flight into the past and present of the greatest city on earth!" The car circled above something that looked like a model-train set gone to heaven.
It was half the length of a football field from the Bronx to Staten Island.
Every single house and building in New York was there, 830,000 tiny structures of wood and plastic built to scale.
The Empire State Building was 15 inches high.
Lowell Thomas marveled at the lengths of the bridges, the acres of parks, the miles of busy docks.
A plane landed every minute at La Guardia, and there were no traffic jams on the expressways.
The sky darkened, the city lit up and Thomas announced, "Center of civilization, this electric metropolis has opened opportunity to all, and its reward has been greatness." I believed him completely.
I wanted the opportunity to spend my life in a Manhattan skyscraper planning bigger parks and longer bridges for the city below.


Malta and Malaysia Open Tourist Offices
Two foreign tourist bureaus have opened offices in New York City.
In June, Malta opened its first North American tourist office.
Malaysia is scheduled to open the doors to its second office in the United States and its first in New York by the end of this month.
The Malta National Tourist Office is in the Empire State Building, 350 Fifth Avenue, Suite 4412; (212) 695-9520.


As Police Force Adds to Ranks, Some Promises Still Unfulfilled
Four summers ago, the Dinkins administration began a huge expansion of New York City's police forces and promoted its goal with a reassuring slogan: "The beat cop is back."
With an infusion of funds for a program that promised "Safe Streets, Safe City," the Police Department has expanded its force by nearly a quarter, to more than 31,000 officers.
But while the hiring goals have largely been fulfilled, and some measurable gains in enforcement can be cited, the department appears to have diverged from the community-policing strategy that elected officials and even the police promised.


Did the Chinese Arrive Before Columbus?
To the Editor:
In William C. Sturtevant's letter about "When China Ruled the Seas" (July 10), he says that Louise Levathes cites "shaky" evidence for one of the claims made in her book.
After doing two years of research for a documentary film on ancient and medieval China, I agree with Ms.
Levathes that early Chinese sailors could have crossed the Pacific.


SUNDAY, August 7, 1994; The Price of Fame
On sale now, at the Andy Warhol Museum in Pittsburgh, are Marilyn Monroe refrigerator magnets, Campbell's Soup note cards and the 15 minutes of fame that Warhol predicted everyone would have.
It comes in the form of a watch devised by a New York designer, Bethany Johns, with a white face, a banana for a second hand (from a Velvet Underground album cover Warhol designed in 1966) and the legend "Your 15 Minutes" printed in block letters, occupying the space between the "3" and the "6." With the watch going for $30, the price of fame comes to $2 a minute, and your next moments of glory will always be less than an hour away.


Boredom Mixed With Danger
If, in the pathology of scandal, Watergate was a cancer on the Presidency and the Iran-contra affair a hemorrhage, Whitewater has shown itself this week to be something else.
It is a fever, not fatal, maybe, but politically wasting and beyond a simple cure.
The Arkansas land deal that Bill Clinton first mocked 29 months ago as "nothing but a big money loser" is now a metaphor for qualms about the President and the way he leads.
True, nobody quite understands it; the two weeks of Congressional hearings that ended on Friday could be eye-glazing, and it seems unlikely to sap support for immediate projects like health insurance or welfare reform.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article in some regional editions on July 24 about the office market in Westchester County misstated relocation plans announced by Mastercard International.
The company has announced that it will move to one of three sites in Westchester, but has not yet said which one.


On the Great South Bay
Lambda Legal Defense and Education Fund's benefit, Fire Island, July 30.


A First At Indy for An Indiana Home Boy
They didn't play "Back Home Again in Indiana" before the inaugural Brickyard 400 today at the Indianapolis Motor Speedway.
They didn't have to.
Jeff Gordon made it the theme of the day.
Gordon, who learned to race here in Indiana, was right at home in the first stock car race ever at the speedway.
He took the lead from Ernie Irvan for the last time when Irvan's Thunderbird suffered a flat right front tire with less than five laps to go.
Gordon, in a Chevy Lumina, then held off the Thunderbird of Brett Bodine -- who earlier had put a chilly relationship with his brother into the deep freeze -- by 0.53 seconds in a thrilling race with 13 different leaders.


Riitta A. Juvonen, Ned A. Schoenfeld
Riitta Anneli Juvonen, the daughter of Tapio and Annikki Juvonen of Helsinki, Finland, is to be married today to Ned Arthur Schoenfeld, a son of Herbert and Gloria Schoenfeld of Massapequa Park, L.I.
Rabbi Barnett Brickner is to officiate at the Pratt Mansions in New York.
The bride, 28, graduated from the Sibeliuslukio School in Helsinki.
She designs children's clothing in London.


Habitats/Scotch Plains; Saving a 1742 Farmhouse
THE little white house on the main road was called a "vernacular farmhouse" in the state's historic sites inventory, with the following description:
"Three fireplaces inside. Every room on first floor has an outside door. House is not all on one level. Must step down a step from living room to dining room. Wide pine planking downstairs. Hand-hewn beams in every room except kitchen. Upstairs floors are of poplar, oak and pine. Original windows with bubble glass. The original house was one room where the dining room is; living room and kitchen were added later."


SUNDAY, August 7, 1994; Playing Games at Work
At Microsoft these days, one of the terms loosely tossed around is "Loosely Supervised Executive." It refers to just about anyone who has a few games on a workplace computer in addition to a spreadsheet and word processor.
The term is an ironic recognition that with one hand, most software manufacturers make business tools, while with the other they make games, which inevitably are installed along with the serious programs.
Software designers even provide "boss buttons" to hide a game with one quick keystroke when a superior walks by, sometimes throwing a fake spreadsheet up on screen as a decoy.


Scotland in a Daimler
Classic cars are usually found in automobile museums or under the watchful eyes of their owners.
But through Oct. 31, car buffs can rent a British classic, such as a 1937 Daimler, a 1949 Triumph or a 1970 Bentley, and drive it around Scotland for a week as part of a package offered by Europe Express, a London-based tour company.
Motorists pick up their vintage autos in Glasgow, then follow their own itinerary, taking in lochs and castles at their own pace.
Nights are spent at any of Scotland's nearly 100 Logis Inns, a chain of small establishments.
Based on double occupancy, a 1960 Jaguar S Type costs $1,719 a week a person Sept. 16 to Oct. 31, $1,809 through Sept. 15.
Accommodations, breakfast, insurance and air fare from New York are included. (800) 927-3876.


Catherine Ryan, Mark Kindschuh
Catherine Regina Ryan, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Donald F. Ryan of Brooklyn, was married yesterday to Dr.
Mark W. E. Kindschuh, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
William Kindschuh of Lincoln City, Ore.
The Rev.
John Padian performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at Our Lady of Angels Church in Brooklyn.
Mrs.
Kindschuh, 25, is a registered nurse at the Bellevue Hospital Center in New York.
She graduated from Boston College.
Her father, a teacher at Public School 1 in Brooklyn, is the vice chairman of The Tablet, the weekly publication of the Diocese of Brooklyn.
The bride's mother, Margaret M. Ryan, trains teachers in District 21 in Brooklyn.


SUNDAY, August 7, 1994; The Shock of the News
When the writer of Ecclesiastes lamented that there was nothing new under the sun, he clearly hadn't been reading the papers.
These days even hardened veterans -- perhaps especially hardened veterans -- continue to see things they've never seen before.
On floods in Georgia (pictured below), that resulted in 17 deaths: "My family has lived here for six generations, and I've never seen or heard of anything like this." -- State Senator George Hooks, The New York Times, July 8.


Thunder Rumble Wins After 0-for-23 Months
Even by Saratoga's standards for race-horse drama, Thunder Rumble is a rare one.
As a 3-year-old colt, he became one of the stars of the 1992 season when he won the Jim Dandy and the Travers Stakes in three weeks' time.
Then he underwent ankle surgery and missed nearly two years of racing.


Mexicans Find Their Beloved Park Transformed by Tensions
On weekend afternoons for the last 17 years, the northern end of Sara Delano Roosevelt Park -- usually a forlorn strip of concrete and brick stretching from Houston to Canal Street, between Chrystie and Forsyth Streets -- turns into a homecoming party for hundreds of Mexican-Americans from around the New York area.
At the center of the gatherings are the 13 teams of the Delancy Basketball League, and the park has also become the place for celebrations of holidays like Mother's Day and Mexican Independence Day.


RESULTS PLUS
GOLF  Azinger Misses Cut but Wins Crowd  As he walked up the 18th fairway, the applause began to roll over Paul Azinger.
By the time he reached the green, the cheers had become a roar.
It was a lovely and touching farewell to a man who just returned.
Azinger, playing his first competitive golf after a nine-month battle with cancer, missed the cut at the Buick Open in Grand Blanc, Mich.
But his second round yesterday at Warwick Hills Golf and Country Club made it clear he won't miss many more.
After a disappointing 4-over-par 76 in the rain-delayed opening round Friday, he came back with a sparkling 70 yesterday.
Corey Pavin shot a seven-under-par 65, good for 131 and a commanding four-shot lead over the first-round leader Fred Funk. (AP)


Technology; Harnessing an Underground Source of Electricity
PEOPLE have been poking holes in the ground here since 1710, mostly in search of the rich iron ore that lies under the gentle hills of New Jersey's Highlands area, about 35 miles west of New York City.
Indeed, local lore has it that when Washington visited the area during the Revolution, he urged the iron forgers to produce more weapons and provided Hessian soldiers captured in battle at Trenton as additional labor.


'9 Highland Road'
To the Editor:
As a clinical professor of psychiatry at New York Medical College, I found H. Jack Geiger's review of "9 Highland Road" fascinating and informative -- until I reached his account of the woman Michael Winerip calls Julie Callahan and the "15 other people living inside her head."


Seeking Protection For Wetland Areas
CONCERN about proposed weakening of Federal protection of national wetlands with the 1972 Clean Water Act scheduled for re-authorization in Congress last month, as well as threats to the county's wetlands from potential developments, prompted 40 environmentalists to attend a recent meeting at the Chappaqua Public Library to learn more about the role of wetlands in maintaining water quality.
"Wetlands issues are really happening in Westchester now," said David Osterman, co-chairman of Wetlands Watch, a committee of the Lower Hudson Group of the Sierra Club, which sponsored the Chappaqua lecture.
"Some wetlands that shouldn't be developed are, like the Somers Golf Course, which is at the headwaters of the Plum Brook River and the Muscoot River.


Corralling the Cowboys; Barry Switzer
JUST OUTSIDE BARRY SWITZER'S OFFICE IS A small refrigerator, and as he opens it, a six-pack stares him dead in the face.
The beer belongs to Switzer's predecessor as head coach of the Dallas Cowboys, Jimmy Johnson, who led the team to two consecutive Super Bowls.
Johnson left five months ago, but his beer is yet another reminder of how his presence hangs over the Cowboys like a cloud that won't go away.
"I wish he would have taken it with him," Switzer says.
"I try to stay away from the stuff now."


Health Care and the Generation Chasm
To the Editor:
M.
L.
Mitchell and Richard Thau may be correct that the age-blind community rating called for in several health reform proposals will unfairly affect younger citizens.
But simply to scrap this "generationally unjust" method of pricing health insurance would create other inequities.
It would increase costs for older citizens beyond the reach of many and, if employers furnish insurance, create a strong incentive for age discrimination.


Restaurateur Tells How Smoking Ban Would Hurt
To the Editor:
The City Council is considering legislation that would ban smoking in all indoor public places except those that provide enclosed smoking rooms with separate ventilation.
For my restaurant, and most others with 50 seats or more, this would effectively force us to ban smoking altogether.
Aside from being arbitrary, unfair and unnecessary, it would damage the restaurant business overall and would cause the city to lose tourist and convention business.


Cosby Ordered to Pay 20 Cents in Damages
Bill Cosby should have no trouble raising the money he has been ordered to pay a photographer who says the entertainer assaulted him.
Mr. Cosby must give the photographer, Dick Corkery, 20 cents.


A Soldier's Story


Political Notes; First Dog Is Latest Family Member to Outshine Mayor
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani keeps finding himself upstaged by his own family.
First there was his son, Andrew, hamming it up during the Mayor's Inaugural Address.
Now, a national magazine has an interview with another member of the First Family -- the dog, Goalie.


Tinton Falls Journal; Bridge-Widening Plan Is Stirring Discord
THE Monmouth County Board of Freeholders pushing aside charges that it is a "sore loser" and "obstinate" -- is back in court, still seeking, after four years, to build a modern four-lane bridge in this borough's quaint historic district.
The county says it will not accept a state-ordered compromise plan to build a three-lane bridge over Pine Brook on Tinton Avenue to replace the creaky, 100-year-old two-lane structure that all experts agree is obsolete and dangerous.
So the county is asking the Appellate Division of Superior Court to take another look at a proposal to build the wider bridge.


In a Full-House Artist Colony, Raging Intellectual Emotions
IT was true we would have a goose-egg omelette together, the Balakian/Reynolds/Nalbantian family and me, but never so much as now, surrounded by this family of literary critics and one utopian economist, would I have such a feeling that thought was food, and idea was feeling and talking was home.
In an age in which so many seek the solace and stimulus of the organized artists' colony, creating their "safe families" through elective affinity rather than biological destiny, here was an Old World family that was at once a self-contained artists' colony and the all-accepting place of return that is perhaps every creator's dream.


New Jersey Q &amp; A: John R. Ford; Analyzing the Simpson Case for TV
JUST when John R. Ford's life and work were starting to take on a busy but somewhat regular schedule, along came the O. J. Simpson case.
Now the days often go nonstop from 4 A.M. to midnight for Mr.
Ford, a legal analyst for NBC news programs.
And, as what is expected to be a sensational murder trial starting on Sept. 19 for the former football star approaches, the pace promises to quicken for Mr.
Ford, 44, a Jersey City native.
He is no stranger to prominent legal cases, which he has handled for 19 years as a trial lawyer in Red Bank, sometimes breaking new legal ground in the process.


Health Care and the Generation Chasm
To the Editor:
Your article promotes a divisiveness that impedes a real overhaul of our cumbersome and expensive health care system.
Statistics indicate that activities often associated with young people -- sports, hazardous driving, drinking, drug abuse, promiscuity -- are responsible for a great share of very expensive serious diseases and traumatic injuries.


Adventures in Heels, Carte Blanche on Wheels
SAG HARBOR, L.I. -- "The Adventures of Priscilla, Queen of the Desert," an Australian movie about three drag queens on the road, had its American premiere in this former whaling village on July 29.
Outside the Sag Harbor Cinema on Main Street, a smart throng of V.I.P.'s, including Marisa Tomei, Chuck Scarborough, Griffin Dunne and some very tall drag queens, was giving the locals something to consider.
"Is that a drag queen, Daddy?" a girl asked.


On Sunday In Boot Camp, Rough Drafts Get Fit to Film
THE search for bankable midsummer fantasies is at its peak.
Two weeks ago, 50 would-be screenwriters moonlighting from the workaday world began class at Writers Boot Camp, trying to get their dreams in order at six-week training courses in New York, Los Angeles and Chicago to see if each of them could create a feature movie script: a labor, according to those who know, that goes well beyond any treatise or fable creation as an arduous trial by word processor.
Just as these $650-tuition-paying dreamers (lately including a noticeable number of restless lawyers) were coaxed into place, along comes the news of that first-draft script sold by a hot young Hollywood writer for $4 million in a bidding war.
It was precisely the Hollywood touch not needed by anyone trying to buckle down to fantasies of cracking Hollywood.


Bertoli Brecht, Survivor
NOT ALL OF US ARE SAINTS A Doctor's Journey With the Poor.
By David Hilfiker. 259 pp.
New York.
Hill &amp; Wang. $20.


Cinda I. Wall And Curtis Ball
Cinda Irene Wall, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas R. Wall 3d of Warwick, Bermuda, was married on Friday to Curtis Ball, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Walter L. Ball of Newtown, Pa.
The Rev.
Charles G. Butta performed the ceremony at St.
Michael's Roman Catholic Church in Paget, Bermuda.
Mrs.
Ball, 29, is a product manager at Becton Dickinson, a medical-supply company in Franklin Lakes, N.J.
She graduated magna cum laude from Harvard University, from which she also received an M.B.A.


July 31-Aug. 6; An Independent Prosecutor, It Seems
The problem was most assuredly not that Robert B. Fiske Jr., the Whitewater independent prosecutor, had an actual lack of independence or other weakness that left him unfit, said the appeals court panel that sacked him on Friday.
No, Mr.
Fiske had to go, the three judges ruled, because he suffered from what everyone who knows anything about political life in Washington in the 1990's realizes was a devastatingly fatal flaw.
Mr.
Fiske, the judges held, had an appearance problem.


Japanese Immigrant Is Near Death After Shooting in a Queens Apartment Building
A young Japanese man who came to the United States to pursue his dreams of being a race-car driver was near death yesterday after having been shot in the right eye on Thursday in the stairwell of his apartment building in Queens, the police said.
The man, Kei Sunada, 22, moved to New York four months ago with the hope of becoming a Formula One driver and was working as a chef in training at the Nakagawa restaurant at 7 West 44th Street.


Miss Klockars, Mr. Findlay
Gretchen Kristine Klockars, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Alan Klockars of Seattle, was married yesterday to Bayne Stuart Findlay, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Cuyler Findlay of New Canaan, Conn.
The Rev.
Gail Crouch, a Congregational minister, officiated at the Kiana Lodge in Poulsbo, Wash.
Mrs.
Findlay, 25, is a research associate at Health and Environment Sciences Group, a consulting concern in Washington.
She graduated from the University of Colorado.
Her father is a professor and chairman of the graduate educational psychology department at the University of Washington in Seattle.
Her mother, Margaret Klockars, is an assistant city attorney for Seattle.


Tacky, Wonderful Blackpool
EVEN by the dreary standards of so many British beach resorts -- foul water and worse weather -- Blackpool is in a league of its own.
It hunches alongside the cold gray surf of the Irish Sea about 25 miles north of Liverpool, at about the same latitude as Edmonton, Alberta, which means that beachgoers often wear windbreakers in August.
The European Union says the water is too dirty for swimming and, at the height of the summer season, the beaches are sometimes deserted, except for the men in woolly hats who are always there, offering rides to children on the shaggy donkeys that plod listlessly up and down the sand.
Yet for all that, this windswept curve of northern coastline endures as Britain's single most popular resort destination, a giddy tumble of neon, beachfront bed-and-breakfasts and Victorian odds and ends that this year is expected to draw an estimated seven to eight million happy holiday-makers, weekend revelers and conventioneers.
Jostling among the heavy crowds along the seaside promenade or packed into the turn-of-the-century electric trams that still rattle along the beachfront, the basic Blackpool tourist is British, and probably from the north of England.
There are families with children in tow, pensioners wobbling on and off tour buses, young adults hovering outside throbbing discos nearly as big as Madison Square Garden.
And, in the autumn, swarms of British politicians, of one stripe or another, make the pilgrimage to Blackpool as the ritual site of one of the major party conferences.


Costs of Peacekeeping Don't Strap the U.N.
To the Editor:
"U.N. Authorizes Invasion of Haiti to Be Led by U.S." (front page, Aug. 1) reports that the United Nations "is strapped for cash largely because of its many peacekeeping operations."


At the Saturation Point?
To the Editor:
Finding and keeping good directors is just one problem facing American museums  [ "Doesn't Anybody Want This Job?," June 26 ] .
The country now has more museums than ever, and new ones continue to be founded.
When they are combined with the number of other charitable organizations vying for finite discretionary support, one wonders: Has America reached a museum saturation point?
An examination of museum leadership reflects the way our nation's nonprofit sector operates.
At the highest level, charitable organizations are in the hands of amateurs.
Boards of trustees are largely composed of people inexperienced in the profession of the particular organization.


Time for U.S. to Sit Down With the New Japan; Studying America
To the Editor:
Re Michael Armacost's "Japan Goes to Business School" (Op-Ed, July 28): I have taught political economy to many Japanese as a professor at Columbia University's Graduate School of Business.
The behavior of these students, whatever reasons underlie their sponsorship, suggests they are much more interested in learning about American society than American production techniques.


Father and Son Find a Kinship, And Triumph, In Shakespeare
IT'S SUNDAY, A BRITISH STAGE performer's day off, and Robert and Toby Stephens are together in a borrowed north London flat, passing a sunny afternoon trading thespian notes.
Which makes perfect sense, since acting is the family trade.
"I think if you're playing big parts, it's best not to speak," Robert Stephens is saying less than 24 hours after receiving his latest ovation as King Lear.
"It's best to stay in bed." (The Royal Shakespeare Company's highly praised production runs through Aug. 30 at the Barbican Center in London.)


How Not to Hire a Nanny
As on-screen nanny searches go, the one in "Mary Poppins" (1964) dates to the Paleolithic era.
Mom did not work, there were two parents, and the children got to choose.
A generation later, the nanny-hiring scene has become a staple of movies and television shows for the yuppie set.
Never mind whether Mom is working, whether Mom has died or whether Dad wants the kids.
It is always the same scene.
Open with a parent and the nanny candidate engaged in awkward chitchat, with the nanny facing the camera.
Nanny makes a bizarre remark.
Cut to the next nanny.
And the next, with each one worse than the one before.
At last, the golden moment: the arrival of what appears to be baby-sitter perfection.
Just to keep working parents feeling guilty, some of these nannies turn out to be serial killers or, at best, pitifully inadequate substitutes for Mom. -- Susan Chira The Situation:


Fashion


Ideas &amp; Trends; Stones on a Roll: As Cynical as Ever
ASK any rock pioneers if they expected to make a career out of music, and the answer is no.
Rock was a lark, a youthful folly; of course, the fun would run out sooner or later.
But 32 years after Mick Jagger and Keith Richards got together to knock out some Chicago blues, the Rolling Stones are headlining stadiums once again.
Their new album, "Voodoo Lounge," entered the charts at No. 2, held out of No. 1 only by the Disney juggernaut of "The Lion King."
Their current tour started in Washington last week and is booked, often for multiple nights, at stadiums around the country, including Giants Stadium in East Rutherford, N.J.
They are a proud anomaly: In a business that prizes youth and novelty, the Stones -- whose average age is 50 -- are still superstars.


Attention City Shoppers! Kmart Bucks Retail Trend
When the first ceremonial shovels of earth were tossed this week for the construction of a super-sized Kmart store here, the score was undeniable: City 1, Suburb 0.
Kmart, a company whose fortunes mirrored the rise of the suburbs, as it transmogrified from the downtown five-and-dimes of S. S. Kresge to its empire of bargain bins and blue-light specials, is inching back here toward its roots.
It may not be a trend, but next spring, the company will close its 1970's vintage store in East Haven, a neighboring suburb, and build a 172,000-square foot new superstore in New Haven.
The store will sell everything from fresh baked bread and Oreo cookies to motor oil and beach chairs and will be the largest Kmart in New England.


JUDITH REGAN
Thank you for the article on Judith Regan.
She will always be a heroine to me for bringing us Rush, in defiance of the forces of the left.
MARY N. FERRI Trenton


Black Belt


Why Social Agency Feuds Are Like Dog Biting Man
To the Editor:
Over the past week we have had to watch the media cover what should have been a private dispute between two nonprofit social service organizations ("Between the Food Lines: Feuding Over Homeless Aid," July 31).
Coverage of such a dispute only harms the hundreds of other organizations that spend their time working to improve the quality of life for all New Yorkers.


It's No Mystery
To the Editor:
In his letter to the editor (July 10), David B. Bronson writes, "I hope someone is going to explain why the illustration used with a review of two books about Civil War art -- an 1861 painting by James Walker of an officer reading a newspaper aloud to other officers in camp -- is entitled 'Letters From Home.' "


Starvation Threatens a 'Safe Haven' in Rwanda
In a largely forgotten corner of this tiny, devastated nation, the survivors of drought, massacres and war are now facing the ravages of malnutrition and starvation.
At a makeshift refugee camp for tens of thousands of people, living in crude huts on steep slopes, tiny Albert Uwamahoro tries in vain to get milk from his mother's dry breasts.
He is one year old.
He weighs 12 pounds.
His father, a Tutsi, and an older brother and sister were killed in April by a Hutu mob.
He was spared because his mother, who was carrying him, is a member of the Rwanda's Hutu ethnic majority.


Sharilyn K. Jee, Patrick Arensdorf
Sharilyn Kim Jee, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Cordell K. Jee of Castro Valley, Calif., was married yesterday to Patrick Alfred Arensdorf, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Alfred M. Arensdorf of Paia, Hawaii.
The Rev.
Thomas Hagen, a Roman Catholic priest, officiated at the Princeton University Chapel in Princeton, N.J.


Word for Word/Life Stories; Of Death, Danger, Hope and Love: Children Learn From Experience
They have lived a lot in a short time, these young people whose autobiographies have been read by hundreds of thousands of people throughout Marin County, Calif.
The stories tell of danger and heartbreak, love and hope.
The stories tell much that is disturbing about this America of many colors and many faces, and much that is inspiring.
The stories are told not in books but on grocery bags, 250,000 in all, distributed by United Market.
The project was conceived by an artist couple, Larry and Kelly Sultan, and was commissioned by Public Art Works, a nonprofit organization in San Rafael, Calif.
"We often see youth through stereotypes," Mr.
Sultan said.
"We hope that this project will give young people a chance to break down these stereotypes and to portray themselves." The stories of four children from San Rafael High School and Bahia Vista Elementary School were chosen, and parts of three are reproduced here.
The story by the Salvadoran who migrated with the aid of a coyote, or guide, caused a furor; many shoppers complained that the store chain was giving tacit approval to his illegal entry into the United States.
Bags with his story were withdrawn, but an outpouring of sympathy led to the creation of a college fund for him.
PHILIP GEFTER


California Contemplates Paddling Graffiti Vandals
Half a century ago, when he was a smart-mouthed teen-ager, Mickey Conroy learned to respect his elders by trudging to the principal's office and getting paddled on the behind.
Later, as a young parent, Mr.
Conroy taught his children the same lesson by hanging a belt from the back of a door, using it rarely but pointing to it menacingly from time to time.


Andrea S. Melfe, Mark I. Walsh
Andrea Sue Melfe, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas A. Melfe of Port Washington, L.I., was married there yesterday to Mark Ignatius Walsh, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Michael A. Walsh of Pelham Manor, N.Y.
The Rev.
William D. O'Rourke performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at St.
Peter of Alcantara Church.


A Dog, a Horse, a Dervish and a Human or Two
The Mask  Jim Carrey, Max (the dog) Directed by Chuck Russell PG-13 minutes


First Fiddle


Anger Greets Removal of a Popular Principal
Cheryl Parker, the principal of Public School 156, is known among parents in Brownsville as a caring and tough educator credited with an increase in test scores.
But last week, members of Community School Board 23 voted, 6 to 2, to dismiss her.
The board acted on the recommendation of Michael A. Vega, the district's superintendent, who said that while Ms.
Parker had done some good at the school, she had exhibited "poor public relations" during last year's asbestos scandal and that in general she had poor communication with her staff.


L.I. a Hub to Help Children Overseas
TEN years ago Susan Laffen of Cold Spring Harbor left Nigeria, where she had been a field nurse for Save the Children.
After nearly three years in Africa she decided to move to Long Island, but she knew that thousands of children who were victims of violence, war and natural disasters needed help.
With nine other people Ms.
Laffen started the Long Island chapter of Save the Children, one of four chapters in the United States.
The others are in Fairfield, Conn.; Austin, Tex., and New York City.


Uniform Diversity In California
DIVERSITY describes the student population in Long Beach, Calif., where Cambodian and Spanish are heard almost as often as English.
But when public schools open next month, the city's 50,000 elementary and middle-school children will all, in one important sense, look alike.
To combat "gang wear," or gang-related clothing, soothe the frenzy over designer clothing that highlights economic disparities and help pupils focus on learning, the city's school board has agreed to mandate uniforms for all the lower grades.


Maguy Marin Ponders: What Makes Us Tick?
BASIC EMOTIONS ARE THE subject of "Waterzooi," the ingenious dance-theater piece that the Compagnie Maguy Marin from France presented recently at the American Dance Festival.
The 90-minute work is unmistakably French, and not just because joy, in one segment, is symbolized by a chorus of dancers in cow masks.
Anyone familiar with the grinning bovine face on the wrapper of a French cheese called the Laughing Cow would get the joke.
The dominant Gallic tone comes rather from Ms.
Marin's philosophical bent, which makes for a more generalized treatment of a theme than expected.
Experimental American choreographers are also apt to ask questions about the nature of love and hate.
But chances are that nowadays they will do so in a confessional, even narcissistic mode.


Town Considers Benefits for Gay Couples
Acting at the request of a lesbian police officer, this Westchester County town is considering extending health benefits to the domestic partners of unmarried town employees.
While the cities of New York, Rochester and Ithaca began offering such benefits earlier this year, Greenburgh would be the first town in the state to take such action.


On the Tarmac
A benefit for the Long Island Association for AIDS Care, July 30.


City Pools? '99.9 Percent Peaceful'
IS it safe to swim?
After several complaints of sexual assault at the city's pools in July, it didn't seem so.
Police presence was beefed up, and there was talk of segregating pools by sex.
But according to the Parks Commissioner, Henry J. Stern, the summer has, in fact, been relatively quiet.
"There were many small incidents reported," he said, "because people are more vigilant and more properly outraged at improper acts. But there were no rapes, no robberies, no beatings, no shootings.


JUDITH REGAN
Is the entire field of publishing market driven?
Does the corporate bottom line determine everything that occurs in this country?
I found Judith Regan's story interesting.
I believe she is a dynamic woman.
But I am reminded of the saying: We define ourselves by our choices.


For the Effort, a Dry Towel


Corrections
An article about the move of a French bank's United States headquarters and an accompanying headline on the front page of the Real Estate section today misspell the name of the bank.
It is Societe Generale, not Societe General.


What Makes Us Angry
NO one ever questions the quantity of life in New York City.
No one could, in the place that has long defined national notions of biggest, tallest, fastest, fiercest.
Yet lately such a civic consensus as ever emerges in this city of "So's your old man!" seems to have settled implacably on the conviction that the quality of life is sadly broken -- and has been for a long time.


The Boom in M.R.I.'s: Concerns Grow on Costs and Overuse
THE growth of magnetic-resonance imaging as a diagnostic tool is generating intense competition for patients, as well as concern about overuse.
M.R.I. makes images of any soft tissue in the body.
Unlike conventional X-rays or CAT scans, M.R.I. does not use ionizing radiation.
Instead, magnetic fields and computers provide the images, clear and precise pictures of specific areas.
Bones stop X-rays, but are transparent in magnetic imaging, making it easier to examine the brain and spinal cord.


Shannon-Erne Link Reopened in Ireland
After more than a century of disuse, the Shannon-Erne Waterway is once again open to boat traffic, providing a leisurely way to experience the unindustrialized western region of Ireland and Northern Ireland.
The canal, restored jointly by Ireland and Britain, opened this summer.
It is now possible to cover 470 miles between Belturbet on Lake Erne in County Fermanagh, Northern Ireland, and the mouth of the Shannon River west of Limerick in County Limerick, Republic of Ireland.
The $45 million project, which involved rebuilding more than 30 bridges, repairing 16 locks and landscaping canal banks, links three rivers and six lakes in County Fermanagh and Counties Leitrim and Cavan in the Republic of Ireland.
The canal between Lake Erne and the Shannon River was originally built between 1846 and 1860 but was abandoned in 1869 with the advent of rail transportation.


Christopher Goes to Mideast To Cajole Israel and Syria
Secretary of State Warren Christopher arrived in the Middle East today to begin a four-nation trip with the aim of nudging Syrian-Israeli peace efforts forward at a time when the Clinton Administration sees new signs that Damascus is serious about an agreement.
American officials in Mr.
Christopher's entourage say that Damascus is carefully laying the domestic groundwork for peace with Israel, and cite as evidence Syria's live broadcast of the July 25 signing of the friendship accord between Jordan and Israel.
Syria's Government-controlled newspapers have also published front-page pictures of King Hussein of Jordan and the Israeli Prime Minister, Yitzhak Rabin, together, as well as articles about their meeting in Washington.


West Indian Parade to Go On During Jewish Holiday
The West Indian-American Day Carnival Parade will be held on Labor Day, as it has the last 27 years, even though the date this year is the eve of Rosh ha-Shanah, the Jewish New Year, under a compromise reached last week.
Last year, Hasidic Jews of the Lubavitcher sect approached city officials and asked that the parade be moved to another date.


No Free Market
To the Sports Editor:
While the rest of the world turns to free-market principles to generate economic progress, baseball owners turn to discredited socialist principles to solve their business problems.
They don't believe that baseball wages should be conducted in free and open competition among those wishing to retain workers who can hit, throw or catch a baseball.


A Slipping Glimpser
If there is a theme to WILLEM DE KOONING: Paintings (National Gallery of Art/Yale University, $55), it is the slipperiness -- in all senses -- of the artist.
His paints were slippery.
His brushwork was slippery.
His paintings seemed to elide into one another.
And he called himself a "slipping glimpser." Of his predilection for slippery paints (he was known to mix his pigments with safflower oil), Mr. de Kooning said, "I like a nice, juicy, greasy surface." The oil extended the usual drying time, allowing him to work his paintings over and over.
Even when a painting was done (or at least gone), bits and pieces of it would crop up in later paintings, because Mr. de Kooning -- as Richard Shiff, a professor of art history at the University of Texas, Austin, points out -- made tracings, photographs and oil transfers of certain passages in his paintings, creating a "yogurt," a culture from which he could generate new works.
"When I'm falling," he said to the English art historian David Sylvester in 1960, "I am doing all right. And when I am slipping I say, 'Hey, this is very interesting.' . . . That is a wonderful sensation . . . to slip into this glimpse." As you can see from this sensuous book, Mr. de Kooning was quite right: it is wonderful slipping into this glimpse.
SARAH BOXER


Polly Wood, S. M. Kanovsky
Mary Clarke Wood, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Edward F. R. Wood Jr. of Philadelphia, was married yesterday in the garden of her parents' house in Mattapoisett, Mass., to Stephen Michael Kanovsky, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Morton R. Kanovsky of Cherry Hill, N.J.
The Rev.
Jay L. Newberry, an Episcopal priest, officiated.
Rabbi Allan Press took part in the interfaith ceremony.
The bride, 33, who is known as Polly, is keeping her name.
She graduated from Skidmore College and received a master's degree in education from the University of Pennsylvania.
She teaches kindergarten at Chestnut Hill Academy in Philadelphia.
Her father, who is retired, was a vice president of Provident National Bank in Philadelphia.


Corrections
An article in some regional editions last Sunday about plans for large retail developments in Connecticut misstated the size of a Stop &amp; Shop supermarket proposed for Norwalk.
It would be 68,000 square feet, not 150,000.


College Goes To the Student
THELMA Harris remembers the morning five years ago when she decided to go to college.
On the way to a clerical job she no longer enjoyed, the 35-year-old single mother heard a radio advertisement for Trinity College, a small, private women's college near her home in Washington.
Promised some credit for her life experience, an environment supportive of working women and, above all, classes on weekends, Ms.
Harris decided on the spot to apply.


Aviva Shlensky, Andrew Goldfarb
Aviva Shlensky, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Ronald Shlensky of Santa Barbara, Calif., is to be married today to Andrew Nathan Goldfarb, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Mark Goldfarb of New York.
Rabbi Margaret Holub is to perform the ceremony in the courtyard of the Santa Barbara Historical Museum.
The bride, 26, graduated from the University of Pennsylvania.
She is the press secretary for Families U.S.A., a health care reform advocacy organization in Washington.
Her father is a forensic psychiatrist and lawyer in Santa Barbara.


A Group Home Finds Acceptance
Breaking with a century-old covenant barring boarders and renters, the Lefferts Manor Association has decided to accept a social-service agency's plans for a group home.
The agency, Catholic Charities, will move six mentally retarded and developmentally disabled women into a $190,000 brick and limestone building at 156 Midwood Street in about two months.


Orioles' Owner: Man With A Plan
Peter Angelos thinks big.
That's not surprising for a man who, with his partners, paid a big price -- $173 million -- for the Baltimore Orioles.
Peter Angelos wants to Camdenize the major leagues.
"Let's build a Camden Yards facility in every major league locale," he said, referring to the Orioles' wonderfully successful home.
To achieve his plan, he wants major league baseball to join forces with local governmental entities to build the parks.
But that's a long-range project that has to wait its turn.
Before getting to ball parks, Angelos has another plan that he wants major league baseball to undertake, this one in conjunction with the players.
This one, he said, would eradicate once and for all the ongoing war between the game's management and labor teams.


Mohua Shome and Ajata Mediratta
Mohua Shome, a daughter of Taposh and Hena Shome of Cherry Hill, N.J., was married yesterday to Ajata Mediratta, a son of Drs.
Prakash and Parmeela Mediratta of Huntington, L.I.
Harenda R. Dave, a Hindu priest, officiated at the ceremony at the Hotel Atop the Bellevue in Philadelphia.
The bride, 27, who is keeping her name, is a broker liaison in New York for the First Call Corporation, a Boston-based financial services company.
She graduated from the University of Rochester.
Her father is a structural engineer in Salem, N.J., with the Public Service Electric and Gas Company.
Her mother is a library assistant at the Cherry Hill Free Public Library.


The Bug Battle, With Natural Weapons
HOLES in leaves are discouraging evidence for any gardener.
They indicate that some unwanted creature is about.
Time was that a pesticide was the solution.
But times have changed.
Creepy crawlers are still about, but instead of rushing for a quick solution, one seeks the identity of the enemy and a safe way to eradicate it.
Quite often all-out war is not really necessary.


TODAY'S SECTIONS
Special Today: Education Life Section 4A
* Teaching the arts in America: Merging museums and classrooms
* Vocational training in a high-tech age.
* College goes to the student.


She Sings; She Dances; She Has Made 3 Movies; She's 9
IN MANY WAYS, IT IS JUST like any other celebrity interview: the poolside lunch at a swanky Beverly Hills hotel, the special order from the waiter (capellini, with butter on the side), the star's demand (no tape recorder) and her young-Hollywood get-up (cut-off overalls and a floppy hat pulled down to the eyebrows).
But this actress's feet don't quite touch the floor, and her pasta keeps sliding off her fork.
When she forgets the name of her favorite magazine, the one that gives you advice on what to do when someone is being mean to you in school, she bounds over to her mother, who is at an adjacent table.


The Executive Computer; Taking the Risk Out of Using Unpedigreed Software
FREE software has always been a bit like a free puppy.
While the initial acquisition may be gratis, the true cost is all in the care and feeding.
And although many sophisticated programs are available for free, their lack of pedigree frightens away all but the most savvy of cyberspace kennel-keepers.
Free software is not the same as shareware, which is typically distributed over electronic bulletin boards as finished programs -- along with instructions to mail a check to the developer if you use the software.
Such developers rely on guilt and the honor system to help them break into the market, and they often offer service and documentation to those who pay.


Allison J. Pugh, Stephen D. Sellers
Allison Janet Pugh, a daughter of Roger and Joanne Pugh of Asuncion, Paraguay, was married yesterday to Stephen David Sellers, a son of David and Skip Sellers of Gaston, Ore.
The Rev.
Dr.
Paul Zeckhausen, a United Church of Christ minister, officiated at the Union Chapel in Hyannis Port, Mass.
The bride, a graduate of Harvard University, is a Foreign Service officer at the State Department in Washington.
Her father, a lawyer, and mother are Peace Corps volunteers in Asuncion.


Who Pays the Price Of a Nuclear Plant?
IF you owned a 1989 Buick Century and your tax bill went up because of a revaluation, you might write the check and not give it a second thought.
But suppose you also owned a 1993 Century in another town nearby, and your taxes were less than one-third as much?
That's the situation facing Northeast Utilities with its Connecticut Yankee nuclear plant in Haddam.
In a 1991 revaluation in which the company expected to see its assessment drop considerably, it saw it increase sharply instead.
The property tax dispute, the largest in Connecticut history, is being now played out in court.
Haddam says an appraisal by Dean &amp; Associates, an engineering consulting company in McMurray, Pa., determined the nuclear plant, which cost $109 million to build in 1969, is worth about $840 million today.


Put Him on a Boat and the Quiet America   Skipper Draws Attention
To compete as a skipper, sailing demands a considerable measure of brainpower and detached, methodical thinking.
Hardly anyone fits that description better than Dave Dellenbaugh, the widely unheralded starting helmsman and tactician of America  , the 75-foot yacht that defended the America's Cup in 1992.
Soft-spoken and slight of build, Dellenbaugh doesn't draw much attention on shore.
But put him on a boat, and he is not easily ignored.
Take the Thistles National Championship, which begins Saturday at the Cedar Point Yacht Club of Westport, Conn.
As a four-time champion in the Thistle class, Dellenbaugh will be there.
And the sailors all know it.


The American Audio Industry Seems to Come Full Circle
THE MOST STRIKING aspect of the recent Consumer Electronics Show, a traditional showcase for new equipment, was not the hardware.
Rather it was that the Chicago event as a whole confirmed the resurgence of the American audio industry.
Domestic firms predominated among exhibitors of audio components -- a notable change from previous years.
And with steadily mounting sales, American hi-fi companies are regaining important ground in a $21 billion market once lost to Japanese competition.


This Week's Numbers
Last
Consensus
Period
Estimates
(I.D.E.A. INC.)
Tuesday
June wholesale sales, pct. change
0.3
0.3
2nd-qtr. non-farm productivity, pct. change
1.3
-1.0
Thursday
July producer prices, pct. change
0.0
0.2
July retail sales, pct. change
0.6
0.0
July jobless claims, thousands
319
325
Friday
July consumer prices, pct. change
0.3
0.3
July business inventories, pct. change
1.1
0.3
This Week's Numbers
Tuesday
3-year Treasury refunding
Wednesday
Johnson Redbook Report released
Thursday
30-year Treasury refunding


Stephanie Rosen, Robert J. Klein
Stephanie Rose Rosen, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Barrett F. Rosen of Nashville, was married there last evening to Robert J. Klein, the son of Barbara E. Goldfarb of Los Angeles and Kenneth R. Klein of Dallas.
Rabbi Stephen Fuchs officiated at Temple Ohabai Sholom.
Mrs.
Klein, 27, is an associate in the New York office of O'Melveny &amp; Myers, a Los Angeles law firm.
She graduated from Emory University, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa, and she and her husband received law degrees from Stanford University.


Streetscapes/100 East 85th Street; A Slim Town House Survivor on a Park Ave. Corner
THE slim neo-Federal house at the southeast corner of 85th Street is one of the most peculiar on Park Avenue, but it has become bedraggled since its original owner, Lewis Gouverneur Morris, died in 1967.
Now, after three years of trying to sell, the owner, the New World Foundation, has given up and is cleaning and restoring the exterior of 100 East 85th Street.


New Pressures on Vocational Education
First, as vocational education enrollments wane for another year, set aside the tradition of practicing for adult work with jigsaws and adding machines.
It's going.
And most educators say, fine, leave it behind.
Next, consider the relentlessly climbing youth unemployment rates, the dwindling earnings of nonprofessional workers in their 20's and the complaints from employers that high school graduates are not prepared for the workplace.


NJN and Its Service To the State
The Legislature is committed to helping NJN become self-sufficient by giving its leaders the time and opportunity to enhance fund-raising efforts while we wean the network from state dollars.
The transition must be gradual, however, as evidenced by the Legislature's restoration of $1 million in funding for NJN for fiscal year 1995.
A coordinated and strong fund-raising effort will be the lifeline of NJN in the future, and it is my firm belief that under its new executive director, Elizabeth Chistopherson, NJN will be successful in attracting corporate sponsorship and personal donations from all across New Jersey.


BELGRADE APPEARS TO BE CUTTING OFF THE BOSNIA SERBS
Scores of heavily laden trucks were backed up at border posts between Yugoslavia and Bosnia today, suggesting that the embargo Serbian leaders in Belgrade said they were imposing on their Bosnian Serb brethren this week was being strictly enforced.
When the Serbian President, Slobodan Milosevic, announced a similar embargo last year, border guards allowed many trucks through, and foreign leaders quickly concluded that Mr.
Milosevic was not serious about his pledge to cut off supplies to the Bosnian Serbs.


Ode to Academic Nastiness
LAST summer, Prof.
Thomas J. Kniesner took a strong dislike to a book called "The Overworked American," by the Harvard economist Juliet B. Schor.
After dissecting the book in a seven-page review in the Journal of Human Resources, Professor Kniesner, who teachers economics at Indiana University in Bloomington, laid into it with a vengeance.
Professor Schor's thesis -- that Americans are working too hard -- is "overwhelmed" by a lack of supporting evidence, he wrote, and then scathingly likened the book to "diet or exercise books that offer quick weight loss without inconvenient sweating or rearranging one's eating habits."


New Counsel Reveals Little Of His Plans
The newly appointed independent counsel on Whitewater today promised that he would be fair and evenhanded, but he declined to discuss anything else about his plans for the investigation.
Speaking briefly with reporters at the annual conference of the American Bar Association in New Orleans, the new prosecutor, Kenneth W. Starr, would not discuss whether he would re-examine ground covered by his predecessor, Robert B. Fiske Jr.
Nor would he say whether he would ask Congress to delay further hearings on Whitewater until after his investigation is complete.


Blind Eye; Africa Allows Its Tragedies to Take Their Own Course
IF it takes the spectacle of open mass graves and children sobbing over their dead mothers to prick American interest in Africa, that is not so difficult to understand.
Africans are far away.
They don't supply American needs or threaten American interests.
Their problems often seem beyond comprehension, let alone fixing.
Even the sainted Mahatma Gandhi, who spent 21 years in Africa, was mainly concerned about justice for his own people, the Indian immigrants here, not about Africans.
The outside world's usual indifference to Africa can be deplored, but at least it can be explained.
How, though, to explain Africa's indifference to itself?


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
Chardonnay Celebration
CLASSROOM supplies consisted of pen, paper, and wine glass.
At the International Wine Symposium last week on the East End sipping was as important as scribbling.
For four days connoisseurs from France to Farmingdale studied Chardonnay.
What better way to study it than to sip it.
Then spit it, of course.
Swallowing is not advised if one wishes to taste -- and remember tasting -- 40 of the greatest Chardonnays.


An Angler Is Hooked on Vagaries of Salmon Fishing Up North
The forces that move an Atlantic salmon to take or reject an artificial fly are only vaguely comprehended by those who angle for this prince of fish.
Veteran fishers do know, however, that the salmon can be wildly cooperative one day and sullen the next.
When our party of nine anglers, led by Joseph Cullman 3d of Manhattan, arrived at the Charlo, New Brunswick, airport we were met by a departing group which was giddy with success.
With Edgar Cullman, Joseph Cullman's brother, as their host, they had set a six-day record at the Two Brook salmon camp: 74 salmon and grilse brought to the net.
The Cullman brothers own Runnymeade Lodge on the Restigouche River and Two Brook, which is on a Restigouche tributary, the Upsalquitch.


Africans in Early Virginia
The Jamestown Settlement in Williamsburg, Va., is commemorating 375 years of African-American culture with a special program on Saturday, Aug. 20.
In observance of the arrival in 1619 of the first people of African origin in British North America, the museum plans a symbolic arrival ceremony and several programs about African-American traditions and experiences and their influence on American culture.
The arrival ceremony will feature one of the museum's early 17th-century ship reproductions; L. Douglas Wilder, former Governor of Virginia, will be host.
Other activities planned include performances of music and dance, traditional African and African-American storytelling and showings of films with African-American themes.
There will also be demonstrations and discussions of 17th-century folk life.


New Visitor Attractions In Boston and New York
A sightseeing excursion of Boston emphasizing sites connected with John F. Kennedy and the addition of double-decker buses to the Gray Line sightseeing loop in New York are fresh attractions for visitors in those cities this summer.
The John F. Kennedy Library and Old Town Trolley Tours have joined forces in a new tour featuring places in the Boston area connected with President Kennedy and his family.
"J.F.K.'s Boston," a three-hour excursion, will operate mornings on Friday, Saturday and Sunday until Oct. 23, and over Thanksgiving weekend.
Highlights include visits to the President's birthplace in Brookline, now a National Park Historic Site, and the New Museum at the Kennedy Library, as well as stops at the Massachusetts State House and the North End of Boston.


Another Chapter Unfolds For Banks
Carl Banks returned home tonight. Well, not really.
From 1984 through 1992, his first nine seasons in the National Football League, he played strong-side outside linebacker for the Giants.
Last year, he played that position for the Washington Redskins.
Tonight, when the Giants met the Cleveland Browns in a preseason game at Giants Stadium, he played there for the Browns.


The Answers
We sit on it, walk on it and live in it.
We wear and write on its byproducts, and touch it for insurance against bad luck.
The only way you can escape it is on the sand dunes of the Sahara.
So take a risk.
Check out your blockhead quotient and see how many answers hit the mark.
Fran Handman 1. (c).  2. (b).  3.
In China, by Ts'ai Lun, the Emperor Ho-ti's minister of public works, out of the inner bark of the mulberry tree.  4.
False.
The terms "softwood" and "hardwood" refer to the type of tree.
Softwood comes from cone-bearing trees such as pine and redwood.
Hardwood comes from deciduous trees, which lose their leaves in the fall.  5.
Hardwood, which was a cheap and plentiful fuel at the time.  6.
Rayon.  7.
Balsa.  8.
True.
The bark of the cork oak is stripped about every 8 to 10 years to harvest cork.
As early as 400 B.C., Romans wore cork sandals and used cork to float fishing nets.  9. (b).  10.
Ironwood is the name given to several unrelated species of trees with very hard and heavy wood that grow worldwide.  11.
False; bamboo is a grass.  12.
Ash.
It is an extremely flexible wood that, with steam-bending -- the process of exposing it to saturated steam, then applying pressure to bend it to shape -- can be made into bentwood chairs, hatracks, rocking chairs, etc.  13. (a).  14. (c).  15.
In ancient times, certain trees were worshiped.
For example, in Greek mythology the oak was sacred to Zeus, while in Scandinavian lore the ash was sacred to the Norse god Thor.
It was believed that the way to avoid punishment from the gods for boasting, or to gain good fortune, was to touch one of the sacred trees.
In time, this evolved to the belief that any piece of wood would do the trick.  16.
The United States; Russia is second and Canada is third.  17.
One-third of the cut trees are replaced, largely with fast-growing monocultures, which are forests of a single type of tree.
The disadvantage of monocultures is that they do not support the variety of wildlife and vegetation that a mixture of trees would, and thus weaken the ecosystem.


K. P. Brustman, Richard Rasor Jr.
Kathleen Patricia Brustman, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Leonard W. Brustman Jr., of Larchmont, N.Y., was married there yesterday to Richard Drew Rasor Jr., the son of Mrs.
Frederick C. Stutzmann Jr., of Garden City, L.I., and Mr.
Rasor of Bethel, Me.
Msgr.
T.
Peter Ryan, a cousin of the bridegroom, performed the ceremony at St.
Augustine's Roman Catholic Church.
Mrs.
Rasor, 27, is studying for a master's degree in professional studies at Manhattanville College.
She graduated from Boston College.
Her father retired as a senior vice president of the New York Stock Exchange.


Wall Street; Betting on the Sympathy Vote
RANDALL D. HUBBARD, a 30-year horse breeder and chairman of Hollywood Park Inc., is making some big bets these days.
In the last year, Mr.
Hubbard has begun to assemble a national race track empire, acquiring tracks in states where he hopes casino-style gambling will be legalized.
His ambitious strategy is to replicate at those tracks the sort of entertainment complex that is taking shape alongside Hollywood Park's track in Inglewood, Calif., where a cavernous card parlor opened last month.


Health Care and the Generation Chasm
To the Editor:
In arguing against the use of "community ratings" for setting health insurance premiums ("Don't Hand the Young the Health Bill . . . ," Viewpoints, July 24), M. L. Mitchell and Richard Thau contend that because the average 25-year-old consumes $560 in health care a year and the average 55-year-old consumes $2,345, it is unfair to charge the same premium for both.


Slain Woman's Sister Seeks Custody Accord
The sister of a New Jersey woman whose husband is charged in her murder is hoping to win custody of the couple's two children without resorting to Jordanian courts, her Jordanian lawyer said today.
The lawyer said Muhammad Ismail Abequa, who is being held on charges of first-degree murder and kidnapping, can resolve a dispute by signing over custody to his wife's family.
But members of Mr.
Abequa's family have insisted they want the children raised in Jordan.


Whitewater's Wreckage, So Far
Give the Clinton Administration witnesses this.
They were tireless in their legalistic evasions and prickly self-justifications.
Even with a new independent counsel on the case, their "nothing happened" defense may have thrown up enough smoke and confusion for them to avoid legal trouble.
But at what cost to an Administration with a record of recklessly promiscuous conflict of interest and to a President already suspected of being incapable of remembering the whole truth?
Mr.
Clinton may have simply been blessing his aides' efforts to save their own skins, or jobs, when he said he had not watched the Whitewater hearings.
But if he spoke the truth, the confession suggests a man oblivious to the fact that his political ship, and hence his Presidency, could break apart on the rocks of mismanagement and obfuscation.


Bulletin: Yankees Mortal After All
Kirby Puckett was disgusted and frustrated with how the Twins were being battered by the Yankees.
He pleaded with his teammates to win another game before he dies and joked that he might join Kent Hrbek in retirement at the end of the season.
Melido Perez wishes that Puckett was serious and that Hrbek's retirement had begun.
After enduring two straight evenings of the Yankees treating their pitchers like minor leaguers, the Twins tonight defeated the finest team in the American League by rocking four homers.
Puckett and Hrbek blasted homers off the sluggish Perez and Puckett added a two-run double to power the Twins to a 10-4 victory in the Metrodome.


Heather Madden, N. M. MacShane
Heather Adams Madden, the daughter of Mrs.
Donald D. Breed of Providence, R.I., and Hugh A. Madden of Paradise Valley, Ariz., was married yesterday to Nicholas Morse MacShane, the son of Lynn Clarke and Frank S. MacShane, both of New York.
The ceremony was performed by the bridegroom's stepfather, the Rev.
Philip Clarke, a United Methodist minister, at Central Congregational Church in Providence.
Mrs.
MacShane, 25, graduated from Lake Forest College.
Her father is a lawyer with Squire, Sanders &amp; Dempsey, a law firm in Phoenix.
Her mother, Elizabeth Breed, is an assistant to the chairman of the architecture department at the Rhode Island School of Design in Providence.


Elissa Panster and Adam Berkman
Elissa Dawn Panster, a daughter of Sandra Panster of New York and Howard Panster of Edison, N.J., was married last evening to Adam Craig Berkman, the son of Adrienne and Harvey Berkman of Stamford, Conn.
Rabbi Arthur Starr performed the ceremony at the Marriott at Glenpointe in Teaneck, N.J.
Mrs.
Berkman, 27, is an associate at Beck &amp; Halberg, a New York law firm.
She graduated magna cum laude from Tufts University and received a law degree from George Washington University.
Her father is a senior vice president at Fuji Securities in New York.


Catherine Taylor, John M. Berner
Catherine Ann Taylor, a daughter of Paul and Lucienne Taylor of Orono, Minn., was married yesterday to John Marshall Berner, a son of Robert and Elizabeth Berner of North Haven, Conn.
The Rev.
George Lobien performed the ceremony at the Lutheran Church of St.
Andrew in Silver Spring, Md.
Mrs.
Berner, 27, and Mr.
Berner, 30, are graduates of Cornell University.
She is the executive assistant to the president of Citizens Against Government Waste in Washington.
Her father is an account executive with Corporate Financers, a factoring company in Minneapolis.
Her mother is the director of the Minnesota Institute for Talented Youth, a summer program in St.
Paul.


Town Still Split on Case of Two Girls Killed on Jeep Ride
The roses and rain-smudged pages of poetry that lined the accident site are gone, and summer's calm has eased the grief that gripped this town three months ago.
On May 14 a Jeep Cherokee carrying seven teen-agers around town "beeping," or honking the horn in a tradition intended to raise team spirit for a school dance competition, flipped and fatally crushed Jaclyn Coriale, 14, and Paula Antonucci, 16.


July 31-Aug. 6: The Happy Couple; A Marriage Made In the Public Eye
What does a fabulously wealthy recluse, raised in show business and regarded as a bit of an oddball, look for in a mate?
Maybe the answer is another fabulously wealthy recluse, raised in show business and regarded as a bit of an oddball.
And when the lovebirds in question are Michael Jackson and Lisa Marie Presley, can there be any limit to the hyperbole surrounding the union?
Apparently not.


In the Philippines, Villagers Work to Ward Off a Typhoon


United Way Contributions Rise Slightly
Donations to the United Way last year were up only one-half of 1 percent, to a total of $3 billion, United Way officials said last week, which is not enough to offset the 3 percent rise in inflation.
Elaine L. Chao, president of the United Way of America, said the continued economic weakness in many parts of the country and layoffs at major companies had held down donations.
Ninety percent of the gifts are raised through United Way campaigns in factories and offices, mainly from employee contributions made through payroll deductions.


July 31-Aug. 6; Ceremony For Slain French Nationals at Algiers Airport


When Your Own Initials Aren't Enough
ALTHOUGH IT HAS SLOWED DOWN in the last couple of years, at least in Japan, the economic energy of the Far East has led to plenty of business for architects from the United States and Europe.
But if the first generation of their buildings is any indication, Asia has been more helpful to architects' balance sheets than to their reputations.
Most work by American architects in Japan turns out to look pretty much like their work back home, only more so.
It is as if they saw their commissions more as advertising than as design opportunities.
Frank Gehry, for example -- as potent a creative force as exists in American architecture -- built a restaurant in Kobe partly in the shape of a fish, his favorite form.
The Kobe fish, whose metal-scaled tail shoots up three or four stories, isn't much more than a spectacular sign.
It's fun, but it hardly pushes Mr.
Gehry's work forward: it's more a caricature of Gehry architecture than an exemplar of it.
The rest of the building (which houses an American-style restaurant called the Fish Dance) is ordinary, even dull.


Time for U.S. to Sit Down With the New Japan
To the Editor:
The Clinton Administration is still at a loss about how to deal with Prime Minister Tomiichi Murayama of Japan and his new coalition regime.


And Then There's . . .
To the Editor:
In 1991, when the curtain arose on the first act of the Metropolitan Opera's new production of "Katya Kabanova," it revealed a strikingly Hopperesque setting for Leos Janacek's stark drama.
It would be interesting to know if the designer, Robert Israel, or the director, Jonathan Miller, consciously used the Hopper motifs in their conception.
ELEANOR S. MEYERHOFF  Roslyn Heights, N. Y.


Midsummer Nights With Schumann
FIVE years ago, at Bard College in Annandale-on-Hudson, Leon Botstein and Sarah Rothenberg started a festival to take listeners beyond the usual summer grab bag of concert favorites.
Their idea was to choose a composer, then explore his musical world in depth, through lectures, panel discussions, exhibitions and two weekends of concerts.
The programs would feature not only works of the selected composer but also those of students, family members, contemporaries and others.


A 'Merry Wives' in the Borscht Belt
LAST month, the merry wives of the Wild West discharged blanks.
Now, the merry wives of the Borscht Belt are really cooking.
There's something of the slapdash about Shakespeare's comedy of everyday suburbanites (no lords, no queens) in the 16th century.
But even though "The Merry Wives of Windsor" is the only one in the canon to be set in its own time and place, there's no need to keep it there.


Viking Mosquitoes
To the Editor:
As bad as the bug situation is in the New York region this summer (news article, July 29), at least people in this area are somewhat prepared for and resigned to pesky mosquitoes.


Helping Map Out International Adoptions
CONSIDER a day in the life of Lorraine Restivo-Waly.
Shortly after her husband, Haidar, and their seven children -- all under the age of 10 -- have departed in the morning, Ms.
Restivo-Waly, a psychotherapist in private practice, sees her first patient.
"My office is in my home. We live in a huge loft on 18th Street in Chelsea, so it is not as difficult for me to go to work as it might be," she said.
"I see patients until 3, and then I pick up the children at their various schools and we're together until after dinner. Then I have office hours until 9. It's a full day but I seem to thrive on all the activity." Mr.
Waly is a computer systems analyst at Mount Sinai Hospital in Manhattan.


Haitians Seek New Influence In Local Politics
Across the United States, a growing sense of rootedness among Haitian immigrants -- strengthened by the tumult in Haiti's Government -- has been prompting the formation of political groups to lobby for Haitian concerns in America.
In Brooklyn, which has a Haitian immigrant population second only to Miami, an organization called the Haitian-American Political Action Group has taken shape in recent months.


POSTINGS: On the Pleasantville Campus; Offices and Lounges for Pace
With its barn-like roof and silo-shaped bay windows, the pastoral design of the Ann and Alfred Goldstein Academic Center at Pace University in Pleasantville, N.Y., in Westchester County, looks more like an upscale country mansion than a high-tech college facility.
Instead, the $6.5 million center will house offices and lounges for the faculties and students at Pace's Lubin School of Business and its School of Computer Science and Information Systems.


Corrections
The table of Treasury bills, bonds and notes was omitted from some editions of Business Day yesterday, and in other editions it reported prices from Thursday, rather than Friday.
Readers wishing corrected copies of the table may write to the Business Editor, The New York Times, 229 West 43d Street, New York, N.Y. 10036.


Man Slain in Apartment
A 74-year-old dental technician was slain in his Harlem apartment late Friday night, the police said.
They said he was found on the kitchen floor with a slashed throat and a plastic bag over his head.


Corrections
A report in the Postings column on July 10 about restoration of the New York Life Insurance Building reversed the names of the original architect.
He was Cass Gilbert.


Commercial Property/Office Parks; A Pioneer Bows Out of Commercial Real Estate
AS a coda to the age of seemingly unlimited speculative commercial building in Westchester County in the 70's and 80's, one of the big builders of that time has quietly transferred ownership of 18 of 26 buildings in a move called a transfer of deeds in lieu of foreclosure.
The builder, Lowell M. Schulman, transferred the properties to the Eastridge Properties Corporation, which has been managing them for the last two years.
It was the largest such transaction in the county's history.


Battle of the Bands, Senior Division
It has been a record-breaking year for the concert industry, and it's only half over.
The Eagles, who are at the midway point on their U.S. tour, have set a new high in ticket prices for a rock band on the road; and Pink Floyd, which just completed its American road trip, has broken the Rolling Stones' 1989 record for the highest grossing American tour, taking in more than $100 million.
On Friday, the Rolling Stones roll into to town again, making this summer a true battle of the bands.
Here are a few pointers to help you determine which aging rock group will be the king of the road:


Somebody the Sailor
To the Editor:
In his review of "Once Upon a Time: A Floating Opera" (July 3), R. H. W. Dillard asserts that John Barth's new novel is the third seafaring fiction that the author has published since "The Floating Opera" (1956): "Mr. Barth has since then thrice built seaworthy boats of words and set fictive sail down the Chesapeake Bay toward the open sea." Mr.
Dillard identifies the other two literary vessels as "Sabbatical" (1982) and "The Tidewater Tales: A Novel" (1987).


July 31-Aug. 6: Can You Believe This?; Belgrade Says It Has Broken With Its Bosnian Proteges
After years of giving military and economic support, Serbia and Montenegro said last week that they had cut off the rebel Serbs who have seized 70 percent of Bosnia and insist on rejecting an international peace plan that might end the Bosnian war by scaling back their holdings to a mere 49 percent.
Serbia's President, Slobodan Milosevic, clearly wanted to parry an international threat to push for tighter economic sanctions against Serbia unless it pressed its allies to make the deal.
Lines of trucks, cars and buses on the border and complaints about cut telephone lines were the strongest evidence that Belgrade meant what it said.
But Mr.
Milosevic bluffed last year, and the year before, and the year before that, and doubt remains about just how serious he is about abandoning the Bosnian Serbs to their fate.
He could easily enough prove his sincerity by announcing Serbia's recognition of Bosnia's independence and territorial integrity, or by inviting international inspectors to watch the border.
And these he has not done.


Ideas &amp; Trends; Women Without Hair: Lost Or Found?
IT is not the hair. It's the hair thing.
In 1486, the "Malleus Maleficarum" identified witches' hair as so laden with mystical powers that along with such tortures as hanging the accused from their thumbs, the best-selling manual of the Inquisition suggested that their locks should be shorn.
To finish the job off, the witches' heads were sometimes splashed with alcohol and set on fire.


The Bug Battle, With Natural Weapons
HOLES in leaves are discouraging evidence for any gardener.
They indicate that some unwanted creature is about.
Time was that a pesticide was the solution.
But times have changed.
Creepy crawlers are still about, but instead of rushing for a quick solution, one seeks the identity of the enemy and a safe way to eradicate it.
Quite often all-out war is not really necessary.


Serb Defiance Continues
Bosnian Serbs continued their violations of the security zone around Sarajevo, firing mortar shells despite a NATO air strike.
Page 9.


White Barn, Again a Season
THANK Donna McKechnie.
If Lucille Lortel had not been a member of the invited audience at a runthrough performance of Ms.
McKechnie's one-woman show a few months ago in a Manhattan studio, the veteran producer said there would have been no season at Lucille Lortel's White Barn Theater and Museum in Westport this summer.
By her own admission, Miss Lortel has been saying "no more" for 30 years.
"I can't keep going on," she repeated yet again the other day, three days before the opening of the White Barn's 46th season.


Flashback to '81: Another Lead, Another Strike
Thirteen agonizing and unlucky years after George Steinbrenner implored Manager Gene Michael to guide the Yankees into first place because a players strike was lingering, he has repeated those stern directions again.
Instead of a broken record, Steinbrenner now sounds like a scratched compact disk.
This time, Michael is the general manager as George burns his ears about being the best because a strike is looming.
Could it actually be 13 years since the Yankees, the most successful franchise in baseball history, played in a World Series?
Since Michael helped nudge the Yankees into first place for the first half and was fired after challenging Steinbrenner to dismiss him or stop threatening him in the second half?
Since Steinbrenner claimed he fought with two Yankees bashers in a Los Angeles hotel elevator after Game 5?
Since the Yankees mishandled a 2-0 lead and bowed to the Dodgers in six games?


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: August 7, 1994
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
25
THE CLIENT, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $6.99.) Just before he kills himself, a lawyer reveals a deadly secret to an 11-year-old boy.
2
6
WITHOUT REMORSE, by Tom Clancy. (Berkley, $6.99.) John Kelly tries to rescue prisoners held in North Vietnam.
3
7
A CASE OF NEED, by Michael Crichton writing as Jeffery Hudson. (Signet, $6.99.) A 1968 novel about the death of a surgeon's daughter.
4
8
THE SHIPPING NEWS, by E. Annie Proulx. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $12.) A man mourns his adulterous wife in Newfoundland.
5*
3
FORREST GUMP, by Winston Groom. (Pocket, $5.50.) A slow-witted man makes his way through three decades of American history.
6
2
SACRED CLOWNS, by Tony Hillerman. (Harper Paperbacks, $6.99.) Two Navajo tribal policemen and a web of politics and murder.
7
2
POT OF GOLD, by Judith Michael. (Pocket, $6.99.) A mother and her teen-age daughter go on a spree after winning $60 million in a lottery.
8
3
A SIMPLE PLAN, by Scott Smith. (St. Martin's, $5.99.) Madness besets a man who plans to pocket a fortune on which he stumbled.
9
2
FINNEGAN'S WEEK, by Joseph Wambaugh. (Bantam, $6.50.) A San Diego cop tracks a crime that results in horror south of the border.
10
17
CLEAR AND PRESENT DANGER, by Tom Clancy. (Berkley, $6.99.) The C.I.A.'s Jack Ryan fights drug lords in Colombia.
11*
2
GUARDIAN, by John Saul. (Fawcett, $5.99.) A single mother strives to protect her children from a stalking, unseen killer.
12
11
PLEADING GUILTY, by Scott Turow. (Warner, $6.99.) A lawyer pursues his firm's missing partner and a multimillion-dollar fund.
13
2
SNAGGED, by Carol Higgins Clark. (Dove/Warner, $5.50.) While in Miami, Regan Reilly contends with a variety of crimes.
14
1
ENCHANTED, by Elizabeth Lowell. (Avon, $5.99.) A marriage of convenience in 12th-century Britain; the last volume of a trilogy.
15
1
THE HORSE YOU CAME IN ON, by Martha Grimes. (Ballantine, $5.99.) A British sleuth and a case of murder and mayhem in Baltimore.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
NonFiction
1
30
CARE OF THE SOUL, by Thomas Moore. (Harper Perennial, $12.) Everyday spirituality.
2
561
THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $10.95.) Inspiration.
3
3
O.J.
SIMPSON: American Hero, American Tragedy, by Marc Cerasini. (Pinnacle, $4.99.) The life of the legendary football player who has been accused of murder.
4
12
LISTENING TO PROZAC, by Peter D. Kramer. (Penguin, $12.95.) Mood-changing medications.
5
14
MAMA MAKES UP HER MIND, by Bailey White. (Vintage, $10.) Life in a Georgia town.
6
11
REENGINEERING THE CORPORATION, by Michael Hammer and James Champy. (Harper Business, $13.) Business innovation.
7*
30
WHERE ANGELS WALK, by Joan Wester Anderson. (Ballantine, $10.) Stories about angelic intervention in human affairs.
8*
77
I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS, by Maya Angelou. (Bantam, $4.99.) The poet's depiction of her childhood and adolescence.
9
3
A BOOK OF ANGELS, by Sophy Burnham. (Ballantine, $10.) Encounters with celestial beings as recorded in the past and present.
10
13
GIRL, INTERRUPTED, by Susanna Kaysen. (Vintage, $10.) A young woman's mental illness.
11
10
FORTUNATE SON, by Lewis B. Puller Jr. (Bantam, $5.99.) The autobiography of a Marine general's son who was mutilated in Vietnam.
12
147
A YEAR IN PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Vintage, $10.) A sojourn in the south of France.
13*
4
STAR TREK MEMORIES, by William Shatner with Chris Kreski. (Harper Paperbacks, $6.99.) A memoir by the man who played Captain Kirk.
14
18
YOUNG MEN &amp; FIRE, by Norman Maclean. (University of Chicago, $10.95.) An account of a disastrous fire in a Montana forest in 1949.
15*
61
THE SILENT PASSAGE, by Gail Sheehy. (Pocket, $5.50.) Menopause and today's women.
16*
15
RACE MATTERS, by Cornel West. (Vintage, $9.) Issues affecting black Americans.
17*
40
THE TAO OF POOH, by Benjamin Hoff. (Penguin, $9.) Taoism a la A.A. Milne.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Advice, How-To and Miscellaneous
1
2
EAT MORE, WEIGH LESS, by Dean Ornish. (Harper Perennial, $14.) Counsel from a physician about diet and nutrition.
2
177
THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE, by Stephen R. Covey. (Fireside/S&amp;S, $12.) Principles to practice in the pursuit of success.
3
10
RAND MCNALLY ROAD ATLAS. (Rand McNally, $8.95.) The 1994 edition of a guide to the United States, Canada and Mexico.
4
39
WHAT TO EXPECT WHEN YOU'RE EXPECTING, by Arlene Eisenberg, Heidi E. Murkoff and Sandee E. Hathaway. (Workman, $10.95.) Advice for parents-to-be.
Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending July 23, at 3,050 bookstores plus wholesalers serving 38,000 other retailers, statistically weighted to represent sales in all such outlets nationwide.
An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.


The Booming, Bulging Tex-Mex Border
M.
G. (Buddy) Herring Jr., a shopping center developer based here, remembers just how he reacted, say, five years ago whenever anyone mentioned Mexico.
"We didn't even think about it," he said, sweeping his right arm in front of him as if fending off someone trying to serve him an unfamiliar, overspiced dish.
"We had enough opportunities in the United States."
Today, an easel in his conference room holds a map of Mexico, with orange adhesive dots on Leon, Torreon, Chihuahua and Monterrey.
He is so busy building shopping centers in these cities and making plans for more that he no longer even bothers with the United States.


World Markets; Foreigners Drive Tokyo's Movements
It may say Tokyo Stock Exchange over the entrance and the players are predominantly Japanese, but ask an analyst these days who is really controlling the fate of the stock market here, and the answer is likely to be the unexpected -- foreigners.
With overseas investors having loaded up on billions of dollars in Japanese equities in the first half of the year, the Japanese market was one of the strongest in the world.
The Nikkei index of 225 issues shot up 18 percent to 20,521.70 on Friday from the beginning of 1994.


Mutual Funds; Making Children Wall Street-Wise
CALL it mutual fun.
The new Young Investor Fund, sponsored by Stein Roe &amp; Farnham in Chicago, aims to make investing easy for children 10 years and older by providing them with a whole load of educational materials and by putting their money into companies that touch their lives, like Coca-Cola and Microsoft.
The concept is good.
It's important to learn about investing because "maybe our parents don't know how to do it," said Julieanne Hersk, 10 1/2.
Besides, "it's easier to learn when you're young," said Dawn DelValle, 14.


In a Full-House Artist Colony, Raging Intellectual Emotions
IT was true we would have a goose-egg omelette together, the Balakian/Reynolds/Nalbantian family and me, but never so much as now, surrounded by this family of literary critics and one utopian economist, would I have such a feeling that thought was food, and idea was feeling and talking was home.
In an age in which so many seek the solace and stimulus of the organized artists' colony, creating their "safe families" through elective affinity rather than biological destiny, here was an Old World family that was at once a self-contained artists' colony and the all-accepting place of return that is perhaps every creator's dream.


A Faulty Model
To the Editor:
So the "healthy immune system" is the "metaphor du jour in corporate America" and "being unmoored in space, experiencing fear, models in an accurate way what is expected of employees." That's the current guide for corporate decision making ("Examining the Working Human," At Work, July 17).
Whatever happened to the simple -- and equally devastating for business -- metaphors based on sports, medicine and sex?


NJN and Its Service To the State
The schools in New Jersey are in desperate need of the types of programming provided throughout our state by NJN.
In our school, in particular, nine different courses are provided via satellite under the auspices of the education department of NJN.
Because of its involvement in distance learning, New Jersey has been an active participant in the Satellite Educational Resources Consortium.
The State of New Jersey through the participation of NJN and the State Department of Education is, therefore, able to influence policy and chart the direction of distance-learning curriculums in the future.
It is very unlikely that WNET could do such things for the citizens of our state.


Laura Zelenko, Robert Urban
Laura Susan Zelenko, a daughter of Barbara and Benjamin Zelenko of Chevy Chase, Md., was married yesterday to Robert Urban, the son of Daisy and Alexander Urban of Charlotte, N.C.
Judge Patricia M. Wald of the United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit performed the ceremony at the Carlton in Washington.
The couple are correspondents covering Central and Eastern Europe for Bloomberg Business News.
They are based in Prague.
The bride, 30, is keeping her name.
She graduated from Princeton University.
Her father is a partner in Nussbaum &amp; Wald, a Washington law firm.
Her mother is the president of the Woman's National Democratic Club in Washington.


Mosque's Quest for New Building Becomes a Plan for Urban Renewal
When Izak-el M. Pasha looks south these days from his third-floor office window in the Malcolm Shabazz mosque on West 116th Street, he sees a vacant red-dirt lot strewn with broken glass and discarded toys.
But if Mr.
Pasha and a group of Harlem business leaders have their way in the next several years, 85 units of federally subsidized housing for the elderly will spring up on the site.


Sikh Immigrant Community Experiencing Growing Pains
With its golden dome and cupola, the Gurdwara Sikh Temple is a jarring sight among the modest brick houses of Richmond Hill.
But the Gurdwara has been a generally benign neighbor, except perhaps for traffic and noise on days of worship.
That changed late last month, when an argument over a temple election escalated and 700 Sikhs brimmed over into the streets, scuffling with one another and with the police.
Fifteen people, including five police officers, were injured.
One man was charged with carrying an unlicensed gun and four others with disorderly conduct.


No Faith?
To the Sports Editor:
Now is the time for players and owners to negotiate in good faith and show consideration to the fans.
Instead, I see players setting an Aug. 12 strike date smack in midseason.
As to the owners, how can they expect the players to accept a cut in their share of revenues from 58 percent to 50 percent?
Instead of blaming their so-called financial woes on the players (so-called because franchise values have skyrocketed), weaker clubs like San Diego should be given two years to find new owners/ investors or new locations, or be compelled to lose their franchises back to major league baseball at book value.
SCOTT AVIDON  Brooklyn


Disabled Pupils: No Baby-Sitting
THIS could be any elementary-school classroom.
The topic is "The Trumpet of the Swan." Maps and letters of the alphabet adorn the powder-blue walls.
And behind pint-sized desks, girls and boys try their best, despite the seductions of the blue sky and sunshine through the classroom windows, to stay focused on the children's book.
The class is not at all typical, though, as evidenced by the ratio of three staff members -- a teacher and two assistants -- to only seven children.
This is the Reece School, on the Upper East Side of Manhattan, for children in grades K to 6 with developmental disorders.
It is a place for youngsters whose severe learning disabilities and emotional problems have threatened to cut them off from the world.
But for a remarkably high percentage, the school is also an opportunity to rejoin it.
Impaired Abilities
Most of the Reece students suffer from attention-deficit disorder, which is often associated with hyperactivity and impulsive behavior, or pervasive developmental disorder.
Pervasive developmental disorder is the more serious, impairing a child's ability to develop cognitive, language, motor, social or imagination skills.
Children with this disorder are often withdrawn and hypersensitive to sound and light.


Selling a Transvestite Musical Set in the Outback
QUENTIN TARANTINO'S "PULP Fiction" grabbed the top award at the Cannes International Film Festival two months ago, and a low-budget Australian comedy (about two drag queens and a transsexual who cross the Outback in an old school bus) won no prize at all.
But "The Adventures of Priscilla, Queen of the Desert," starring the veteran English actor Terence Stamp and opening here on Wednesday, demonstrated that there was more than one way to win at Cannes.
The film, which Variety described as a "cheerfully vulgar and bitchy" road movie, follows the travails of Bernadette (Mr. Stamp), Tick (Hugo Weaving) and Adam (Guy Pearce).
The three characters comically endure the rigors of the scorching desert (and one another), triumph over the intolerance they find in sparse redneck towns and, as the film turns more serious, discover themselves and where they really belong. (Back in Sydney.)


Deborah Kanter And Ira V. Heffan
Deborah Susan Kanter, the daughter of Carl and Gail Kanter of Scarsdale, N.Y., was married last evening to Ira Victor Heffan, the son of Martin and Ellen Heffan of Otis, Mass.
Rabbi Stephen Klein officiated at Tappan Hill in Tarrytown, N.Y.
The bride is a conference manager at Eastern Research Group, environmental consultants in Lexington, Mass.
She is a graduate of Washington University and is studying for an M.B.A. at Boston University.
Her father is a general counsel in the managed-care division of Merck &amp; Company, the pharmaceutical concern, in Montvale, N.J.
Her mother is a teacher's aide at the Greenacres School in Scarsdale.


Leanne Mazzei, Alfred J. Witko
Dr.
Leanne Mazzei and Dr.
Alfred James Witko, dentists in New York, are to be married today in Massapequa, L.I.
The Rev.
Kent E. Huyck is to perform the ceremony at the Massapequa Dutch Reformed Church.
The bride graduated from Villanova University and received her dental degree from New York University, where she is to study orthodontics in the fall.
She is a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
George W. Mazzei of Massapequa.


The Slump in Teen Idoldom
DAVID CASSIDY crooned, Donny Osmond cooed and the Monkees did whatever the Monkees did, and millions of girls in training bras ran out to buy their albums.
It was 1970, give or take a few years, the heyday of teen idoldom.
For magazines like Tiger Beat and Sixteen it was a golden age, a time when every sweet young thing in bell-bottoms pined for Micky Dolenz and knew the words to "I'm a Believer."


No Bad Summers
"Like all good things that cannot be taken for granted, weekend country life heightens the pleasure of city weekdays. Attempts to make the retreat even more appealing tend to become an avocation." -- House Beautiful, July 1994
It was not without a little effort that publishing executive Mark B. and his wife, publicist Dodi L., converted a barn they found in Yuma, Ariz., into the guest cottage of their summer home in Rhinebeck, N.Y.
While preparing to drag the structure 2,225 miles to its new location on the Hudson River, the couple decided it was important to transport the entire Yuma site -- including the barn's dirt floors.
"People do faux this and faux that," Dodi explains.
"But you can't fake dirt."
Indeed, authenticity is the prevailing ethos of the couple's second home.
Birds' nests found in the barn's rafters have been stuffed into feed bags to create extravagant, squashy throw pillows; on pegs above the bedrooms' straw pallets hang pieces of Amish clothing -- overalls, simple shifts, mobcaps -- that Mark and Dodi hope guests will don as sleepwear.
If friends and family have been reluctant to visit so far, that hasn't discouraged Mark and Dodi.
"They'll come around," says Mark, using paint stripper to remove a thick crust of floor dirt that has formed on the coffee table.
"In the meantime, we're keeping very busy."
EVER SINCE ROBERTA S. STARTED HER SUMMER consultancy business two years ago, she has been living year round in the Litchfield, Conn., Colonial where she previously only summered.
Summer consultancy?
The phrase, coined by Roberta, is an attempt to give name to those myriad summer-house-related services the 39-year-old caterer and former actress provides to second homeowners and renters in the historic Litchfield area.
"To me," says Roberta, whose piercing intensity and penchant for wearing military fatigues belies her diminutive stature, "summer is not a season. It's a process. It's a series of choices. Do I choose to endure the insect population? Do I choose to get stuck in Friday evening traffic on the Saw Mill River Parkway? These sorts of questions fascinate me."
Roberta's new book, "Summer Is Not a Season, It's a Process. It's a Series of Choices," will be in bookstores this month.
Extolling the virtues of preparedness in all situations, "Summer" is a compendium of sage observations and pointers for gracious summer-home living: "Think of fresh corn like cut wood: have it delivered." "Lemonade is not about lemons. It's about sunshine." "Don't let a child mope indoors because he can't find his snorkeling mask: give him a plastic bag and a large rubber band."
While Roberta shows us her garden of infant vegetables -- tiny eggplant and tiny zucchini she plans to export to Manhattan "for diners with weak knife skills" -- a squawking sound is emitted by the walkie-talkie hanging from her belt.
It is Roberta's assistant, Zoe, calling from one of the three houses Roberta is working on.
They have a loud, urgent conversation.
Finally, Roberta blurts out: "I have to go to one of my sites. Someone has made a bad choice."
WHEN INSURANCE SALESMAN JACK B. AND TWO of his fishing buddies first entered the Adirondack lodge Jack bought two years ago, a strange odor emanated from therein.
"We knew exactly what it was," says Jack, pointing to a wall formerly bedecked with mounted elk heads.
"It was moldering elk."
The three men removed the heads from the wall.
But suddenly the lodge seemed less . . . authentic.
So Jack did what only a true outdoorsman would do -- he turned seven of the lodge's rooms into living quarters for live elk.
On this balmy late-summer weekend, the inhabitants of the lodge's bedrooms are, as we move from east to west: Jack and his wife, Paula; an elk; an elk; Jack and Paula's daughter, Steff; an elk; Jack's fishing buddy Eddie; an elk; an elk; Jack and Paula's son, Joseph, and an elk; an elk; an elk; and the family's au pair, Elke.
"You know what this whole thing reminds me of?" says Jack.
"You know when you're looking for an apartment in the classifieds and the abbreviation for 'eat-in kitchen' is written EIK, and you wonder, 'How the hell did an elk end up in someone's apartment?' " He pauses.
"Now I know."
ADVERTISING EXECUTIVE MASON F. AND cosmetics counselor Eduardo M. are eschewing the yearly flight from metropolis to country idyll this summer and are opting for something more original: they are spending all their weekends in their SoHo apartment.
How will they transcend the irritations of the urban summer?
Explains Eduardo: "I have translated the 26 quintessential summer experiences into a series of sprays and lotions."
A recent Saturday afternoon found the two men dressed in nubby, bunny-type sleeping garments, hovering expectantly near a floor-to-ceiling bookshelf on which are tidily arranged varying types of glass bottles, all bearing handwritten labels -- "Wicker Picnic Basket," "Kite on the Beach," "Unflattering Celebrity Biography."
What is in the lotions and sprays?
"They're all over-the-counter products," Eduardo says somewhat mysteriously from the bookshelf.
Are all the Experiences different from one another?
"Yes. Each is unique and specifically chosen for its ability to evoke an aspect of summer." Are any of them lighter fluid?
"Not one of them is lighter fluid."
Eduardo emerges from the bookshelf area with a brown apothecary jar.
Unscrewing the cap, he dips a cotton pad into the bottle, which is marked "Lawn Darts." Upon contact of the pad with his forehead, Mason emits a startled whimper evocative of vehicular tragedy.
"Oh lovely," he says, finally.
"Light and buoyant. Playful. Almost . . . almost summery."


Traci Farber And Seth Kamil
Traci Merritt Farber, a daughter of Linda and Richard Farber of New City, N.Y., is to be married today to Seth Ira Kamil, the son of Ellen and Alan Kamil of Lincoln, Neb.
Rabbi Susan Silverman is to perform the ceremony at the Ryetown Hilton in Ryebrook, New York.
Ms.
Farber, 28, is an assistant vice president of human resources at Bankers Trust in New York.
She graduated from Union College in Schenectady, N.Y.
Mr.
Kamil, 27, is a director of Big Onion Walking Tours, a Manhattan guide service.
He graduated from the University of Massachusetts at Amherst and is studying for a Ph.D. in American history at Columbia University.


SUNDAY, August 7, 1994; Solution to Urban Parking Woes Revealed
Actually, it's not the Parking Violations Bureau's version of Robocop, just good clean fun, like David Letterman running over appliances, or a demolition derby.
But neither practice can compare with Robosaurus, something like a giant version of the toy "transformers" that turn from trucks into monsters.
It unfolds from tractor-trailer size into a 40-feet-tall, ravenous techno-beast.
Created by Monster Robot of Malibu, Calif., Robosaurus tours the world, and recently performed at Old Bridge Township Raceway Park in Englishtown, N. J. Ken Landerman, the track director, said: "It eats a car, chews it up, rips it in half and sets it on fire. It's really more of a kids attraction."


Castro's Threat to Unleash Refugees Brings a Warning by U.S.
In a stern warning to President Fidel Castro of Cuba, the Clinton Administration says it will not permit a repeat of the 1980 Mariel boat lift, in which Cuba dropped emigration restrictions and 120,000 Cubans fled to the United States.
The warning was issued by the State Department on Friday night after Administration officials became alarmed by Mr.
Castro's threat to unleash a flood of refugees.
The State Department also urged Cubans not to go along with President Castro's "ploy."


L. Stanley James Is Dead at 69; A Pioneer of Neonatal Medicine
Dr.
L.
Stanley James, a researcher in the physiology of the newborn and the fetus in the womb, died on Thursday while vacationing at Center Harbor, N.H., the Columbia-Presbyterian Medical Center announced.
He was 69 and lived in West Redding, Conn.
The cause was congestive heart failure, said Robin Donaldson, a spokeswoman for Columbia University, where Dr.
James worked for many years.


Parental Bribery Doesn't Pay
DOES it help to bribe your kids to get good grades?
Dr.
Adele E. Gottfried, the head of the department of Educational Psychology and Counseling at California State University at Northridge, says it actually hurts them -- that motivation diminishes when a parent offers a child material rewards for academic achievement.


New Voices For Jesus In Stadium Crusades
On a warm, still evening, a casually dressed crowd of mostly adolescents and young families settles into the stands under the lights of Anaheim Stadium.
It is not baseball's Angels they have come for but a preacher, the Rev.
Greg Laurie, who stands on a stage facing home plate.


Michele Lowe, Michael Porte
Michele Lowe, the daughter of Marshall Lowe of Westhampton, L.I., and the late Doris Lowe, was married yesterday to Michael Porte, a son of Eunice and Dr.
Daniel Porte Jr. of Seattle.
Rabbi Robert Kirschener officiated at the Adamson House in Malibu, Calif.
The bride, 36, graduated from Northwestern University.
She is a playwright.
Her father owns Lowe Furniture in Bellmore, L.I.


Steven A. Shaw, Ellen R. Shapiro
Ellen Renee Shapiro, who is to become the manager of the academic marketing department at Simon &amp; Schuster next month, and Steven Anthony Shaw, an associate in the law firm of Cravath, Swaine &amp; Moore, are to be married today in Woodbridge, Conn.
Both work in New York.
Rabbi Alvin Wainhaus is to officiate at Congregation B'nai Jacob.
The bride and bridegroom are 25 and graduates of the University of Vermont, she cum laude.
The bride is the daughter of Susan and Jack Shapiro of New Haven.
Her father retired as a teacher at West Haven (Conn.) High School.
Her mother is the director of the Gan Hayeled Nursery School in Woodbridge.


IN SHORT: FICTION
FIRST NOVEL  EYE CONTACT  By Stephen Collins. Bantam, $21.95.


In the Region/Westchester; A Satellite Workshop for Peekskill's Artists' Colony
THE campaign to enrich downtown Peekskill's artists' colony will get a boost later this month when the Westchester Art Workshop, a school in White Plains that is accredited by the State University of New York, opens a satellite campus here.
"This will bring 600 to 1,000 people into the downtown," said Mayor Frances S. Gibbs.
"We worked very hard to convince the school that Peekskill would be a complementary location for them, and allow the school to get new enrollments from northern Westchester."


Warsaw Tourist Shops Close in Protest Against Crime
On a typical Saturday morning in the Old Town, the cobblestoned Market Square reverberates with the bustle of restaurants and shops preparing for the day's influx of tourists.
But today there was mostly silence, punctuated occasionally by the murmur of passing police patrols.
More than 150 restaurants, cafes, antique stores -- even the new Pizza Hut -- in Warsaw's Old Town remained closed in a weekend protest against organized crime and the police force's inability to restrain it.
Business owners in the city's historic quarter have been threatened with violence in recent weeks unless they paid protection money to one of Warsaw's crime organizations.


POSTINGS: Two Blocks Away and Twice the Space; Societe General Moving To the McGraw-Hill Building
It will still be known as the McGraw-Hill Building, but new black polished-granite cornerstones at 48th and 49th Streets in front of 1221 Avenue of the Americas bear a decidedly French accent in their gilded lettering.
Societe General, the French banking giant, is moving its United States headquarters from the Associated Press building two blocks away at 50 Rockefeller Plaza.
By Aug. 19 it will occupy 312,000 square feet on six full floors, about twice the space it has in half the A.P. building, where it has been slowly expanding since 1978.
The 2,497,000-square-foot McGraw-Hill Building is owned by Rock-McGraw, a joint venture partnership; Rockefeller Center owns 55 percent and McGraw-Hill 45 percent.


Defector Says Saudis Sought Nuclear Arms
A former Saudi diplomat seeking political asylum in the United States asserts that Saudi Arabia tried to buy nuclear research reactors from China and from an American company in 1989 as part of a secret effort to acquire nuclear weapons.
In an interview on Friday, Mohammed A. al-Khilewi, formerly the second-ranking official at the Saudi Mission to the United Nations, produced some letters to support his allegations.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  National League  CHICAGO CUBS -- Signed Donn Pall, pitcher.
Placed Jose Bautista, pitcher, on the 15-day disabled list.
Moved Anthony Young, pitcher, from the 15- to the 60-day disabled list.
Football  National Football League  MIAMI DOLPHINS -- Waived Reggie Brown, wide receiver.
Canadian Football League  TORONTO ARGONAUTS -- Signed Tommy Kane, wide receiver.


No Paper Cooks
To the Sports Editor:
Ira Berkow's column about baseball team owners allegedly cooking their books ("Players Ask, So What's Cookin'?") The Times, Aug. 3) states that "Tribune Company, which owns the Chicago Cubs, has pinned losses from other areas on the Cubs."


Department Of Oversight
To the Editor:
I was delighted to read Hayden Herrera'a article on the painter Joan Snyder especially since (as Ms. Herrera mentions) I was an early supporter of Ms.
Snyder's work  [ "Joan Snyder Traffics in Art and True Grit," July 24 ] .


Ideas &amp; Trends; Adult Tugs-of-War Over What's 'Best' for a Child
A JUDGE decrees that an adopted 3-year-old boy must live with the biological parents he has never known.
A mother emerging from years of treatment for drug addiction claims her 3-year-old daughter, who has spent her whole life with foster parents who want her too.
To many people, these cases in Illinois and New York City are disturbing, even obscene.
But there are few ideas that seem so obvious, and in practice prove so elusive, as determining what is in the best interests of a child.
Indeed, these decisions of courts and social service agencies reflect society's own confusion and passionate division about what this idea really means.


'The Comedy of Errors' Meets 'La Dolce Vita'
AFTER a bad-luck "Macbeth," the Hudson Valley Shakespeare Festival on the grounds of the Boscobel Restoration is back on track with a freewheeling "Comedy of Errors."
The director Thomas Nahrwold wants us to believe his is a Fellini-esque take on Shakespeare's early comedy (possibly the first, easily the shortest, quite the least interesting) in the canon.


Haiti's Hunger Is Abundant While Food Is Scant at Best
After a five-hour walk from her village in the mountains east of here, Joassaint Joseph finally arrived at the feeding center, a truck trailer parked in a field under a scorching sun.
Flashing a yellow card, she received about 25 pounds of soy-enriched bulgur grain and a half gallon of cooking oil, and then prepared to head home.
For the next two weeks, that ration, provided by the relief agency CARE International, will be a vital buffer between life and starvation for Ms.
Joseph, 36, her husband, and their six children, ranging in age from 3 to 16.


U.S. Expanding Scope in Review Of Gifts to Agriculture Secretary
Federal investigators examining whether Agriculture Secretary Mike Espy improperly accepted gifts from the nation's biggest poultry company have expanded their inquiries into a broader review of possible ethical violations by Mr.
Espy and two of his top aides, and into whether agriculture policy has been swayed by the lobbyists and industry groups involved.
The investigations, by the Justice Department and the Agriculture Department's Inspector General, have hurt morale at Agriculture, a sprawling department that has long been criticized for being too closely linked to the interests it regulates and that is now at the brink of sweeping change.


INSIDE
&gt;A Presidential Fever?
In Washington's pathology of scandal, Whitewater seems less damaging than the cancer of Watergate, but it still seems beyond a simple cure and will not go away.
Page 26.
More Disaster for Rwandans
While the world has focused its relief effort on Rwandans who fled to Zaire, thousands of refugees who fled to the French security zone inside the country are starving.
Page 3. 'Safe Streets,' 4 Years Later
Four summers ago, New York's police forces began a huge expansion.
But despite some achievements, officials have diverged from the community policing strategy.
Page 35.


Though This Were Madness, Was There Yet Method in 't?
THE IMAGE OF THE Romantics most of us formed when we were young, transmitted by sugary Hollywood biopics and the neighborhood ladies who gave us piano lessons, was that of handsome, sensitive young men who devoted their lives to their art and either died of consumption or turned into old men with beards.
But there is a side of the great composers of the 19th century that doesn't quite fit into this cozy picture.
*
Beethoven, who once contemplated suicide, was described by his contemporaries as heavy-drinking and violent-tempered.


Q and A
Touring Costa Rica
Q.
We are planning a trip to Costa Rica and would like to explore on our own.
Are reservations for accommodations needed well in advance, especially in the national parks during November?
Which are the "must see" places?
What agencies offer self-guided tours? -- V. P. Liebschner, Boonton Township, N.J.


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
AMERICAN RAPTORS
For the past 25 years Doris Mager has rehabilitated birds of prey that have been shot, poisoned, injured or displaced from their habitats.
Using some of the live birds that she has rescued, but that can no longer fly, she conducts educational programs about raptors and their survival around the country.


Head Start Expanding Despite Problems
HEAD START, the Federal program for preschoolers that began in the 1960's, is expanding.
Despite problems nationally and on Long Island, Head Start, unlike many other Great Society programs, is serving growing numbers of people with a greater variety of services.
This summer plans are moving forward for continuing expansion.


It's a Bird! It's a Plane! It's an Ad!
MICHAEL BERGIN, a model, was lying on a field alongside a runway at Allaire Airport recently, garbed only in Calvin Klein underwear.
Actually, it was a 45-foot-long image of Mr.
Bergin, stretched on a banner, that had been copied from a billboard in Times Square.
The nylon banner was about to make its first public appearance, towed by a small airplane.
The plane, first seen as a white speck in the sky, started its descent at 90 miles an hour.


From a Prison Cell to the Avant-Garde
ALTHOUGH Robert Pete Williams died in 1980 at the age of 66, he arguably remains the most avant-garde blues performer ever recorded.
No punk rock band has ever matched the jagged, acerbic fury of the riffs Williams played 35 years ago.
No rapper has approached his ability to evoke the torment of life in prison or bend language to cast an eerie spell over a chance encounter with a seductive woman.
Williams could improvise precise, topical blues numbers with remarkable spontaneity.
He had never been recorded when he was discovered in Angola penitentiary in Louisiana, convicted of murder.
Like the country blues titan Leadbelly, Williams even sang his way to freedom.
Yet he was no more than a moderate success on the folk-revival circuit in the 1960's, and the very density and originality of his blues must have been part of the reason.
His decision to take up the slide guitar was also ill-advised.
Today he is a shadowy memory, unknown outside blues circles.
The release of Williams's prison recordings in 1959 caused a sensation with an earlier generation of fans.
By rights, equal excitement should greet the recent reissue of most of his earliest sides along with more than a dozen unreleased tunes on "I'm as Blue as a Man Can Be" (Arhoolie 394; CD and cassette) and "When a Man Takes the Blues" (Arhoolie 395, CD and cassette).


Enjoying the Abundance of Eggplant, Without the Oil
GLOSSY eggplants are a year-round market staple.
In summer, eggplants of every description are in the market, from typical dark purple large ones to slender, often lighter-colored Asian varieties and even some creamy white ones that look like ostrich eggs.
And this is when eggplants have more allure than ever.
Perhaps it's because the vegetables and herbs that complement them so well, like tomatoes, zucchini, peppers and basil, are also at their peak of freshness and quality.
The spongy texture of the eggplant's flesh can be daunting, however.
Consequently, many traditional eggplant recipes, like ratatouille, begin by requiring that eggplant slices be sauteed, a step that often calls for a half cup of oil or more.
Some cooks broil or grill eggplant slices after brushing them with oil, a technique that uses less fat.


Bits of Old Ireland Were Just His Cup of Tea
IN THE ART TRADE OF THE 1930's, John Hunt's eye became legendary when he bought medieval ivories, bronzes and enamels for Sir William Burrell, a Glasgow shipowner.
After World War II, the dealer sold other ancient, Romanesque and Gothic treasures to the Metropolitan Museum of Art, the Rijksmuseum in Amsterdam, the Museum of Fine Arts in Boston and the Walters Art Gallery in Baltimore.
But the vast bulk of Hunt's personal collection and the most compelling Irish discoveries he made are now exhibited here at the University of Limerick in, appropriately enough, the Hunt Museum.
The museum, a private trust established by the Hunt family, is operated in part by the Government of Ireland.
A repository for items assembled over 50 years by John and Gertrude Hunt, the gallery has on display roughly half of the 2,000 pieces that remained at his death in 1976, at age 75.
The rest are on loan to the British Museum and the Victoria and Albert in London or are in storage until the Hunt Museum moves to its new home next year.


Poverty Is Unfairly Defined
The cost of food, rent and other consumer goods can be twice as high in Manhattan as in Little Rock, Ark.
Yet the income cutoff for poverty programs is the same in both places, $14,764 for a family of four.
That produces the ridiculous and unfair result that a Manhattan family earning $15,000 does not qualify for Federal nutrition or education programs while an Arkansas family earning $14,500 -- the equivalent of $29,000 in Manhattan -- does.
The Federal definition of poverty is blind to the real costs paid by people struggling to purchase the necessities of life.
That is why Senator Joseph Lieberman, Democrat of Connecticut, and Representative Dean Gallo, Republican of New Jersey, have proposed bills that would adjust poverty levels for state differences in the cost of living.
That way poor families in Los Angeles and Philadelphia will get their fair share of the $20 billion or more that Congress spends on need-based programs.
Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan of New York, an expert on poverty, says that adjusting poverty levels for living costs will produce poverty rates in New York nearly as high as those in the Deep South.


Graham and the Giants Struggle in Playing Catch-Up
Kent Graham had just been smashed, sandwiched by Cleveland linebacker Gerald Dixon and defensive tackle James Jones.
He got up slowly, a little wobbly and limped back to the huddle.
It was early in a tough 14-play, 74-yard touchdown drive that symbolized Graham's game tonight, his battle to be the Giants' starting quarterback and maybe even his young career.
He stumbled at times, looked great at others, and in the end was pretty good after a disastrous start.
The problem is, pretty good isn't good enough.
To eclipse his competitor, Dave Brown, he has to be spectacular.
Those are the unfortunate facts for Graham.
And after two exhibition games, Brown has established a firm lead in this race and Graham is playing catch-up.


The Past Recaptured
The pull of the past is a form of sorcery.
For Dennis Holt, the catch came in 1989, as he walked down Duffield Street in downtown Brooklyn, looked up at the century-old Offerman building and saw the imbedded dates, " '91" and " '92." Squinting through time, he wondered: what was there before?
He turned to an old book previously unearthed in a second-hand store in Portland, Ore. -- Lain's City Directory, a kind of White Pages.
He found not only the answer -- houses -- but a vast open window on 1885.
And he fell captive to the same whiff and sound of horseshoes and trolleys that has arrested E. L. Doctorow, Caleb Carr and Luc Sante.


Health Care and the Generation Chasm
To the Editor:
The fatuous lament from Yuppiedom presumes that its authors have discovered eternal youth -- that they will not one day be in the over-50 group.
While they make an issue of age-related automobile insurance rates, they fail to mention that the over-50 population continues to pay school taxes though its children have left home and are now writing articles deploring the cost of subsidizing their parents' health care.
Why is the United States the only major industrial country incapable of having a sound, equitable health care program?
Probably because thinking in the national interest has become a thing of the past.
W.
WALTER HAYUM  Marshfield, Mass., July 25  The writer is a retired president of the picture agencies Universal Media Inc. and Photo Media Ltd.


Corrections
A report on July 10 about the wedding of Nicole Marguerite Prenovost and Dan Negrea misstated the clergyman's title.
He was Bishop Sean O'Malley of Fall River, Mass.


Votech That Works
Every year, vocational education students at Lancaster County schools in Pennsylvania take classroom training in carpentry, plumbing, electrical wiring and masonry and build several houses priced in the $150,000 to $200,000 range.
This showcases the students for local builders, who inspect the work and have usually hired all of them by the time classes end in June.
But more importantly, the process of building the houses, under the watchful eye of an experienced builder, gives them a taste of what it is like to work for a living.
The program is part of a broad effort, driven to a large degree by the economic and industrial needs of the nation, to strengthen the work force, improve the quality of vocational training in high schools, develop specialized training after high school for those who do not go on to college, and offer some hands-on training for engineering and science students who do go on.
As matters stand, a gap has widened between what traditional vocational training offers and what workers in high-technology industry need.
"Students are often not prepared for work," said Richard C. Burley, director of the three-school vocational technical program in south-central Pennsylvania.
"So we try to put students in the atmosphere they will face when they leave."
One fact that makes the Lancaster program of double interest is that it guarantees its students jobs if they successfully complete their programs.
"We've been guaranteeing jobs for five years, " Mr.
Burley said.
"We say that if a student comes to school 95 percent of the time, maintains a C average or better and graduates, we guarantee a job in their specialty or they can come to school for free until we find a job for them." He said a few had come back for a few months, but were eventually placed.
Graduates Often Lacked Basic Skills
This intensely practical approach evolved after employers complained that high school graduates in America often lacked basic verbal and mathematics skills, let alone the specialized knowledge needed to operate complicated, computer-controlled machines and instruments.
This has been an important theme for the Clinton Administration, which has proposed developing improved national standards for secondary education and launched a program to link up students with prospective employers before graduation.
One reason for the Administration's interest is the growing international economic competition.
"The United States is unique among industrial countries in that it does not have an organized postsecondary education system for the noncollege-bound," said Lester Thurow, a prominent economist at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
Countries like Germany and Japan use their edcucation systems as competitive weapons, Mr.
Thurow said, with the Japanese talking about training workers to 'add to effective battle strength."'
Education specialist and business groups say there are jobs available for people without four-year college degrees, but increasingly they require specialized training.
"I've got jobs I can't fill," Mr.
Burley said.
"They include diesel mechanics, computer repair, welders, machinists, electricians, masons and refrigeration."
But even where the demand for technically trained people is apparent, vocational programs still struggle against the notion that a four-year college education is the only proper goal for students other than those with the most limited ability.
Indeed, specialists in the vocational education field say that the practices of almost automatic promotion and grade inflation have left employers largely distrustful of the value of a high school diploma.
As a result, after graduation many of the non-college-bound "Flounder in the job market for six or eight years while they mature," said Alfred Pautler, a professor of education at the State University of New York at Buffalo.
"Finally at about the age of 26 to 28 they begin to get real jobs."
One of the goals of the Administration's education initiative is to help change employer attitudes toward the noncollege-bound by setting national standards for vocational education.
Part of the problem for the noncollege-bound, Professor Pautler said, is that most secondary schools send their graduates into the unknown without a mechanism to assist them in the next phase of their lives.
"If a child goes from high school to college, that is a successful handoff," he said.
"But others have nowhere to go, and the schools do not track them. Most districts do not know where their graduates go."
To help provide hands-on skills, the Lancaster vocational schools are also offering some courses for the college-bound.
On certain mornings during the school year, pre-engineering students come to the vocational schools to experiment in a laboratory for computer-aided design.
"These are kids who are going to four-year engineering schools," Mr.
Burley said.
"We bring them in here and familiarize them with top-of-the-line C.A.D. equipment." The students design simple products on the C.A.D. terminals and then transfer the designs to computer-controlled cutting machines.
"They watch the part they designed get manufactured," Mr.
Burley said.
"That gets the good academic student interested." It is also useful for them, since even top-ranked engineering schools are requiring students to participate in projects where they design and build real products.
Increasing Complexity of Jobs
A recent report by the American Society for Training and Development predicts that both industrial and service jobs will grow increasingly complex and technically demanding.
The report, "Quality Education: School Reform for the New American Economy," said the result would be that people with postsecondary education would tend to supplant those with only high school diplomas.
Like many other vocational schools, Lancaster County's have relationships with community colleges in the area, where graduates can go on to get a two-year associate's degree, which is valuable in many technical fields.
Today's work force is like an hourglass that is being pulled apart, Mr.
Burley said.
"It is being separated into the skilled and nonskilled. The skilled jobs pay salaries and benefits that can support a family. About all an unskilled person can do is work two jobs and go without benefits."
There are, of course, limits even to greatly improved vocational education.
All workers are simply not trainable for work on the high-tech equipment of today's workplace.
But with improved specialized training in high school and with the encouragement to continue on in some noncollege training afterward, many can move into the skilled world.
They and the nation as a whole will be the beneficiaries.


What's the Message in the Dividend Tea Leaves?
ARE American corporations feeling a bit less flush?
Perhaps so.
The Standard &amp; Poor's Corporation reported last week that 119 companies raised their dividends in July, eight fewer than in the previous July.
It was the first time since April 1993 that there had been a year-to-year decline for any month, and the largest drop in three years.


GAMBLING NATION
I enjoyed Gerri Hirshey's informative and humane novella "Gambling Nation" (July 17).


Fehr No Pope
To the Sports Editor:
Who does Donald Fehr think he is?
Does he think he is bigger than the game?
Does he think the Players Association is bigger than the game?
A strike is bad for baseball.
And every sports announcer in the country calls the owners dummies.
They are dummies, for paying the money they do to these players.
I'm afraid both the owners and the players are in for a rude awakening when they both discover that we fans pay the tab.


Ken N. Schoen and Jane Trigere
Jane Trigere and Ken N. Schoen, partners in Schoen Books, an antiquarian book dealership in Easthampton, Mass., are to be married today in Northampton, Mass.
Rabbi Philip Graubart is to perform the ceremony at the Congregation B'nai Israel Synagogue.
The bride attended Sarah Lawrence College and graduated from Boston University.
She is the daughter of the late Robert Trigere and the late Jane Ellis Morrow Shepard, and the stepdaughter of Gunn Trigere of Los Angeles.


PHOTOGRAPHER'S JOURNAL


NJN and Its Service To the State
The appointment of Elizabeth Christopherson as executive director of the New Jersey Network received only slight mention in "NJN Girding for a Battle of Survival." But to those of us who have had the chance to witness in other contexts Ms.
Christopherson's dedication, energy and first-rate intelligence, her appointment gives cause for optimism.
The critical carping quoted in the article, that Ms.
Christopherson's experience has been as chairwoman of the New Jersey State Council on the Arts rather than directly in television, should hardly be cause for alarm.
A creative talent with the perspective of outside experience may well be exactly what is needed for a situation the article describes as precarious and in need of new direction.


Abigail B. Black, Richard Elbaum
Abigail Beatrice Black and Richard Keith Elbaum were married last evening in Scarsdale, N.Y., at the home of the bride's maternal grandparents, Mr. and Mrs.
Seymour Milstein.
Rabbi Robert Kaiser performed the ceremony.
The bride, 24, graduated from Columbia University, from which she received an M.B.A.
She is to join the private banking division of Chemical Bank in the fall.
Her mother, Constance J. Milstein, is a general partner of Milstein Properties, the real estate company in New York.


Something Is Rotten in the State of California
BIG DREAMS  Into the Heart of California.
By Bill Barich. 546 pp.
New York: Pantheon Books. $24.
TRANSLATING LA  A Tour of the Rainbow City.
By Peter Theroux. 271 pp.
New York: W. W. Norton &amp; Company. $21.


Kimberly Hunter, Gregory K. Lemite
Kimberly Ann Hunter, a daughter of Abraham and Barbara Hunter of Wyandanch, L.I., was married yesterday to Dr.
Gregory Keith Lemite, a son of Claude and Esther Lemite of Westbury, L.I.
The Rev.
Marvin Gatlin performed the ceremony at the Huntington (L.I.) Townhouse.
The bride is a doctoral candidate in school psychology at Columbia University.
She graduated from the College of New Rochelle and received a master's degree in early childhood education from Hofstra University.
Her father retired as a Nassau County, L.I., police officer.
Her mother is a nurse's aide.


Bluespeak
The lingo of the United Nations can be deeply puzzling.
When diplomats and reporters speak of peacekeepers in Rwanda and safe havens in Bosnia and armed humanitarian intervention in Somalia, they sound almost systematically paradoxical.
It's true that the U.N. is capable of greater precision.
Distinctions are now being made among peacemaking (mainly diplomatic efforts), peace operations (a military catchall), peacekeeping (the traditional placement of troops between forces that have ceased firing), peace enforcement (basically warmaking, as in the Korean War and the Persian Gulf) and peace building (various postwar operations).


Cindy E. Lazar, Scott D. Musoff
Cindy Ellen Lazar, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Donald Lazar of Manhasset Hills, L.I., was married last evening to Scott David Musoff, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Wallace Musoff of Old Bridge, N.J.
Rabbi Henry M. Weiner officiated at the Woodbury (L.I.) Jewish Center.
Mrs.
Musoff and her husband, both 25, graduated from Tufts University, she magna cum laude.
The bride received a master's degree in education from the Bank Street College of Education; she teaches the first grade at Rodeph Sholom Day School in New York.


Frumps by Day, but Fragrant Jezebels by Night
THESE sultry summer evenings make me miss my moonflowers.
I usually have some in summer, but this spring the seeds failed to germinate.
Now, up on my Brooklyn roof, I wish I'd tried again.
They could turn my industrial-looking smokestack into a wall of white perfume.
The moonvine, Ipomoea alba, begins to open its long, twisted buds at about 4 P.M. and perfumes the air with six-inch pale white saucers until dawn.
Only a few bloom each night, and in the morning they droop like exhausted party queens.


Melissa Osborne, James S. Turner
Melissa Edwards Osborne, a daughter of Judith Edwards of Glen Head, L.I., and Conrad L. Osborne of New York, was married yesterday to James Scott Turner, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
James W. Turner of Manhassett, L.I.
The Rev.
Kevin Madigan, a Roman Catholic priest, performed the ceremony at the West End Collegiate Church in New York.
Mrs.
Turner, 26, is an associate with Sylvan Lawrence, a New York commercial real estate concern.
She graduated from Hunter College.
Her father is a novelist, opera critic and vocal coach in Manhattan.
Her mother writes children's books and is also a psychotherapist in Glen Head.


Tapping Esthetic Roots
To the Editor:
Celia McGee offers a fresh and insightful look into Edward Hopper's influence upon a generation of film makers and writers in "Hopper, Hopper, Everywhere"  [ July 24 ] .
Yet she fails to mention any of the artist's own esthetic roots.


At Work; The New Disability Law Guidelines
ON behalf of the estimated 43 million Americans with disabilities, the landmark Americans With Disabilities Act of 1990 reiterates a principle of antidiscrimination law that would seem simple enough: Employers must judge job applicants on their objective qualifications for a particular position.
In May, the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission released guidelines it says were designed to help employers fulfill the goal of the legislation.
The E.E.O.C.'s underlying principle, too, seems simple enough: Employers may not ask questions of job applicants that might lead to disclosure of a disability before an offer is made, on the theory that such disclosures would muddy hiring decisions with prejudices and stereotypes.
In fact, with a little professional guidance on the guidelines -- available from the commission -- it is not impossible to figure out what is permissible and what is not, presumably a bit of welcome news for the increasing numbers of businesses covered by the measure.
In late July, coverage expanded to businesses with 15 or more employees.


Trying to Cash In On a Long Shot
In many ways, Orlando Vega is like so many players competing in the world basketball championships.
Puerto Rico's sharpshooting guard is looking forward to playing against Dream Team II.
"There's no fear on my part, just the love of a challenge," Vega said recently.
"If you're a player, you want to test skills against the best."


The Real Robert Jordans
THE ODYSSEY OF THE ABRAHAM LINCOLN BRIGADE Americans in the Spanish Civil War.
By Peter N. Carroll.
Illustrated. 440 pp.
Stanford, Calif.:  Stanford University Press.
Cloth, $55.
Paper, $16.95.


Fool's Profits: Just How Dumb Was Kidder?
WALL STREET scandals are not exactly a new phenomenon.
It has been more than a century since Grant &amp; Ward's failure set off the panic of 1884, when it turned out that the brokerage house had been ripping off its customers -- among them its name partner, former President Ulysses S. Grant.
In more recent times, we have had E. F. Hutton's check-kiting venture, Mike Milken's contretemps at Drexel Burnham and Salomon Brothers' concealed purchase of Treasury securities.
In each case, a firm or its senior executives stood accused of crossing ethical or legal lines in the pursuit of profit.


July 31-Aug. 6; Boot Camp Graduate


You Don't Just Feel Security, You Have to See It
Toni Reyes, a member of the tenants' board of directors at Co-op City, knew that crime had reportedly dropped nearly 50 percent over the last two years.
But she was unhappy.
Under a director of safety installed in 1992, Co-op City's private police force had shifted away from uniformed beat officers toward random sweeps of buildings in the sprawling complex.
The 100 officers were being trained in criminal investigation, and they often worked in plainclothes.


In America; Disregard Of The Truth
Driven by ambition, misguided loyalties and intense political pressures, public officials resorted to astounding levels of misconduct in the aftermath of the tragic Waldbaum's supermarket fire in Brooklyn in 1978.
Six firemen were killed and the tragedy generated enormous publicity.
The politicians needed a fall guy.
A ne'er-do-well named Eric Jackson eventually was convicted of arson and felony murder.
But from very early on in the investigation the Police Department believed that the only arson at Waldbaum's had been committed by firefighters.


No Headline


The World; Mexicans' Dark Motto: In Little We Trust
JUST as the votes were being counted in a hotly contested state election in Yucatan last November, the electricity was mysteriously knocked out in the capital city and large areas of the state.
Officials said it was a mechanical defect, which almost no one believed, and when the lights came back on the long-ruling Institutional Revolutionary Party, the PRI, was ahead.
When the PRI presidential candidate Luis Donaldo Colosio was assassinated in Tijuana in March, so many people doubted the official explanation -- that a deranged gunman had acted alone -- that questions arose over whether the accused assassin held in a central Mexico jail was the same man who had been taken into custody seconds after the shooting.
One had a mustache and one did not.
Officials said the suspect had shaved.


A God of All Faiths
To the Editor:
Re "Attacks on Christian Right Amount to Bigotry" by Jendi Reiter (letter, July 27): There is a difference between pledging allegiance to the "Christian flag" and pledging allegiance to "one nation indivisible under God." Pledging allegiance to a Christian flag eliminates those Americans who do not profess the Christian faith, but have a different one.


Expecting the Unexpected: The I-287 Blast
IN 18 years with the police force here, Capt.
Peter A. Viviano said he had never witnessed anything like what he saw early on July 27.
Arriving at the accident scene shortly after a propane tanker exploded, sending balls of fire rolling across Westchester's main commuter highway, he found a neighborhood enveloped in flames -- power lines down, trees on fire and homes in ruins.
On Interstate 287, inside the cab of the tanker, the driver lay dead.
In all, 23 people in surrounding neighborhoods were injured.
And although accidents of such magnitude are unusual for small-city police departments, plans were in place for such an occurrence.


CURRENCY
Last
Prior
Year
Week
Week
Ago
Japanese Yen
100.20
99.85
104.45
per Dollar
German Mark
1.5790
1.5820
1.6970
per Dollar
Canadian Dollar
1.3865
1.3863
1.2915
per U.S. Dollar
British Pound
1.5415
1.5440
1.4978
U.S. Dollar per British Pound
Gold
$377.60
$383.00
$376.00
Republic National Bank
Currency: Friday NY Close


On 84th St., Last of the 'Slivers'?
When they began work on their new high-rise at 84th Street and First Avenue last November, the executives of Related Companies knew they were trying to beat the clock.
New zoning laws aimed at prohibiting buildings like theirs -- a slender, 55-story apartment tower -- were moving toward approval in the City Council.
To be grandfathered, they had to finish excavation and a substantial portion of the foundation before the laws took effect.


Enjoying the Abundance of Eggplant, Without the Oil
GLOSSY eggplants are a year-round market staple.
In summer, eggplants of every description are in the market, from typical dark purple large ones to slender, often lighter-colored Asian varieties and even some creamy white ones that look like ostrich eggs.
And this is when eggplants have more allure than ever.
Perhaps it's because the vegetables and herbs that complement them so well, like tomatoes, zucchini, peppers and basil, are also at their peak of freshness and quality.
The spongy texture of the eggplant's flesh can be daunting, however.
Consequently, many traditional eggplant recipes, like ratatouille, begin by requiring that eggplant slices be sauteed, a step that often calls for a half cup of oil or more.
Some cooks broil or grill eggplant slices after brushing them with oil, a technique that uses less fat.


Bumping Takes Toll on the Tardy
OVERBOOKING is one of the few areas where the Government has continued its control of the airlines in the 16 years since deregulation.
In overbooking -- accepting more ticket reservations than there are seats -- if all expedients fail, a passenger who arrives at the gate on time with a ticket and seat assignment does not board and thus misses a meeting, connection, vacation or wedding.
The Government rules specify monetary compensation -- $200 or $400 depending on the fare and the degree of lateness at the destination -- to a bumped passenger, who in any case may refuse it and negotiate for more, or sue.
Government data show a rise in the rate of involuntary bumping in the first quarter of 1994, both over the last quarter of 1993 and the first quarter of 1993.
In addition, the 1993 total was greater than 1992's, although the trend over 10 years has been downward: from 4.34 bumped passengers per 10,000 in 1984 to 1 per 10,000 in 1993.
The figure for the first quarter of 1994 is 1.52.
A spokesperson for the Department of Transportation saw no reason for this rise.
Gambling on No-Shows
Overbooking is a universal airline practice.
The Department of Transportation says all popular flights are "routinely" overbooked by 20 percent or more.
This way, airlines play poker against no-shows, including, for example, people who make reservations on several flights because they do not know when a meeting will end.


Where Children Learn to Grow What They Eat
THERE is a "kinder garden" at the Frelinghuysen Arboretum here, where about 50 youngsters are being given hands-on horticultural training.
"Branching Out" is a Morris County Park Commission educational gardening program for children that is in its 21st year and has brought more than a thousand young people closer to the soil and even the kitchen.


E. B. Van Liew, M. E. L. Goodchild
Elizabeth Bennett Van Liew, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Alfred B. Van Liew 2d of Middletown, R.I., was married yesterday to Matthew Edward Larson Goodchild, a son of Anne E. Goodchild of Sheffield, Mass., and the late Anthony A. Goodchild.
The Rev.
John S. Rogers performed the Episcopal ceremony at the chapel of St.
George's School in Newport, R.I.
Mrs.
Goodchild graduated from Endicott College.
Her father is the managing partner in Van Liew Capital and the Van Liew Trust Company in Providence, R.I.
Her mother, Frances Van Liew, is a partner in J &amp; F Designs in Newport.


A Challenge of Sorts for Devotees of Red Meat
WHEN Layne Lieberman-Anapol heard that Starr Boggs had purchased the Hampton Square Restaurant in Westhampton and was converting it into a steakhouse, she told him, "I guess I'm not needed on this one."
Ms.
Lieberman-Anapol, a nutritionist, had worked with Mr.
Boggs, one of the Island's most creative chefs, to develop a nutritionally balanced menu at Mr.
Boggs's restaurant at Dune Deck in Westhampton Beach.
That menu featured dishes low in fat, cholesterol, calories and salt.


RECORD BRIEFS
'Wings of Time'  Lauren Pomerantz, soprano; Ensemble Alcatraz. Songbird AEACD 1405; CD.


Four Summer Festivals, Three Composers of Old
MOZART, Beethoven and Schubert are the common denominators this week at four of the state's summer music festivals: Norfolk, Music Mountain, Chestnut Hill and South Shore.
At Music Mountain, Beethoven's Op. 127 Quartet and Schubert's "Trout" Quintet are among the enticements at the 3 o'clock recital today by the Leontovitch String Quartet, with the guest artists Alvin Brehm on double bass and Jon Klibonoff at the piano.


COST IS OBSCURED IN HEALTH DEBATE
President Clinton's health plan was inspired as much by a desire to control costs as by a passion to guarantee insurance for every American.
But the goal of cost control has been eclipsed by the furor over universal coverage.
Consumer groups, business executives and labor leaders who joined the campaign for health care legislation in hopes of controlling costs are profoundly disappointed.
This spreading sense of unease could have deep political consequences as Mr.
Clinton nears the midpoint of a term in which health care has preoccupied him more than any other policy issue.


The Bug Battle, With Natural Weapons
HOLES in leaves are discouraging evidence for any gardener.
They indicate that some unwanted creature is about.
Time was that a pesticide was the solution.
But times have changed.
Creepy crawlers are still about, but instead of rushing for a quick solution, one seeks the identity of the enemy and a safe way to eradicate it.
Quite often all-out war is not really necessary.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-21 SERBIAN EMBARGO HOLDING  Serbia seemed to be enforcing its embargo on the Bosnian Serbs to pressure them to accept a peace proposal.
What residents say they fear most is the randomness of the attacks.  35  AN UNCONVENTIONAL CANDIDATE  "I've got to get these people better prepared as human beings," says the candidate for New York State attorney general as her outstretched hand is ignored.
It is classic Karen Burstein: brash, funny and unconventional.  35  A SUICIDE AND A GIRL'S CUSTODY  A Belarussian girl who traveled with her father to New York, and was critically injured as he leaped to his death, was illegally taken from her mother's custody six years ago, her mother and grandparents said.  37  Obituaries 43  Benny Ong, the reputed Godfather of Chinatown crime for 20 years.
Dr. L. Stanley James, a specialist in neonatal and perinatal medicine.


In the Gaza Strip, Hopes For a Rise in Tourists
A PALESTINIAN journalist could not believe it when he happened recently upon a column of British Christian pilgrims heading back into Israel through an army checkpoint after having spent a day in the Gaza Strip.
"Tourists in Gaza!" he exclaimed in amazement.
"God is great!"
Aside from reporters, foreign travelers are indeed rare in the poverty-stricken coastal strip, now under Palestinian self-rule along with the West Bank town of Jericho.
But with peace threatening to break out not only here but also in nearby corners of this region, Israeli and Palestinian officials expect one dividend to be a rise in the numbers of visitors, who in the past may have stayed away because to them the Middle East meant only trouble.


Shift by Nonprofits Leaves Space Behind
FOR SALE: the former headquarters of the United Negro College Fund.
For sale: the former headquarters of the Boys and Girls Clubs of America.
For sale: the former headquarters of CARE.
Nonprofit organizations are on the move.
Several prominent ones, most recently the 50-year-old college fund, have relocated headquarters and back-office operations from New York City, leaving a string of empty East Side office buildings in their wake.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
MEMOIR  FLAT ROCK JOURNAL  A Day in the Ozark Mountains.
By Ken Carey.
HarperSanFrancisco, $18.


Marsha B. McCoy, Andrew J. Cappel
Marsha Brooks McCoy, a Ph.D. candidate in Roman history at Yale University in New Haven, was married in Dwight Chapel there yesterday to Andrew Julius Cappel, an associate at Leboeuf, Lamb, Greene &amp; McCrae, a law firm in New York.
Judge Jon C. Blue of State Superior Court in Hartford performed the ceremony, in which the bride's father, Dr.
Charles S. McCoy of Berkeley, Calif., a Methodist minister, took part.


F.Y.I.
Sound of the Yankees Q.  Each time my friends and I go to Yankee Stadium, we speculate about what that strangely shaped black tower looming over center field is.
It looks like ("calling Dr. Rorschach") a bunch of chicken coops piled on top of one another.
Someone suggested it had something do with the speaker system.
Can you help?


Journal; Back In Circulation
If knitters, Rollerbladers and orthodontists can all have their own slick special-interest magazines, why not people with AIDS?
Many reasons spring to mind -- starting with questions of taste -- but none have deterred Sean Strub, a 36-year-old entrepreneur, from starting POZ (as in H.I.V. positive), which is easily as plush as Vanity Fair and is against all odds the only new magazine of the year that leaves me looking forward to the next issue.
The very concept of looking forward to future issues may sound oxymoronic when applied to a periodical focused on a terminal illness.
And so does the notion of slickness: Is a glossy AIDS magazine whose contributors include writers, photographers and graphic artists from The New Yorker, Esquire, Variety, The New York Times and "Good Morning, America" another example of what the writer Daniel Harris calls AIDS kitsch?
In a tart essay in Harper's Magazine last month, Mr.
Harris lamented the rise of AIDS products -- from teddy bears sporting red ribbons to the bathetic HBO movie of "And the Band Played On" -- that sentimentalize the epidemic and turn its patients into beatific poster children.


Japan May Have to Face Up to AIDS
It might not seem unusual that Toshihiro Oishi, a 25-year-old gay man, is infected with the virus that causes AIDS.
What makes Mr.
Oishi unusual is that he is one of only four people in Japan to have ever publicly admitted being infected.
"Most people can't even tell their close family members or neighbors," said Mr.
Oishi, explaining that AIDS patients and virus carriers in Japan fear discrimination, social ostracism and the loss of their jobs.
Most hospitals in Japan refuse to treat people infected with the virus, he said.


In Geneva, Serious Dining For Business or Pleasure
WHATEVER the reason -- its wealth, its international population, its superb geographic situation -- Geneva is a serious restaurant city.
On a recent long weekend, our first time in Geneva, my usual traveling companion and I visited four superb restaurants and one perfectly respectable brasserie.
Certain generalizations are possible, but let's get the stereotypes out of the way first.
We arrived during a midsummer heat wave, so nobody was eating cheese fondue, though it was advertised all over town.
Service was almost always irreproachable, the presentation orderly, the chocolate desserts out of this world and the prices, at the best places, well into the stratosphere: it is not difficult to spend $200 on dinner for two.


For Chinatown Job Seekers, a Tenuous Lifeline
LAST Saturday, shortly after he was dismissed from a job he got through the Singapore Employment Agency in Chinatown, Xie Jing Xu went to the agency for a partial refund of the referral fee, or deposit.
Edging up to the windows with their steel bars, he slipped the receipt through an opening.
Neither employee behind the counter acknowledged him.


BEST SELLERS: August 7, 1994
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
3
2
THE GIFT, by Danielle Steel. (Delacorte, $15.) A woman's casual visit to a small town changes the lives of many of its inhabitants, as well as her own.
2
1
9
THE CHAMBER, by John Grisham. (Doubleday, $24.95.) A lawyer represents a racist who is on death row for his part in a 1967 bombing in Mississippi.
3
2
23
THE CELESTINE PROPHECY, by James Redfield. (Warner, $17.95.) An ancient manuscript, found in Peru, provides insights into achieving a fulfilling life.
4
5
104
THE BRIDGES OF MADISON COUNTY, by Robert James Waller. (Warner, $16.95.) A photographer and a farmer's lonely wife in Iowa.
5
6
7
POLITICALLY CORRECT BEDTIME STORIES, by James Finn Garner. (Macmillan, $8.95.) Classic tales respun to avoid offending current sensibilities.
6
4
3
EVERYTHING TO GAIN, by Barbara Taylor Bradford. (HarperCollins, $24.) A woman tries to cope after an act of violence destroys her perfect family life.
7
7
17
THE ALIENIST, by Caleb Carr. (Random House, $22.) A journalist and a psychologist track down a murderer in turn-of-the-century Manhattan.
8
1
DISNEY'S THE LION KING, adapted by Don Ferguson. (Mouse Works, $6.98.) The coming of age of animal royalty, told in words and pictures.
9
9
2
UNDUE INFLUENCE, by Steve Martini. (Putnam, $22.95.) A defense attorney finds himself caught in a web of murder and deceit within his own family.
10
8
7
THE CROSSING, by Cormac McCarthy. (Knopf, $23.) A young American comes of age traveling with a she-wolf into Mexico's mythic sierra.
11
14
2
PLAYING FOR THE ASHES, by Elizabeth George. (Bantam, $21.95.) A case involving arson, infidelity, cricket and murder in the English countryside.
12
13
15
REMEMBER ME, by Mary Higgins Clark. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $23.50.) After an estranged couple reconcile, they find themselves haunted by a mysterious force.
13
10
6
THE WATERWORKS, by E.L.
Doctorow. (Random House, $23.) Life in the New York City of 1871 as witnessed by a jaded newspaperman.
14
12
13
INCA GOLD, by Clive Cussler. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $24.) Dirk Pitt contends with a ring of thieves for possession of ancient artifacts in the Peruvian Andes.
15
11
5
DOWNTOWN, by Anne Rivers Siddons. (HarperCollins, $24.) A woman learns about life and the ways of men in Atlanta during the 1960's.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Nonfiction
1
2
65
EMBRACED BY THE LIGHT, by Betty J. Eadie with Curtis Taylor. (Gold Leaf Press, $16.95.) A woman's near-death experience.
2
1
7
THE AGENDA, by Bob Woodward. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $24.) The inner workings of the Clinton White House.
3
4
4
MOON SHOT, by Alan Shepard and Deke Slayton with Jay Barbree and Howard Benedict. (Turner, $21.95.) How Americans reached the moon in July 1969.
4
3
33
THE BOOK OF VIRTUES, by William J. Bennett. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $27.50.) Moral stories adapted from the Greeks, the Bible, folklore and elsewhere.
5
5
22
MIDNIGHT IN THE GARDEN OF GOOD AND EVIL, by John Berendt. (Random House, $23.) The mysterious death of a young man in Savannah, Ga.
6
9
16
SAVED BY THE LIGHT, by Dannion Brinkley with Paul Perry. (Villard, $16.) An account of two near-death experiences by a South Carolina businessman.
7
13
2
MOTHERLESS DAUGHTERS, by Hope Edelman. (Addison-Wesley, $23.) The experiences of women after the deaths of their mothers.
8
8
9
D-DAY, JUNE 6, 1944, by Stephen E. Ambrose. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $30.) The Allied invasion.
9
7
8
LIFE OF THE PARTY, by Christopher Ogden. (Little, Brown, $24.95.) A biography of Pamela Harriman, the United States Ambassador to France.
10
12
14
REBA: My Story, by Reba McEntire with Tom Carter. (Bantam, $22.95.) The country star's autobiography.
11
1
THE LESSONS OF LOVE, by Melody Beattie. (HarperSanFrancisco, $18.) The author tells how she recovered from the death of her 12-year-old son.
12
10
30
SOUL MATES, by Thomas Moore. (HarperCollins, $25.) A psychotherapist discusses love and relationships.
13
6
12
STANDING FIRM, by Dan Quayle. (HarperCollins/Zondervan, $25.) The former Vice President recalls his life, especially during the Bush years.
14
11
6
DAVE BARRY IS NOT MAKING THIS UP, by Dave Barry. (Crown, $20.) A collection of humor pieces.
15
1
GAL: A True Life, by Ruthie Bolton. (Harcourt Brace, $19.95.) A black woman recalls her troubled childhood in Charleston, S.C.
16*
15
97
WOMEN WHO RUN WITH THE WOLVES, by Clarissa Pinkola Estes. (Ballantine, $23.) How myths and folk tales can enable women to understand their psyches.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous
1
1
15
IN THE KITCHEN WITH ROSIE, by Rosie Daley. (Knopf, $14.95.) Recipes by Oprah Winfrey's cook.
2
2
63
MEN ARE FROM MARS, WOMEN ARE FROM VENUS, by John Gray. (HarperCollins, $23.) Ways to improve communication and relationships between the sexes.
3
3
15
MAGIC EYE II, by N.E.
Thing Enterprises. (Andrews &amp; McMeel, $12.95.) A second collection of designs.
4
4
29
MAGIC EYE, by N.E.
Thing Enterprises. (Andrews &amp; McMeel, $12.95.) Designs in color that take on new qualities when scrutinized at length.
Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending July 23, at 3,050 bookstores plus wholesalers serving 28,000 other retailers (gift shops, department stores, newsstands, supermarkets), statistically weighted to represent sales in all such outlets nationwide.
An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
And Bear in Mind (Editor's Choices of other recent books of particular interest) THE BIRD ARTIST, by Howard Norman. (Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, $20.) An adulterous affair and a murder propel this tragic novel of a hamlet in Newfoundland, where everybody knows everybody and the weather is unspeakable.
BY THE GRACE OF GUILE: The Role of Deception in Natural History and Human Affairs, by Loyal Rue. (Oxford University, $27.50.) A professor of religion and philosophy argues that deceit, including self-deceit, is evolution's way of keeping us going in a universe that doesn't give a hoot.
THE CATCHER WAS A SPY: The Mysterious Life of Moe Berg, by Nicholas Dawidoff. (Pantheon, $24.) Berg's legend as ballplayer, spy, linguist and universal genius loomed far larger than Berg's reality; Mr.
Dawidoff's painstaking research reveals the intelligent, ingenious charmer who cast so great an image.
THE CORRESPONDENCE OF WALTER BENJAMIN, 1910-1940, edited by Gershom Scholem and Theodor W. Adorno. (University of Chicago, $45.) Selected letters of an international icon of high culture whose foreshortened life lent glamour to his notoriously difficult thought.
THE EVOLUTION OF RACISM: Human Differences and the Use and Abuse of Science, by Pat Shipman. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $23.) A thoughtful study of evolution's employment to abet or oppose racism; not all the bad guys meant ill, and the good guys sometimes fought dirty.
LOUISIANA POWER &amp; LIGHT, by John Dufresne. (Norton, $22.) Mr.
Dufresne's first novel, replete with funny lines and plot twists that always lead somewhere, concerns an orphan's efforts to escape a family curse.
Lots of luck, orphan!
ROOMMATES: My Grandfather's Story, by Max Apple. (Warner, $19.95.) An enthralling novelistic memoir of the infinitely durable Herman (Rocky) Goodstein, who at 93 accompanied Mr.
Apple to college.
THE SHADOW OF THE PANTHER: Huey Newton and the Price of Black Power in America, by Hugh Pearson. (Addison-Wesley, $24.) A deromanticized portrait of the celebrated Black Panther Party leader, with attention both to his brilliance at organizing and to his reliance on criminal brutality.
SHEAR, by Tim Parks. (Grove, $21.) An eerie, engrossing suspense novel about responsibility; its hero, a smug geological consultant, tragically complicates his life through sexual adventure.
THESE SAME LONG BONES, by Gwendolyn M. Parker. (Houghton Mifflin, $21.95.) With an unusual combination of lush metaphor and narrative restraint, this first novel spins a tale of race and power as a black businessman struggles to transcend his daughter's death.
WAR IN ITALY, 1943-1945: A Brutal Story, by Richard Lamb. (St. Martin's, $23.95.) The painful story of Italy after the fall of Mussolini, a land characterized for two years by enslavement, betrayal and mass murder, ravaged by Fascist thugs, the Germans and the Allied armies.


Lauren J. Knudsen, R. C. Schoenthaler
Lauren Jean Knudsen, the daughter of Larry and Patricia Knudsen of La Canada, Calif., was married there yesterday to Robert Carlton Schoenthaler, a son of Virginia Gutwillig of Houston and Robert W. Schoenthaler of White Plains.
The Rev.
Chuck Osburn performed the ceremony at La Canada Presbyterian Church.
The bride, 23, is a third-year law student at the University of California, Hastings College of Law.
She and her husband graduated from Northwestern University.
Her father is the president of Knudsen Associates, fund-raising advisers in Pasadena, Calif.
Her mother is the executive director of the Pasadena Senior Center.


Jump-Starting Capitalism
TERESA Whalen, an M.B.A. candidate at the University of Michigan, was having another action-packed day.
She was helping develop a financing package for two Navajos who want to open a roadside stand selling roast mutton sandwiches.
She was putting together an employee training program for three Burger Kings here on the reservation.
She was talking to professors at Navajo Community College about creating a Navajo-owned water quality testing laboratory.
She was having a blast.
"I can't wait to get my hands on that lending circle," she said as the four-wheel vehicle she was riding in bounced along a dirt road and over a mountain pass, heading toward her next appointment.


Father in Death Plunge Had Taken Child Illegally
A Belarussian girl who traveled with her father to New York, and was swept along with him as he leaped to his death, was illegally taken from her mother's custody six years ago, her mother and grandparents said today.
The girl, Lydia M. Kitayev, 7, was critically injured when she tried to stop her 38-year-old father, Mikhail, from throwing himself out a fourth-floor window of a New York City homeless shelter on Thursday, the police said.


Bertoli Brecht, Survivor
NOT ALL OF US ARE SAINTS A Doctor's Journey With the Poor.
By David Hilfiker. 259 pp.
New York.
Hill &amp; Wang. $20.
INCREASINGLY, the national debate over health care has focused on the question of how best to help the middle class.
The very rich and the very poor will always have access to health insurance, President Clinton and his allies say, but the middle class is continually in danger of losing coverage.


Texas County In Forefront In Executions
When Robert Drew was executed in Texas on Tuesday, Harris County earned the distinction of having sent more people to death than any state except Florida.
Florida has carried out 33 executions since they resumed there in 1979.
Harris County, most of which is the City of Houston, tied that number with Mr.
Drew's death.
More than 10 percent of the nation's 249 executions since 1976 resulted from convictions here.


The World: U.N. Speaks Out on Haiti; Monroe's Doctrine Takes Another Knock
IN the midst of an otherwise straightforward television interview on NBC last Sunday, the American Ambassador to the United Nations, Madeleine K. Albright, was asked a rather arcane question: In seeking United Nations approval for invading Haiti, was the Clinton Administration burying the Monroe Doctrine forever?
Monroe Doctrine?
The reference was to James Monroe's declaration of 1823 that the Western Hemisphere was now closed to re-colonization by Europeans.
This may be dimly familiar to those who once took an American history course.
But the details are widely enough misunderstood that the kind of people who populate the serious policy talk shows have long since made it a rhetorical stick with which to beat their opponents -- a kind of code for brooking no nonsense in the Americas.


Questions of Conflict Sting Mutual Funds
For a decade, millions of Americans trying to avoid the pitfalls and predators of the stock market have turned to mutual funds, relying on the funds' professional managers to avoid the mistakes of an amateur investor.
Among those millions are many unsophisticated savers seeking higher returns than they can get from banks or Government bonds, now that interest rates are lower than they were for many years.


City Investigators Question Giuliani Fund-Raiser
William W. Koeppel, a real-estate executive and campaign fund-raiser for Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani, has been questioned by city investigators about lease arrangements for at least 15 campaign workers or aides to Mr.
Giuliani, the executive's spokesman said yesterday.
The spokesman, Gary Lewi, said Mr.
Koeppel had recently been contacted by the Department of Investigation about rentals to the aides, who received two weeks to three months without charge for signing leases at apartments owned by Mr.
Koeppel on the Upper East Side.


After a Closer Look, the Bengals' No. 1 Draft Pick Is Still No. 1
The Cincinnati Bengals were almost certain they had the real thing when they selected defensive tackle Dan Wilkinson with the No. 1 pick over all this year in the National Football League college draft.
After three weeks of training, they are sure.
One of the Bengals' longtime scouts was asked how Wilkinson ranked with Cincinnati's other previous first-round picks on defense.


Footlights Lure From Past for Lumet
SIDNEY LUMET last worked in the theater 30 years ago, which is about how long he has been spending time in East Hampton.
In the 30 years, Mr.
Lumet has made more than 30 movies that have established him as one of America's foremost directors.
Except for editing two films in the country, Mr.
Lumet has never deviated from the idea that East Hampton is his refuge.


Tuning Up The Memory
WHEN is an algorithm an algo-rhythm?
Or, to ask it another way: What's a good way to memorize gobs of medical data for a big nursing exam?
Answer: Sing "Rocking to the Algo-Rhythms."
Bob Diskin, a 39-year-old Massachusetts nurse, started writing songs when he was in nursing school and had to memorize, for example, intricate algorithmic formulas by which cardiac rhythms are assessed.
"When I was in college," Mr.
Diskin said, "I would write songs to help me study the difficult work. And the language of cardiac care sounded a lot like a hillbilly song."


HOME IS WHERE THE CARNIVAL IS
They set up on softball diamonds fairgrounds and shopping-center parking lots, cutting a bona fide trail through the charm and mystery of America.
The mash of people come, change jangling in their pockets, eager for some heartlandish thrills.
Carny people -- nomads without a state -- live in a seemingly inviolable and surreal time capsule, bound to each other by a wanderlust and style of living unfamiliar to most of the country.
It is not for the pusillanimous.
Years, decades pass -- but little changes about the carnival.
Freak shows with their half-ladies and mice-eating geeks are much in decline, but there are still the immutable Ferris wheels and merry-go-rounds and Zippers.
Still the carny games of skill -- the balls-in-the-bushel-baskets, the knock-down-the-milk-bottles; still the grinders and the cotton candy and the other digestive roadblocks.


July 31-Aug. 6: Pre-Dawn Derailment; Questioning Rail Safety After an Amtrak Wreck
The Clinton Administration is planning an inquiry into the safety of the country's passenger railroads after Amtrak's South Shore Limited derailed in Batavia, N.Y., last week, sending nine cars and 320 sleepy passengers plunging down a rock embankment and into a wooded gully at 3:44 A.M.
No one was killed, but scores suffered broken bones and other injuries.
The wreck of the Chicago-bound train on a straight high-grade track owned by Conrail was the eighth derailment for Amtrak in the last two years.
The worst, last September in Alabama, left 47 people dead.
Secretary of Transportation Federico Pena ordered a "summit conference" on rail safety, to focus particularly on why there are so many collisions at grade crossings.


In Chinese or English, It's 'Dragons Aweigh!'
LOCH NESS may have a monster, but Flushing Lake has dragons.
At least it will next weekend, at the Hong Kong Dragon Boat Festival in New York.
More than 30 corporate men's and women's teams will race the ornately carved and painted boats in hopes of going to an international competition in Hong Kong next June.
Qualifying heats will be held next Saturday and Sunday in Flushing Lake, and the national final will be in the Hudson, off Battery Park City, on Aug. 21.
In addition to the dragon boat races, there will be plenty of Chinese arts and crafts, food and other entertainment.


Suppose We Invade Haiti. Then What?
Contrary to the hopes of many who are calling for a U.S. invasion of Haiti, it is an illusion to believe that such an action could restore genuine democracy there.
What happens after the Marines depose Haiti's brutal military rulers?
Washington would probably sanction the return of the exiled President, the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide, but -- judging by past U.S. policy in Haiti -- would do nothing to help realize the hopes of the overwhelming number of Haitian people who voted for him in 1990.
If the U.S. invades, either on its own or with an assortment of countries recruited to lend an appearance of "multilateralism," it is unlikely that the Haitian people will regain control of their Government.
Rather than a surgical strike to remove the military regime of Lieut.
Gen.
Raoul Cedras, an American invasion would be the prelude to a lengthy occupation, formally under the authority of the United Nations but under de facto U.S. control.


Nathalie Vallier, C. C. Brodhead
Nathalie Vallier, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Roger M. Vallier of Gannat, France, was married yesterday to Christoffer Crawmer Brodhead, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
David C. Brodhead of New York.
The Rev.
Jean-Baptiste Vion performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at the Church of Berneuil in Berneuil, France.
The bride, 23, is studying at the School of Architecture in Paris.
Her parents are the managers of Total Petroleum, a gas and oil distributor in Gannat.


One Tree (and Volunteers) Triumph, While 56 More Trees Wait
Two years ago, Barbara Thomas decided to use some of her spare time to work on the tree committee of a SoHo-TriBeCa neighborhood group.
With another volunteer, Tanya Kelley, Ms.
Thomas shepherded forms to landlords and her community board, compiled lists of sidewalk and tree pit conditions along West Broadway between Houston and Chambers Streets and meticulously transferred them to user-friendly maps.
Then, half the area they were working on was landmarked.


Mary D. Mahl, Bernard Rolnick
Mary Donovan Mahl, a retired college administrator, was married on Friday to Bernard Rolnick, a lawyer in New York.
Town Justice Lawrence Lenihan of New Castle, N.Y., performed the ceremony at the Kittle House in Chappaqua, N.Y.
Mrs.
Rolnick, 60, retired as the assistant dean of community services at Westchester Community College in Valhalla, N.Y.
She graduated from Smith College and received a master's degree in guidance counseling from the Bank Street College of Education.
The bride is the daughter of the late Dr. and Mrs.
Francis E. Donovan.


Serbs Launch More Shells At Sarajevo
Hours after NATO launched a punitive air attack on a Bosnian Serb target Friday night, the Serbs again violated a heavy-weapons exclusion zone around Sarajevo by firing three mortar shells, a United Nations spokesman said today.
"We know the firing points," Maj.
Rob Annink said, adding that United Nations observers use special radar to spot the mortars, which were fired from three positions in the Sarajevo suburb of Lukavica.
He said at least one of the shells had landed in Serb-held territory.


Tech Notes; In Search of Sailboat Speed
FOR sailors, the 50-knot speed barrier is a goal that keeps getting closer but has not been attained.
Yet the quest for that speed -- 57.5 miles an hour, to landlubbers -- has spawned technology that is available on a recreational sailboat.
More water bug than boat, the 29-foot vessel is called a Trifoiler.
It looks like a trimaran, a boat with three hulls.
But when the wind blows at 10 miles an hour or more, all three fiberglass structures rise out of the water, and the craft rides on L-shaped foils that work like underwater airplane wings.


In a Show Of 8 Artists, Appreciation For Color
THE Paesaggio Gallery has moved from Hartford to Canton, where the director, Janice LaMotta, has joined with her husband, Kevin Rita, an antiquarian bookseller, to form what might be seen as a mom-and-pop setup.
The clapboard house with a double storefront is occupied on the left of the porch by her gallery, on the right by his store.
The setup is not only picturesque but also could be the setting for a Spencer Tracy-Katharine Hepburn comedy.
The only thing missing is a fast script exploiting the potential for rivalry, since Mr.
Rita, an aficionado of art, is currently offering a small show of collage works by Joy Floyd.


Piecing Together a Multicultural Heritage
A QUICK take on the "Composite" show playing the Neuberger Museum at the State University here, is that it is assemblage updated.
But closer inspection reveals that the change is as much in the appreciation of the genre as in the way it is practiced.
This means that the ethnic backgrounds of the artists must be taken into consideration.


Data Bank/August 7, 1994
Data Bank/August 7, 1994
Index of Leading Indicators
June
May
April
Monthly percent change
0.2
0.1
0.0
Factory Orders
Monthly percent change
0.8
0.8
0.2
Construction Spending
Monthly percent change
0.2
1.3
0.9
Personal Spending
Monthly percent change
0.4
0.4
-0.2
Personal Income
Monthly percent change
0.1
0.4
0.5
Employment
July
June
May
In thousands
122,500
122,400
122,900
Unemployment/Rate
In thousands/percent
8,000 (6.1)
7,800 (6.0)
7,900 (6.0)
Weekly Jobless Claims
July 29
July 22
July 15
In thousands
319
329
390


'Anything Goes' Revived
DURING recent summers, Theaterfest at Montclair State University has produced musical evenings with Barbara Cook, Rosemary Clooney, Carol Channing and Rita Moreno, and Tommy Tune.
Why not Melba Moore?
In a much publicized musical comeback, the singer, an alumna of Montclair State, is starring to her disadvantage in a makeshift version of a full-out musical, Cole Porter's "Anything Goes," instead of appearing more beneficially in concert.
Go figure.


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
BOSCOBEL RESTORER
Berry Tracy may not be a familiar name except to the cognoscenti of American antiques, but his influence in establishing a place for 19th-century American furniture and decorative arts in the history of those disciplines has been considerable.


Shannon-Erne Link Reopened in Ireland
After more than a century of disuse, the Shannon-Erne Waterway is once again open to boat traffic, providing a leisurely way to experience the unindustrialized western region of Ireland and Northern Ireland.
The canal, restored jointly by Ireland and Britain, opened this summer.
It is now possible to cover 470 miles between Belturbet on Lake Erne in County Fermanagh, Northern Ireland, and the mouth of the Shannon River west of Limerick in County Limerick, Republic of Ireland.
The $45 million project, which involved rebuilding more than 30 bridges, repairing 16 locks and landscaping canal banks, links three rivers and six lakes in County Fermanagh and Counties Leitrim and Cavan in the Republic of Ireland.
The canal between Lake Erne and the Shannon River was originally built between 1846 and 1860 but was abandoned in 1869 with the advent of rail transportation.


July 31-Aug. 6: Unclear Intentions; The North Koreans Return to the Table For Nuclear Bargaining
Four weeks after the death of President Kim Il Sung, North Korea resumed negotiations with the United States on its nuclear program last week in Geneva.
It could be read as a positive sign, but not necessarily.
No one knows what Mr.
Kim really intended when he agreed to the talks.
And no one can be sure that Pyongyang's new regime really wants a deal.
The United States is offering an end to North Korea's economic and political isolation, but the price is high: North Korea must renounce all hope of becoming a nuclear power and, since its word cannot be trusted, it must also open all its nuclear installations to international inspection and place any stocks of weapons-grade plutonium under international control.


How About More Classes for the Money?; Schools of the Rich
To the Editor:
Elite small colleges have been pricing themselves out of the market (front page, July 27) since the 1950's.
At $25,000 (room and board included), these colleges still accept only a fraction of the students who apply.


Today's Midlife Career Changers Need Universal Health Plan
To the Editor:
In a July 15 speech, President Clinton pointed out that rich people have health insurance, poor people have health insurance, and so do politicians.
Even those who go to jail are guaranteed a certain quality of health care.
The only ones left behind are in the middle class.
How come?


Sports of The Times; Dreaming of the Way It Used to Be
LAMBASTE me for being mired in the past, for refusing to remove my scratchy mono Beatles LP's from the turntable with the dust all over its plastic cover, but I just can't seem to feel anything but overwhelming indifference for these baby-faced millionaires whose collective title I find difficult even tapping into my trusty lap top.
I admit this is journalistically juvenile, but as I type my stories, I'm avoiding using the unofficial brand name, Dream Team II.
The first day up here, I called it the Next Generation and winced when I saw that in print, so now I resort to U.S. and Team USA and Americans and American pros and N.B.A. stars and Coach Don Nelson's team.


GAMBLING NATION
I was bemused by Hirshey's predominantly female ship (or bus) of fools, those "bingo ladies" who "started it all." She asks no questions about the social causes and potentially tragic consequences of gambling and shows no real concern for its present victims.
There is little mention of hard-core gamblers or the white-collar criminals who rob and exploit society and, if necessary, practice violence to satisfy their vice and greed.
EVA CORREDOR Annapolis, Md.


A Costume as Light as a Feather


A 'Rigoletto' A la Hopper
To the Editor:
The second act of the English National Opera production of "Rigoletto" (seen in New York at the Met in 1983) takes place on the New York waterfront circa 1953.
The focal point of the set, which encompasses two-thirds of the stage, is an almost exact replica of Hopper's "Diner" painting.
While nostalgically amusing, it is also sinister and threateningly sad.
So like Hopper's paintings.
JAMES ALLEN REID  New York


When Politics Hide Behind Islam
The burning of books leads ineluctably to the burning of heretics.
Freedom of conscience is a protection for all believers, to the disadvantage of none.
When preachers enter politics, scruple sometimes flies out the door.
It has taken centuries for Western societies to absorb these lessons, whose value is periodically underscored here at home by an outburst of religious zealotry -- such as the killing in Florida of a physician by a foe of abortion rights, to demonstrate the sanctity of life.
Similar acts, in other parts of the world, have been inspired by what is too sweepingly called Islamic fundamentalism.
Every great religion derives its strength from fundamentals, and in that sense every believer is a fundamentalist.
Rather call it crafty fanaticism when clergymen with a political agenda agitate to execute alleged blasphemers, now including Christians.
And in countries where this is happening -- Bangladesh, Pakistan and Iran -- religious bigotry is in fact a deadly weapon in a worldly power struggle.


Mediocrity Too Lofty A Target For Mets
There was Jeromy Burnitz looking incredulously at strike three with the bases loaded in the second.
And Ryan Thompson chasing another pitch out of the strike zone to end the seventh, again with three Mets aboard.
So it was no surprise when David Segui lined out to Jerry Browne in shallow left field with two runners aboard to end the game.


Valerie Altmann, Daniel Perla
Dr.
Valerie Joy Altmann, a resident in obstetrics and gynecology at Long Island Jewish Hospital in New Hyde Park, is to be married today to Daniel Rory Perla, a United States equities analyst at Soros Fund Management in New York.
Rabbi Uri Gordon and Rabbi Sender Shizgal, an uncle of the bride, are to perform the ceremony at the Shaar Hashamayim Synagogue in Montreal.
Dr.
Altman, 27, graduated from McGill University, from which she received her medical degree.
She is a daughter of Miriam and Gabor Altmann of Montreal.


Hospitals In Vietnam Lose Aid
"We are asking the Foreign Ministry to change the name of this hospital," said Dr.
Pham Van Dien, the director of the Vietnam-Poland Friendship Hospital.
"Let's just call it General Hospital of Nghe An Province."
Dr.
Dien, a surgeon, spoke with bitterness stemming from an evident sense of despair at being responsible for the main provincial hospital and lacking virtually everything that its patients need.
It is a feeling that is shared by the health authorities throughout Vietnam.


Alexa C. Diegel, Thomas A. Rice
Alexa Charlotte Diegel, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Rolf Diegel of Worthsee, Germany, was married yesterday to Thomas Anthony Rice, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas O. Rice of Lloyd Harbor, L.I.
The Rev.
Jeffrey von Arx, a Roman Catholic priest and the chairman of the history department at Georgetown University, performed the ceremony at the Church of Ste.-Madeleine in Charnay-les- Macon, France.
Mrs.
Rice, 23, studied at the Martha Graham School of Contemporary Dance, and she and her husband graduated from Georgetown.
She was a dancer with the District of Columbia Contemporary Dance Theater.
Her father is the president and chief executive of Netstor Software G.m.b.H. in Munich, Germany.
Her mother, Chantal Diegel, is an interpreter specializing in English, German and French.


Suddenly Royals Have One-Game Loss Streak
Mariners 11, Royals 2
Kansas City's 14-game winning streak came to a crashing end last night when Reggie Jefferson drove in four runs and Edgar Martinez hit a three-run homer to lead Seattle to an 11-2 rout of the Royals.


Nikki Anne Levin, M. F. Christman
Nikki Anne Levin, the daughter of Nancy P. Levin of Lexington, Mass., and Dr.
Albert B. Levin of Waltham, Mass., is to be married today to Michael Fabrique Christman, a son of Russell F. Christman of Chapel Hill, N.C., and the late Sylvia T. Christman.
Vivian Burns, a justice of the peace in Woburn, Mass., is to officiate at the Codman House Estate in Lincoln, Mass.
Ms.
Levin, 29, who is keeping her name, is studying for a medical degree at the University of California at San Francisco, where the bridegroom is an assistant professor of radiation oncology.
She graduated summa cum laude from Harvard University, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa.
She received a Ph.D. in biology from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
The bride's father is a cardiologist at the Lahey Clinic in Burlington, Mass.
Her mother is a psychotherapist in Lexington.


WALLEYED OPTIMIST
James Gorman's About Men column "Just a Walleyed Optimist" (July 17) omits one crucial element of fishing lore that should be transmitted to sons -- there are legal size limits.


CRIME
Reading James Lee Burke is like riding a runaway locomotive -- a big rush, until you crash and burn.
DIXIE CITY JAM (Hyperion, $22.95), the seventh adventure for a hang-tough Cajun cop named Dave Robicheaux, is one of this unruly writer's wilder rides.
The demented plot opens with Dave's eerie underwater encounter with a U-boat that sank off Louisiana during World War II.
With a Nazi submarine in the water, can "speed-fried Nazi zomboids" be far behind in the narrative?


New Rules, But Wagner Loses Again
IT'S THE HUMAN SIDE OF GRAND OPERA THAT gives us so much trouble.
Music without plots and cast lists is easier to deal with.
Think of instrumental music as sound without morals.
The key of B flat doesn't lie, cheat or steal; it's just there.
When music starts incorporating people, how they behave becomes an issue.
Operas, for example, tell stories about how good or bad their characters are.
Because goodness and badness vary wildly, depending on who is proclaiming the first or denying the second, every opera needs a reference point to tell the two apart.
That point, I think, can reside only in the composer.
The idea of good for Berlioz, even when applied to an opera about ancient Troy, is an idea of good mutually understood by him and his fellow Frenchmen in the 1850's.
Music by itself has qualities that push opera toward simpler outlines.
The singing styles exaggerate speech; musical movement becomes a brake when applied to swiftly flowing words.
Along with this size and slowness comes a simplification of human emotions; gray areas between good and bad tend to be erased.
I saw a new opera based on "The Sorrows of Young Werther" a few years ago in which Albert, Lotte's betrothed, is transformed into Werther's vicious rival, very unlike the sympathetic companion Goethe had made him.
The composer, bowing evidently to opera's demands for symmetry, felt he needed unequivocal conflict, and Albert was his man.
It is another example of opera's devouring good literature and being able to thrive on bad.


L.I. Shootings Test Nerves; 3 Are Fired On in Suburbs
Behind a dull pane of bulletproof glass a night clerk at the Beacon Motel on Route 347, Lonny Giarrizzo, stared into the deep blackness of night and imagined an army of snipers staring back at him.
From his brightly lighted cubicle there was nothing to see but the headlights of passing cars.
But in the vague outlines of darkness the image of an unknown sniper or snipers who have stalked this quiet part of Long Island crept into his mind.
"You can't see nothing out there, but he sure can see us," Mr.
Giarrizzo said.
"I don't mind telling you I'm scared as hell. There could be a dozen snipers out there."


Cathedral View Is Also Served
CAFE ST.
JOHN ++ (212) 932-8420; 1018 Amsterdam Avenue at 110th Street; $; American Express


Bertoli Brecht, Survivor
NOT ALL OF US ARE SAINTS A Doctor's Journey With the Poor.
By David Hilfiker. 259 pp.
New York.
Hill &amp; Wang. $20.
INCREASINGLY, the national debate over health care has focused on the question of how best to help the middle class.
The very rich and the very poor will always have access to health insurance, President Clinton and his allies say, but the middle class is continually in danger of losing coverage.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
PHILOSOPHY  THE PURSUIT OF LOVE  By Irving Singer. Johns Hopkins University, $25.95.


Sound Bytes; The Evangelist for Notes
THREE years ago, Jim Manzi, the acerbic president and chief executive of the Lotus Development Corporation, realized that his non-technical background was leaving him at a disadvantage in the very public verbal jousts he regularly had with his main software rivals: Bill Gates, chairman of the Microsoft Corporation, and Philippe Kahn, chairman of Borland International.
Lotus, Mr.
Manzi decided, needed a technology-savvy mouthpiece, a vocal and visible spokesman, particularly to evangelize the company's Notes "groupware." So he turned to John Landry, a veteran of the mainframe software wars, named him chief technology officer and sent him out to battle for Lotus.


Manager's Profile
Kenneth W. Corba Fund: Stein Roe Young Investor Fund, $6 million in assets.
Co-manager since May 1994 inception. (Sponsor: Stein Roe &amp; Farnham, Chicago.)


SUNDAY, August 7, 1994; Testing Napoleon
Napoleon Bonaparte died 173 years ago, but the F.B.I. has just taken on the case.
Some members of the Napoleonic Society of America suspect foul play -- they think the Emperor may have died from arsenic poisoning, not stomach cancer.
Why the F.B.I.?
To test two samples of the Emperor's hair.
One comes from a collection once owned by the writer George Sand.
And the other was supposedly snipped off by the linen maid hours after Napoleon's death.


Dressing Down
When the air grows heavy and the human spirit wilts, a salad is the best revenge.
A seemingly innocent tumble of greens, it is neither gentle nor mild, but alive -- fierce, both in its inherent crispness and in the peppery spice of its leaves.
Eating a salad is like cracking a whip.
It emboldens.
Raw, not cooked, a salad is not about satisfying a physical hunger but a psychological urge.
Making a salad, however, is an intellectual endeavor, for you need to know the character and potential of each green.
You need to know, for instance, that head lettuces, though mild in flavor, are inherently crisp and therefore good canvases upon which to build.
That iceberg lettuce, when sliced in thin ribbons, delivers a satisfying crunch and a quick rush of juice, even if its flavor is totally evanescent.
Or, that buttercrunch lettuce, while remarkably crisp and sturdy, lends a salad a delicious, fresh flavor.


THE BUDDY SYSTEM
Shouldering the world -- and the new fall clothes -- together.


Police Make Arrests For Weapons Possession at Flea Market


Woodstock Redux: All They Were Saying About Giving Peace a Chance
For a brief, mercurial time in the late 1960's and early 1970's, an underground press thrived in New York.
As the anniversary of Woodstock approaches, the festival's impact at the time is perhaps best captured in excerpts from the rhapsodic reportage of Rat and The East Village Other.
AUG. 27-SEPT. 9 Cover story:  "and i danced in the mud, and the blood, and the beer . . . "


Karen S. Miller and Denis Lamb
Karen Sue Miller, until recently the director of marketing and communications in Washington for the accounting firm of Deloitte &amp; Touche, was married yesterday to Denis Lamb, a former diplomat and Government official.
The Rev.
Peter Carey performed the ceremony at All Souls Episcopal Church in Washington.
Mrs.
Lamb, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John A. Miller of Shelbyville, Ill., graduated from Bradley University and received a master's degree in English literature from St.
John's University in Queens.


NJN and Its Service To the State
While the article "NJN Girding for a Battle of Survival" (July 17) pays inordinate attention to the conventional bottom line -- dollars and cents -- those of us committed to nonprofit public broadcasting are concerned primarily with a different sort of bottom line: service to the community.
By all measures of community service, NJN is a great success.
Each day it brings to the people of New Jersey unique informational, cultural and educational services that respond directly to their search for programming that adds to the quality of their lives.


In Supercomputers, Bigger and Faster Means Trouble
FIVE years ago the Defense Department gave $12 million to the Thinking Machines Corporation, an innovative start-up company in Cambridge, Mass.
An assignment came with the seed money: take high-performance computing to new frontiers.
So Thinking Machines began a bold bid to design a new kind of computer that, by 1995, would probably cost $80 million and be more than a thousand times faster than the most powerful supercomputers available in 1989.
It was a Government-subsidized effort to build the Ferrari of supercomputers.
The initiative reflected Washington's high-tech policies and priorities in the late 80's, when the Cold War was still on, Star Wars spending flowed and computing firepower was considered a measure of national security.


Old Style Returns To California Homes
To the Editor:
I am delighted to learn that front porches are making a comeback in California subdivisions  [ "An Old Style Returns to California Subdivisions," July 17 ]  following the style of Midwestern homes built in the earlier part of this century.


As Innings Dwindle, Baseball Chief Balks
No one could mistake Bud Selig for Judge Kenesaw Mountain Landis, baseball's first commissioner, whose iron-fisted control over the sport from 1920 to 1944 remains legendary.
No white flowing mane for Mr.
Selig but a neatly cropped haircut above glasses, a sport jacket and tie.
No imperial bearing, no thunderous pronouncements, no seat of central authority in a highly visible setting -- he occupies a small office in Milwaukee County Stadium -- no attempt to insert his supposed office to solve serious issues, or, at least, the impending strike by major league baseball players.
And yet, as the acting commissioner of baseball, Mr.
Selig is, of all things, Judge Landis's successor, eight removed.
As successors go, though, Mr.
Selig appears toothless.
And, although not in a bunker, he is remote, a thousand miles away from the crucible of strike talks in Manhattan.
If the owners and the players do not settle their differences, including the owners' insistence on a cap on salaries and the players' vow not to acquiesce to one, the baseball season will stop indefinitely after Thursday night's games.


Extras Included
Cruisemasters, a cruise-only travel agency in Los Angeles, recently started a World Cruise Desk.
The new service provides passengers with a range of shore amenities not included in the ship's itinerary at no extra charge.
"Most ships offer shore activities, but we try to put something together that's a bit different," said Richard Kaplan, Cruisemasters' president.


Q. &amp; A.
Providing Access to a Condo Unit Q Over the years, many of the unit owners in our new condominium building were forced to change their apartment locks because of repeated unauthorized entry, for no apparent reason, at all hours of the day and night by construction workers and building personnel.
In some instances, property was taken.


No Headline
People should not judge a book by its cover. -- SUHA ARAFAT, characterizing her husband's first month in power.  [ 20:3. ]


Enjoying the Abundance of Eggplant, Without the Oil
GLOSSY eggplants are a year-round market staple.
In summer, eggplants of every description are in the market, from typical dark purple large ones to slender, often lighter-colored Asian varieties and even some creamy white ones that look like ostrich eggs.
And this is when eggplants have more allure than ever.
Perhaps it's because the vegetables and herbs that complement them so well, like tomatoes, zucchini, peppers and basil, are also at their peak of freshness and quality.
The spongy texture of the eggplant's flesh can be daunting, however.
Consequently, many traditional eggplant recipes, like ratatouille, begin by requiring that eggplant slices be sauteed, a step that often calls for a half cup of oil or more.
Some cooks broil or grill eggplant slices after brushing them with oil, a technique that uses less fat.


A Higher Calling With Guns and Badges
SISTER Concepta D'Amato insists that she is the only nun she knows who answers to two higher orders: God and the East Hanover Police Chief.
Sister Connie, as she prefers to be called, is the police chaplain for the East Hanover Police Department, and she may be the only nun in the state -- or maybe even the nation -- who serves as a chaplain to a police department, a post normally held by male priests, ministers or rabbis.


More About the Muggletonians
To the Editor:
Concerning the Muggletonians, referred to in Charles Valentine's letter of June 12, he and other "omnivorous" readers may wish to know that Patrick O'Brian mentions this sect in passing on page 12 of his most recent Aubrey Maturin novel, "The Wine-Dark Sea." In fact, Mr.
O'Brian apparently has a complete knowledge of English religious dissent.
Sailors who are "Brownists, Sethians, Arminians, Muggletonians" or members of several other sects appear with a picturesque regularity among the crews of Capt.
Jack Aubrey's various commands.
ROBERT BRAY  Bloomington, Ill.


No Plans? Too Late
'Tis the season to save the date.
Party organizers, aware that competition for guests grows keen in the fall, have been sending out "Save the Date" notes so that busy Manhattanites can plan their back-from-the-beach-house schedules.
Already, social types have been asked to pencil in Jean-Paul Gaultier for Sept. 19, and to save Oct. 4 for Fete de Famille IX, the annual party outside Mortimer's to fight AIDS; to hold Oct. 19 for the New York City Opera's 50th anniversary celebration, and Nov. 7 for the Fashion Institute of Technology's 50th.
So if you ask some people to dinner on Oct. 13 and they say they're busy, it may be true: Victoria Newhouse, for one, has urged her friends to "Save This Date!" for a benefit for her Delta Society Service and Therapy Animal Awards.
DAN SHAW


Ideas &amp; Trends; Unforgettable, That's What It All Is, and Isn't
NOW that the Woodstock commemorations have been halved for lack of patronage, it is time, as the drug-free pleasure of some snickering dies down, to look into history's myriad alternative occasions in a packed year of calendar milestones stretching from Omaha Beach to the Sea of Tranquillity.
Memory serves us strangely, if we're not careful, so herewith is a fuller 1994 sampler of other premises for jostling together down at time's shore, to wallow and wince.
Prohibition, for one big event, occurred 75 years ago, reason enough now for en masse bellying up to the bar.
About 500,000 Americans were arrested across the following decade, certainly more than were busted in all the rock concerts ever held.
Yet its liver-scarred participants never gather for some of that Dennis Hopper-toned hyperbolic whining of "Like-wow-man" at the timelessness of having been wasted together.
As for musical occasion, 50 years ago Glenn Miller disappeared as World War II was ending and about to flood the nation with big-band addicts eager to send the recording industry rocketing.
He left, less self-tragic than Jimi Hendrix, as a soldier flying above the English Channel without so much as a baton or yellow ribbon to mark him.
Even more might we now gather to mourn the day the music died, 35 years ago, when the prodigious Buddy Holly perished in the plane crash that took the Big Bopper and Ritchie Valens as well.
For commemorating the other deity in the Aquarian trinity, sex, now's the time for an original cast revival of "Oh! Calcutta!" the first Broadway vehicle to draw middle-class audiences with full-frontal nudity.
That was 25 years ago, so to display the original cast, slackened and flaccid with time, might be the ultimate test of box-office nostalgia.
Looking back at 1969, when Penthouse magazine began and the Saturday Evening Post closed after a century of modesty, you don't have to be swaying obeisantly in a mass of Deadheads to see how sex once was a less forbidding distraction than it has lately become.
As for fractious politics, there are those in the crowd who might be willing to attend a commemoration of the 25th anniversary of Earl Warren's rounding out his estimable career on the Supreme Court, if only because he forced his critics to find fresh excuses for national kvetch and conspiracy beyond "the Warren Court." Others might want to skip any 25th reunions for the debut of The Brady Bunch; better to privately savor the undermining of faux wholesomeness that has followed.
Those are only a few opening milestones, with no reference to such occasions as George Bush's proclamation four years ago of this "decade of the brain" in which all Americans were urged to hail, study and otherwise groom the "three-pound mass of interwoven nerve cells." But do we write?
Do we call in?
And what about the 35th anniversary of Barbie, and still no genitalia?
Or the 30th year of G.I.
Joe, and still no manhood?
And the 30th for Charlie the Tuna's first ego-crushing rejection, with, nonetheless, still no 9-millimeter fin-gun being brandished, bless the tepidness of Charlie's rage.
Americans who think the 50th birthday of Smokey the Bear is cause for rallying should drive this weekend up the Thruway (I mean, the Thruway's open, man!) to Andover, N.Y., where more than 2,000 firefighters are feting Smokey like he was Arlo.
Lows and Highs
All the more reason for combing memory for outbursts of laughter and vanity.
Maybe geriatric biker gangs could terrorize a retirement village to commemorate the 70th anniversary of Marlon Brando's first mumblings in his crib.
And it's 200 years since the first American millionaire, Cornelius Vanderbilt, was born and got The Donald treatment of undue respect.
Marlon's nativity coincided with the sensational Leopold and Loeb trial, a case of affluent youths' murdering a random innocent in a fit of ennui, a case that gripped the nation like O. J.'s without benefit of TV rent-a-sages.
It's 90 years since Ju-Jitsu was wildly popularized by Teddy Roosevelt, a moment for which the Beltway's massed castrati chorus of White House press corps veterans might lyrically commemorate the 20th century's earliest spin-controlled feeding-frenzy.
Dear Woodstockians, your best instincts can be handily marked right now elsewhere in history than Bethel.
No one still struts more as a free spirit than Candide, the creature of Voltaire who was born a commemoratively tidy 300 years ago.
"Let us cultivate our garden," was Candide's epiphany, as in: Do your own thing.
You can't relate to Voltaire?
That's cool; how about the Munchkins of Oz convention in Wilmington, Del., this weekend?
You just missed the Canadian Chocolate Festival in New Brunswick for getting off on unproscribed substances.
If you're bummed out about all this call to memory, at least keep in mind that 10:33 P.M.
E.D.T. today is the precise halfway point of summer, a sweet turning ever ignored but hyped less than the age of Aquarius.
The calendar has lots more going ungathered over: 50 years since the first bikini whittled life's mysteries, 20 years since streaking begged their restoration.
Where would all of Woodstock's studied dressing down be without the dressing up historians mark at 1,000 years ago, when Anglo-Saxons invented the layered look and donned primal shirts and coats?
There's a bog somewhere, a place for us to gather and really let go about this, reviewed this time by platoons of style writers.
On a simpler scale, we still have time to mass, in Hollywood, ideally, 200 years after men's hair powder was disfavored by the primping Founding Fathers.
In doing so, they did spare the executive pigtail so sported now in authoritarian grays by some who style themselves as post-Woodstock successes spinning entertainment riches from all that they learned at the counter-culture.
Daniel Berrigan, still conscientious after all these years, saw it all coming: "A revolution is interesting insofar as it avoids like the plague the plague it promised to heal."
About the big plague, this year we can commemorate the 1,400th year of its ending.
It leveled Europe's population by half but made all of us stronger for it, even if this health care debate is a drag.
"For what has this world been formed?" Voltaire asked, answering: "To plague us to death." Janis Joplin's point, exactly.
But before that there is much other overlooked life available for commemoration.
It's 900 years since the first gondola defined the grace of Venice.
Tomorrow, zealous gardeners celebrate national Sneak Some Zucchini Onto Your Neighbor's Porch Night.
And, oh: 40 years since Joe D. married Marilyn, a decade after "The Glass Menagerie" made an American romance of memory.
And 400 years since Shakespeare showed producers how to really pack spirited groundlings together, creating a coda that's Woodstockian enough in "As You Like It": "Last scene of all, that ends this strange eventful history, is second childishness and mere oblivion."


A Dog, a Horse, a Dervish and a Human or Two
North  Elijah Wood, Bruce Willis Directed by Rob Reiner PG 87 minutes


In Nigeria, Strikers Reject Military Offer
With tensions growing from more than a month of strikes, opponents of military rule in Nigeria are signaling that they will accept no solution to this country's political crisis short of the installation of the man widely believed to have won the presidential election last year.
With most workers in the country's economic capital, Lagos, joining in a strike by employees of the country's vital oil industry this week, Nigeria's military leadership has sought a solution to the crisis by offering a conditional release to Moshood Abiola, an opposition leader and the presumed winner in the June 12, 1993, national elections.
He has been jailed on treason charges since late June of this year for his attempt that month to claim the presidency.


How About More Classes for the Money?; Schools of the Rich
To the Editor:
Elite small colleges have been pricing themselves out of the market (front page, July 27) since the 1950's.
At $25,000 (room and board included), these colleges still accept only a fraction of the students who apply.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
EDUCATION  FAILING AT FAIRNESS  How America's Schools Cheat Girls.
By Myra Sadker and David Sadker.
Scribners, $22.


A Life of Its Own
Thirteen years ago, the plan to redevelop Times Square with four huge office towers was hatched as a grand design for urban renewal, something as ambitious as the United Nations or Lincoln Center, something that would bring civility and commerce to what had become a national icon of sleaziness and blight.
Since then, a building boom has gone bust, a torrent of lawsuits has derailed other large projects, and many of New York City's biggest development dreams have been scrapped.
Mortimer B. Zuckerman's Columbus Circle project unraveled last month.
And the 20-year-old effort to replace the West Side Highway was scaled back further last week to a plan for a riverfront boulevard.


Rocks and Bottles Hurled At Police in Harlem Clash
Police officers responding to a report of gunfire on 125th Street in Harlem were met with a deluge of rocks, bricks and bottles early yesterday in a disturbance that ultimately involved more than 900 people, the police said.
The confrontation prompted police officials to call in about 200 officers, including many from other boroughs, and to cordon off a four-block stretch on 125th Street.
By the end of the clash, 11 people were arrested, 5 officers suffered minor injuries, and the street was filled with shards of glass and other debris.


Treasury to Auction Bills, Notes and Bonds
The Treasury's schedule of financings this week will include bills, notes and bonds, beginning with today's regular weekly auction of three- and six-month bills.
The Government will auction three-year notes on Tuesday and 10-year notes on Wednesday.
On Thursday, the Government will auction 30-year bonds and 38-day cash management bills.
By the close of the New York cash market on Friday, the rate on the outstanding three-month bill was 4.45 percent, and the rate on a six-month bill was 4.89 percent, traders said.
In when-issued trading, three-year notes were being offered at a rate to yield 6.57 percent, 10-year notes at a rate to yield 7.25 percent and 30-year bonds at a rate to yield 7.43 percent.


Demonizing Iran Doesn't Equal Foreign Policy
To the Editor:
"Iran and Allies Are Suspected in Bomb Wave" (front page, July 29) raises two unfortunate questions regarding the political judgment of Secretary of State Warren Christopher.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-6  RENEWED BOSNIAN TENSION
Life in the Bosnian capital had been improving, but after a week of renewed aggression by the Serbs, the city is sliding once again to a low point in its effort to recover.
A1


More Like a Factory Than a National Trust
IN the next four days you will read and hear the term "looming baseball players strike" a lot.
You will also hear from a lot of grass-roots locales the term "fan boycott." And then there will be the obligatory calls for intervention by the President of the United States.
Only one of these notions should be given any credence at this point.
And that is the players strike.
For the players are scheduled to walk on Friday, and it appears that only intervention of the heavenly sort will stop that from happening.


A Journal Is Sprouting From Seeds of the 60's
Last week, Woodstock was declared a bust by the Woodstock generation.
Or, at least, one of the two reunion concerts planned for the 25th anniversary of the event was called off when only 1,650 of 50,000 tickets had been sold by a cutoff date.
But don't tell that to Warren Hinckle.


The Rucker League Has Fans Starry-Eyed
The Rucker League bills itself as America's oldest and best summer basketball league.
Others might argue about the latter assertion, but the former is pretty much a given.
In its 44 years of existence, the Rucker has been the summer stage for some of the game's greatest players, some who made it professionally, like Kareem Abdul-Jabbar and Earl Monroe, and some playground legends who did not, like Herman (Helicopter) Knowings and Joe Hammond.


Cherokee Run Is Defeated
Cherokee Run, perhaps the best sprinter in the East, joined the list of beaten favorites at Saratoga Race Course today when he was outrun by half a length by Boundary in the sprint known as the A Phenomenon Handicap.
The race was run before a crowd of 58,177, a record for Saratoga, while 12,880 more watched by television at Aquaduct in Queens.
T-shirts were given away at both tracks.
Boundary, third choice in the betting, was taken from the railing toward the outside by his rider, John Velasquez, and he stayed there stalking Dalhart until the turn for home.
Dalhart, one of the Loblolly Stable's candidates for the Triple Crown last year, faded to sixth place after that.
But Boundary took the lead and held it while Cherokee Run made a late but losing dash to take second by half a length over I Can't Believe.
The winner, owned by Mrs.
William Haggin Perry and trained by Bill Mott, ran the six furlongs in a rousing 1:083/5 , just three-fifths of a second off the track record, and paid $10.40 for $2.
He had been a perfect 5 for 5 until July, when he ran second and third at Belmont Park.


15 Firefighters Injured in Queens


Brown Has Clear Edge Following 2 Rounds
The battle to become the Giants' starting quarterback seems almost over.
Coach Dan Reeves acknowledged today that Dave Brown was one good performance away from beating out Kent Graham for the job.
"I'm going to sit down with my staff and talk about it," Reeves said.
"But I don't think there's any question Dave is ahead of him right now. I want to make a decision, but I want to talk to the coaches. We'll talk. We'll see."


3 Stowaways On Freighter Saved at Sea
Six young stowaways from the Dominican Republic, who said they had been beaten and subjected to forced labor after being discovered aboard an Estonian freighter, were rescued by American authorities yesterday after three of them leaped into the Atlantic from the vessel's anchorage outside New York Harbor.
Tattered and grimy after days at sea and apparently desperate to escape, three of the men plunged 40 feet from the deck of the freighter into the sea shortly before 1 P.M. and began swimming for the distant city.
The nearest land was the Queens peninsula of the Rockaways, five miles to the north.


Caribbean Traditions Mixed With the Modern
The opening concert of Lincoln Center Out of Doors on Friday night did double duty.
It was also an uptown extension of the Caribbean Cultural Center's 10th annual Carnival, and like the center's weekendlong carnival at Battery Park City, it promised to sample music and dance styles from around the Caribbean, Africa and New York.
The bill announced as the concert began included Los Munequitos de Matanzas, a traditional rumba group from Cuba; Village Drums of Freedom, a Brooklyn steel-drum group, and Phantom, a Haitian rock band.
But the rainy show ended early; Phantom did not perform.
Los Munequitos de Matanzas, formed in 1952, hold on to traditional songs and rhythms.
Voices rise in solo chants, harmonize or share call-and-response; percussion, from congas and box-shaped drums to bells and rattles, surrounds the incantations with rhythms that are light, precise and kinetic.
Rare rural styles like the yambu and the columbia, and the more familiar guaguanco and rumba, were like calculated hailstorms of percussion, every click and sputter and hiss in its time-honored moment.


ResultsPlus
GOLF  Couples Roars Back  Fred Couples, recovering from a back injury that kept him out of golf for almost four months, shot a seven-under-par 65 in the third round yesterday morning, then had a 68 in the afternoon and beat Corey Pavin by two strokes in the Buick Open.
Couples closed out his first victory of the season -- and the 11th of his career -- with an exclamation point birdie on the final hole, hitting his approach less than two feet from the pin and making the putt for a 270 total.
The 36-hole finish, which Couples dreaded, was necessary because the opening round was postponed Thursday by rain.
Curtis Strange, Steve Pate and Greg Kraft were tied for third at 276.
Ben Crenshaw and Keith Clearwater finished at 277. (AP) Hill Wins McCall's: In Stratton Mountain, Vt., Carolyn Hill won the McCall's L.P.G.A.
Classic, her first victory in 14 years on the tour.
She closed with a three-under-par 69 for a 13-under 275 total to beat Nancy Ramsbottom by three strokes.
Ramsbottom, seeking her first tour victory in 10 years on the tour, shot a 70 for a 278. (AP) TENNIS  Graf Regains Form  Steffi Graf, playing her best tennis in months, routed Arantxa Sanchez Vicario, 6-2, 6-1, yesterday in Carlsbad, Calif., to win the Toshiba Classic, her first tournament victory since May.
Graf, who failed to play up to her standards all week, finally had all elements of her game working in beating the world's No. 2 female player in 67 minutes.
The victory broke a three-month drought for Graf, who last won at the German Open in May. (AP)
Navratilova's Team Wins: Martina Navratilova led the New Jersey Stars to a 28-25 overtime victory over the Idaho Sneakers in the finals of the World TeamTennis championships in Sacramento, Calif.
With courtside temperatures reaching 100 degrees, the Stars won a match that featured three tie-breakers. (AP)
Ivanisevic Prevails: Top-seeded Goran Ivanisevic overcame a challenge from unseeded Fabrice Santoro before winning, 6-2, 4-6, 4-6, 6-3, 6-2, in the final of EA Generali tournament in Kitzbuhel, Austria. (AP) Becker Takes Los Angeles Open: Boris Becker trounced Mark Woodforde of Australia, 6-2, 6-2, yesterday to win the $400,000 Los Angeles Open.
Becker, the No. 2 seeded player making his first appearance in Los Angeles, won in less than an hour.
He lost just 8 points on his serve the entire match.
It was the German's second title this year.
Woodforde repeatedly missed first serves and committed numerous unforced errors.
Becker earned $42,000 and Woodforde $24,150. (AP)
Bruguera Solves Medvedev: After losing to his opponent the first three times, top-seeded Sergi Bruguera finally defeated No. 2 Andrei Medvedev, 6-3, 6-4, in the Czech Open final in Prague. (AP) BOXING Close Call for McGirt  James (Buddy) McGirt barely preserved his World Boxing Council welterweight title shot against Pernell Whitaker yesterday, winning a 10-round split decision over Patrick Coleman at Callicoon, N.Y.
McGirt, who lost the title to Whitaker in March 1993, has a rematch scheduled for Oct. 1.
First, though, the two-time world champion had to get past Coleman.
It almost didn't happen.
McGirt controlled the early rounds, then had trouble breathing because of his mouthpiece.
Coleman stepped up the pace, but McGirt closed strong, opening a cut on Coleman's left eyelid in the final round. (AP)
EQUESTRIAN  Germans Get the Gold  Germans won three gold medals on the final day at the World Equestrian Games in the Hague yesterday.
Franke Sloothaak won the individual show jumping with four faultless rounds.
The Germans won the team competition in the four-in-hand driving with 256.6 faults and Michael Freund won the individual gold medal, finishing with a total of 122.5.
In show jumping, Michel Robert of France had a half-fault in a time penalty to finish behind Sloothaak.
Belgium won the four-in-hand silver medal, scoring 271.4, and the Netherlands the bronze with 283.4 points.
SOCCER  Women's Title to U.S.
The United States won the Chiquita Cup women's soccer tournament yesterday, beating Norway, 4-1, at Worcester, Mass., behind two goals by Mia Hamm.
The United States, the defending world champion, went ahead in the final minute of the first half when a Norwegian player accidently put the ball in her own net. (AP)


Inventory rise Piques Wall Street
Last week's Government figures showed that more than two-thirds of the nation's economic growth in the second quarter came from rising inventories, and that spooked Wall Street more than Main Street.
Rising inventories have often been an early warning sign of downturns in production and general economic trouble to come, and that is just how Wall Street interpreted the figures.
Bond prices rose sharply as investors bet that the economy would weaken and undercut pressures to raise interest rates.


2 Boaters Are Killed When Craft Collide In Great South Bay
A Port Washington, L.I., man and a 14-year-old boy were killed and another boy was seriously injured yesterday when their boat was struck by a larger vessel in the Great South Bay off Long Island, the police said.
The accident occurred about 6:45 P.M. on a brilliantly sunny, nearly cloudless day with only light winds.
The two boats collided about 200 yards north of the Fire Island hamlet of Dunewood, a half-mile east of Fair Harbor, said Officer Michael Maffucci, a spokesman for the Suffolk County police.


Music Notes
Disk vs. Directory
Musical America, the annual directory in which musicians and managers advertise their availability in the hope of making productive connections, has taken a step toward the multimedia future.
Realizing that photographs and selective quotations from reviews can go only so far, Robert Rund, the associate publisher, has put together a 43-minute compact disk sampler that includes performances by 13 of the magazine's advertisers.
The recording is being sent, without charge, to the 7,000 orchestras, opera companies, festivals and performing arts series listed in the directory: anyone, that is, in a position to hire one of the performers.


A Life of Hiding for a Tobacco Critic Bound to Silence
In the last few months, as thousands of pages of documents from the Brown &amp; Williamson Tobacco Corporation have surfaced in Congress and in news reports, one man's name has repeatedly been cited as the source.
But not a word has been heard from that man, Merrell Williams, a 53-year-old former paralegal.
A Louisville, Ky., court has enjoined him from discussing the documents with anyone, including his own lawyers.
So he is silent, even though he has been publicly accused by Brown &amp; Williamson of stealing its papers.


Corrections
A report on Saturday in the Chronicle column about Van Cliburn referred incorrectly to the pianist's concert schedule.
After initial plans to postpone a concert in New York last Tuesday night because of his mother's illness, it was held as scheduled.


Purdue Student, in a First, Earns a Double Doctorate
Inspired by the comic-book character Spiderman and a firefighter who told him he could accomplish anything he applied his mind to, a Purdue University student yesterday became the first in the nation to be awarded two doctorates simultaneously.
As 800 graduates crossed the stage in the Purdue Hall of Music in West Lafayette, Ind., the procession halted as 31-year-old Harry Kloor, of Portland, Ore., was double-hooded with two blue, black and gold hoods -- one for his Ph.D. in physics, the other for his Ph.D. in chemistry.


When Retail Giants Merge
The proposed merger between bankrupt R. H. Macy and Federated Department Stores is a plausible survival strategy for both chains.
But it also poses a threat to consumers and manufacturers, especially those in New York City.
In at least a dozen sites in the metropolitan region -- including Westchester County, northern New Jersey and Long Island -- the two retail giants compete head to head.


Lollapalooza, as Usual, Goes Its Own Way
Lollapalooza is an alternative rock roadshow that mutates as it travels.
On Saturday at the very pungent Downing Stadium on Randalls Island (there's a sewage treatment plant nearby), 6 of the 12 bands that performed at the tour's opening concert in Las Vegas, Nev., a month ago had been replaced.
On the main stage, Green Day took the Japanese band the Boredoms' slot opening for the Lollapalooza stalwarts the Smashing Pumpkins, the Beastie Boys, George Clinton, A Tribe Called Quest, Nick Cave and L7.
On the second stage, all five bands were new additions, and the music ranged from rap to jazz to country to rock.
What made this wide array of music alternative was its performers' relationship with the audience.
Where popular acts of the last two decades swaggered like untouchable stars, culminating in the wall Pink Floyd performed behind 15 years ago on one tour, alternative acts try to break down the wall.


Crime in the Subway
Reported subway crime fell nearly 18 percent in the first five months of 1994 from the first five months of 1993.
There have been approximately 12 felonies a day this year, down from 50 a day in 1990.
The transit police attribute the decline in the effort to crack down on minor offenses like smoking and aggressive panhandling, as well as 25 percent increase in the number of officers since 1990 and frequent sweeps for fare evaders.
Through Aug. 2, the sweeps have resulted in the arrests of more than 3,000 people for whom warrants were outstanding.
Some transit officials fear that the proposed merger of the city's three police forces will allow the Police Department to take officers out of the subways, although the Giuliani administration has pleged to maintain currect levels of policing.


Not 'Abortion Doctor'
To the Editor:
I take issue with your use of the term "abortion doctor" (front page, July 30).
You play into extremist hands by labeling a health care provider so simplistically.
Dr.
John Bayard Britton was a family practice physician, a brave, caring man who did more than perform the legal procedure for which he was brutally executed.
He should be referred to as a doctor, and remembered as a courageous man.
BEATRICE MORITZ  New York, Aug. 1, 1994


CHRONICLE
KATHLEEN NEAL CLEAVER , the communications secretary for the Black Panthers before she was expelled with her former husband, Eldridge Cleaver, in 1971, has been working on her memoirs sporadically for more than a decade.
Not until now though has she had time to write without interruptions by school, work or children.
Next month, Ms.
Cleaver, an assistant professor of law at Emory University Law School, will move to Cambridge, Mass., where she has been named one of 39 fellows at Radcliffe College's Mary Ingraham Bunting Institute.
The institute, a multidisciplinary center for advanced studies, grants stipends to female scholars and artists for artistic, literary and scientific projects.


CHRONICLE
SENATOR EDWARD M. KENNEDY became a grandfather yesterday with the birth of KILEY ELIZABETH KENNEDY , the daughter of DR.
KATHERINE KENNEDY , known as Kiki, and the senator's son EDWARD JR. , The Associated Press reported.
The baby, weighing 7 pounds, 11 ounces, was born at 8:44 P.M. at the Yale-New Haven Hospital.


Patents; A Federal appeals court resolves the thorny issue of whether a software program is patentable.
IN a long-awaited decision issued last week, the United States Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit seemed to lay to rest any question that software is an invention that can be patented.
"The court has broadly affirmed the patentability of software -- as long as it is operating a machine or causing a physical result," said Donald S. Chisum, a leading patent law expert in Seattle.


George Avery Jr., 92, Former Director Of Botanic Garden
Dr.
George Sherman Avery Jr., a plant physiologist who headed the Brooklyn Botanic Garden from 1944 to 1969, died on Friday at Greentree Manor Convalescent Center in New London, Conn.
He was 92 and lived in Quaker Hill, Conn.
He had been in declining health in recent years, said Elizabeth Scholtz, who was the Botanic Garden's director from 1972 to 1980.


Multiple Motives for Kidder's Self-Examination
Joseph Jett's defense lawyers complained last week that the Lynch report was not so much an independent fact finding as a prosecutor's brief.
They have a point, but they're missing the main one.
True, the internal investigation by Gary G. Lynch, a partner at Kidder, Peabody &amp; Company's outside law firm, Davis Polk &amp; Wardwell, did paint Mr.
Jett as a criminal, particularly by dating the $350 million false profit scheme back near the beginning of Mr.
Jett's employment at Kidder and by pointing to various signs that the bond trader had tried to conceal his activities.


Economic Calendar
Listed below are the scheduled release dates for major economic indicators this week.
Monday
None


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Press; In Somalia, 20 days of terror and a lesson for journalists.
TINA SUSMAN, a reporter for The Associated Press, works with words.
But words were failing her.
She was trying, in a telephone interview from South Africa last week, to describe her feelings toward the Somali kidnappers who held her captive for 20 days this summer.
They kept her in a series of hiding places in Mogadishu under 24-hour guard, and, sometimes, one of them threatened her with a pistol as they tried to get a ransom from The A.P.


Outside the Beltway, Whitewater Hearing Looks Like a Dud
This summer, in a country where the murder of O. J. Simpson's ex-wife brings the network's regularly scheduled programming to a halt but where the Whitewater hearings do not even rate uninterrupted coverage on C-Span, there appear to be three kinds of people.
There are the Washington Beltway regulars whose lives and Rolodexes depend on knowing Roger C. Altman from Josh Steiner.
There are the scandal junkies who actually keep up with the Bobbitts and Buttafuocos and who are following Whitewater as they would "Days of Our Lives."


On Jets' Front, Expect a Battle for the Backup's Backup
It is not a burning question.
But it could be, perhaps as soon as opening day.
The Jets suddenly found their own little quarterback battle today, although it is hardly as cosmic as the one belonging to the other team in Giants Stadium.
This one involves who will back up Boomer Esiason and Jack Trudeau.
Teams are entitled to name a third quarterback in games as an emergency replacement.


No Headline
"I look up onto that hill every time I go past. I can't see anyone over there. But I know I'm looking my fate in the face, and each time I expect the next bullet to be for me." -- NEDZIB DZOZO, a tram driver in Sarajevo.  [ A2:3. ]


A Youth Movement Takes Over in the Met
The 91st Metropolitan Golf Association amateur championship might have signaled the changing of the guard in amateur golf in the region.
Dennis Hillman, a 21-year-old from the Westchester Country Club in Harrison, N.Y., captured the title this afternoon here at the Hackensack Golf Club with a 5 and 4 triumph over J. J. Henry, a 19-year-old from the Patterson Club in Fairfield, Conn.


Fly Fishing's New Face: Women on the Water
By 10 o'clock the sun was already high and strong over the Snake River, and the sky stretched big and blue for miles.
A band of 12 women clomped along a gravelly stretch of river bank in neoprene waders and hip boots.
They carried nine-foot fly rods, holding them upright like spears.
Hooked onto their khaki vests were clusters of bugs fashioned from deer and moose hairs and chicken feathers.
Mary Joe McCracken, a personnel manager from Santa Barbara, Calif., looked dazed.
"I have never held a fly rod before," she said.
"I have no idea what I'm doing."


TRANSACTIONS: WEEKEND
Baseball  American League  BOSTON RED SOX -- Activated Gar Finnvold, pitcher, from the 15-day disabled list.
Placed Scott Cooper, third baseman, on the 15-day disabled list, retroactive to Aug. 4.
CLEVELAND INDIANS -- Sent Chad Ogea, pitcher, to Charlotte of the International League.
Called up Jerry DiPoto, pitcher, from Charlotte.
National League  CHICAGO CUBS -- Signed Donn Pall, pitcher.
Placed Jose Bautista, pitcher, on the 15-day disabled list.
Moved Anthony Young, pitcher, from the 15- to the 60-day disabled list.
FLORIDA MARLINS -- Activated Ryan Bowen, pitcher, from the 15-day disabled list.
NEW YORK METS -- Activated Pete Smith, pitcher, from the 15-day disabled list.
Placed Josias Manzanillo, pitcher, on the 15-day disabled list, retroactive to July 28.
Football  National Football League  MIAMI DOLPHINS -- Waived Reggie Brown, wide receiver.
SAN FRANCISCO 49ERS -- Waived Walt Campbell, defensive tackle.
Signed Tim Bruton, tight end.
Canadian Football League  TORONTO ARGONAUTS -- Signed Tommy Kane, wide receiver.
Soccer  American Professional Soccer League  MILWAUKEE WAVE -- Announced the retirement of Moe Suri, forward.


Dell Is Returning Today To Notebook Computers
A year after pulling its notebook computers from the market, the Dell Computer Corporation will introduce two lines of the portable machines today.
Dell said the new notebooks included advanced battery technology and ergonomic design that would differentiate its offerings from those of its major rivals.


Report on New York Schools Would Eliminate Board of Ed
To the Editor:
"Misguided School Reform" (editorial, July 18) states that my report to Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani on New York City school reform "seems shaped by politics rather than a sensible, coherent approach."


The Call of the Lox and Due Process at Zabar's; A Salmon Slicer Claims Discrimination; Her Employers See Only Mangled Fish
This is a tale of art and commerce, of sex discrimination and smoked fish, of due process and Zabar's.
On one side is a determined young woman seeking justice because her salmon-slicing skills, she believes, have been cruelly impugned.
On the other is her employer, an exacting man who believes that anyone who mangles a nice piece of fish should not be paid the same as more seasoned counterparts -- regardless of whether they all happen to be men.


Call-In Host Calls Out for Anti-Tax Ballot Spot
Three years after Connecticut adopted an income tax, Tom Scott, the Rush Limbaugh of state politics, says lingering resentment over that move could make him a serious candidate for governor.
From a radio pulpit outside Hartford, Mr.
Scott, a former state senator turned call-in show host, has been on a mission to foment a tax revolt.
And lately he has taken the battle one step further, encouraging supporters to gather petitions to place him on the ballot as the gubernatorial candidate of the newly formed Independence Party.


Bridge
Some of the funniest bridge episodes ever described in print were about Jackie Moyse, the wife of the late Alphonse Moyse Jr.
He was the editor of The Bridge World, and his articles about her have been collected by the present editors in a booklet, "Bridge With Jackie, Book II." It is available for $6 including mailing from The Bridge World, 39 West 94th Street, New York, N.Y. 10025.
On the diagramed deal she made her first use of the Texas convention.
Four hearts in response to one no-trump showed spades and required her partner-husband to bid four spades, but he quickly forgot, a common development when artificial conventions are used for the first time.


To Some Fund Managers, Red Flags Don't Mean No
For Sale: Stock in an untested technology company whose previous chairman is being sued for fraud.
Or how about a company whose investment banker served a prison term?
Then there is the mining company whose chairman was nudged out by regulators.
Shares available cheap, if you hurry.
Not long ago, American mutual fund managers would not have dreamed of investing in stocks like these.
But as the number of funds has multiplied and competition to offer investors a better return has grown, some funds are betting on companies they would have shunned in the past.
The result has sometimes been an unpleasant surprise for investors in those funds.


Go Dancers, Go Dancers, Go!


CHRONICLE
BILLY IDOL , the sneering, spiky-haired rocker, was hospitalized this weekend for treatment of a drug overdose, The Associated Press reported yesterday.
"He's fine now," his publicist, Ellen Zoe Golden, said after he was released from a Burbank, Calif., hospital on Saturday.
"He's with family and friends and just relaxing. All indications for a recovery are favorable."


Legislation May Calm Frantic Radio Ads for Car Leases
"Leases are subject to approval by primary lender. Lessee is responsible for excess wear and for maintenance repairs. 10,000 miles per year included, 15 cents per mile thereafter. First payment plus security deposit due at inception. Thirty-eight payments of $239 equals a total payment of $9,082. Must be 18 years or older."
Even a very fast reader needs more than 10 seconds to say aloud this standard language from an advertisement for an auto lease.
And those 10 seconds have been a big headache to radio executives seeking to increase their auto advertising, because Federal law requires that ads for leasing include substantive details of the lease provisions.


Demonizing Iran Doesn't Equal Foreign Policy; Teheran Not Involved
To the Editor:
A July 26 news article hints at Iranian involvement in the bombing of a Jewish community center in Argentina a week ago.
You quote a Jewish leader saying suspicion falls on Iran.
No authority in Argentina has made such allegations against Iran.
Iran has categorically denied all news reports containing such insinuations, which have invariably emanated from Zionist officials.


A National Registry for Work
A Federal commission on immigration reform has urged President Clinton to establish a computerized national registry of all citizens and immigrants authorized to work in the United States.
The goal, a worthy one, is to help employers check the eligibility of job applicants in order to screen out illegal aliens.
The proposal has been vigorously attacked as an invasion of privacy and a threat that will lead to government surveillance, a national identification card and new forms of discrimination.
But such fears appear exaggerated.
The registry can be protected so that it does not grow into an instrument of government oppression.
The commission's chairwoman, Barbara Jordan, a former Democratic Congresswoman from Texas, a longtime civil rights advocate and leading black politician, said she would never support a proposal that increased discrimination or invaded privacy.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Cadillac's new campaign reaches out to women and minorities, not just the older white man.
CADILLAC, the luxury division of General Motors, is experimenting with a new television and print campaign to broaden its reach beyond the aging white men who are its traditional customers.
But unlike other marketers who tailor niche ads to fit the perceived tastes of their targets, Cadillac plans to beckon to women and minorities -- buyers who Cadillac says account for 40 percent of the luxury market -- through the same national advertising it uses to lure its tried-and-true buyers.


Corrections
A report in the Company News column of Business Day on Friday about the proposed acquisition of Trident NGL Holdings Inc. by Natural Gas Clearinghouse misstated the estimated value of the transaction.
Including the assumption of $415 million in Trident debt by Natural Gas Clearinghouse, the total transaction value will be more than $750 million, not $337 million.


A Confusion of Competition Cools Florida's Casino Fever
It sounds like a gambling industry dream.
After turning sinful Las Vegas into a family resort, what better place to open casinos than Florida, the land of sun-splashed beaches, Mickey and millions of card-playing retirees?
Earlier this year, voter approval of casinos in the Sunshine State looked like a sure bet.
But it is now in danger, thanks to infighting more reminiscent of a barroom brawl than board room behavior among the companies vying for a potential $5 billion a year in gambling profits.


Darakeh Journal; With Mullahs' Sleuths Eluded, Hijinks in the Hills
It was not yet 9 in the morning and Mehdi Nazemi, with a full day's work in front of him, had broken into a heavy sweat.
"It has been bad all morning," he said.
"Girls in baseball caps, covered with makeup, coming up here without proper head scarves. And the boys use words I can't repeat and strip off their shirts. It is a dirty, lonely job. But we must be ready to die for God."
Each weekend several thousand young Iranian men and women take off for the small village of Darakeh, at the northwest corner of Teheran, to climb the sharp, rocky peaks that surround the city and to escape the rigorous restrictions imposed by the Islamic state.


Smith's Line Changes From Hard Hit to Hard Luck
Pete Smith is getting used to this, not knowing quite how to feel when you pitch well enough for a rare victory and emerge with another defeat.
"If you follow my career, you'll see that trend," he said grudgingly.
If there was any solace, it was in the visiting clubhouse at Shea Stadium, where Ryan Bowen, another right-hander with horrible luck, was enjoying his first victory.


One Grange Cultivates Farm Life
The cedar-shingled meeting hall for Searsburg Grange No. 494 is a reminder of a time when such halls were as common as one-room schools and general stores in villages and hamlets across the Northeast and much of rural America.
And in spite of evidence of roof leaks and mice, the Searsburg Grange -- unlike hundreds of others -- still has members and still holds meetings.


Elements of a Style That's All American
About a fourth of the way through "Cornet Kings Before Armstrong: Music of Buddy Bolden, Freddie Keppard and King Oliver," a concert of early New Orleans jazz on Saturday night at Alice Tully Hall, Wynton Marsalis performed a version of "Careless Love." Mr.
Marsalis, who has been adding a new level of intensity to all his appearances in the Classical Jazz series every time he improvises, had the audience gasping midway through his solo.
Using bent blues phrases, melody notes with the heft of stone and dancing lines, he cleaved his way through the group with an improvisation that was a compendium of the American idiom, of what defines our difference from Europe.
In a sense the whole evening was obsessed with accretion and change, the adding and diminishing of instruments to the core rhythm section, the addition of new American formal rules to pop songs or European marches, the imposition of new melodies in the form of improvisations and the riff.
And while the music, with its hellbent entertainment ethos, presents itself as a good time, its rhetorical tools, with their 20th-century modernist sensibility, have enough ramifications and appeal to have changed the course of music in this century.


Am Emphasis on Subsidies and Assuring Insurance Coverage in Mitchell's Health Plan
When the Congressional debate on national health insurance legislation formally begins on Tuesday, the Senate will be considering a bill that relies mostly on subsidies to cover more people and on enhanced competition to control costs.
The bill, proposed by the majority leader, George J. Mitchell of Maine, would provide the most new help to children and pregnant women.
It would also initiate two programs that advocates for the elderly have sought for years: prescription drug coverage under Medicare and Federal support for home and community-based long-term care.


Young &amp; Rubicam Hires Executive
William C. Melzer, the former managing director at D'Arcy Masius Benton &amp; Bowles of St.
Louis, has been named to the new position of executive vice president at Young &amp; Rubicam Advertising Worldwide of New York, effective immediately.
"Bill brings us talents across all aspects of agency operations," said John McGarry, the chief executive at Y.&amp; R. "We will be using him to consult on major multinational accounts, especially in the food, beer and retail areas where he has so much experience."


In the Summer TV Doldrums, Two Sparks of Life
After several years of making big commitments to original summer programming, the broadcast networks have cut back this year on the number of new entertainment series that break the usual pattern of reruns in June, July and August.
The reason, according to an executive at one production studio: Summer shows have generated no real returns for networks or producers for the last three years.


People
*
Wenda Harris Millard was named president and group publisher at SRDSInc., New York, succeeding James Meyers, who left.
Ms.
Harris Millard was previously senior vice president and publisher at Family Circle magazine, New York.


Accounts
*
Lyon's Restaurants Inc., Foster City, Calif., to J. Walter Thompson San Francisco, to handle the restaurant chain's account, previously at Hoffman &amp; Lewis, San Francisco.
Billings were estimated at $3 million.


Corrections
An entry in the Addenda listing on the Media Business page on Thursday about the advertising account review of Cub Foods Inc. included erroneous information supplied by Wells Rich Greene BDDP in New York, the winner of the account.
The Leo Burnett Company in Chicago and Foote, Cone &amp; Belding in Chicago were invited to participate in the review but declined; they were not contenders for the account.


Forced to Flee -- A special report.; U.N. Faces Refugee Crisis That Never Ends
The exodus of two million refugees from Rwanda was not an aberration but part of a trend in which increasing millions of people worldwide are being put to flight by war and famine.
The number of refugees has mushroomed during the last two decades, from 2.4 million in 1974 to 10.5 million by 1984 to close to 23 million today.


Tanglewood Series Gets a Change of Air In Its New Home
After a horrible day of drenching rain, Saturday dawned astonishingly bright and clear at the Tanglewood Music Center here.
It was the opening weekend of the Festival of Contemporary Music, whose directorship has transferred to the brilliant, free-thinking Dutch conductor Reinbert de Leeuw.
A friend of the new regime proposed that the heavenly weather was symbolic of a more-than-meteorological clearing of the air at Tanglewood, the end of a long 12-tone reign by Northeastern academic composers.
An exaggeration, of course: Tanglewood was host to a wide range of contemporary programming under Oliver Knussen's direction over the last seven years, and the 12-toners will be back in a concert on Monday.
But there certainly were some new and unexpected sounds floating out of the new Seiji Ozawa Hall on Saturday afternoon.
The brazen, bizarre, curiously danceable music of Louis Andriessen, also from the Netherlands, formed the centerpiece of a four-hour concert that also included historical precedents for Mr.
Andriessen's style and works by younger composers following in his wake.


Electric Utilities Brace for an End to Monopolies
The electric utility industry, one of the last monopolies in the American economy, is bracing for competition, a change that is likely to eventually lower rates across the country.
Companies are scrambling to prepare by cutting their costs, diversifying and looking for partners.
Late last month, two utilities in the Midwest announced a merger, citing "the advent of deregulation and increasing competition."


Rwanda's Very Long Haul
It has begun to dawn on policy makers, if not yet the public, that the crisis in Rwanda may take years to resolve.
Relief workers in Zaire, where a million Rwandans have fled, see little hope for a prompt return home by Hutus fearing reprisal massacres by Tutsis, who now dominate the new Government in Kigali.
Indeed, instead of getting better, matters could become worse, spreading conflict, hunger and uprooted peoples through an entire region.
It would be wise for the Clinton Administration to prepare Americans for what may be a very long haul in Central Africa.
A small contingent of U.S. troops is already assisting the United Nations operation in Rwanda, and Washington has promised to come up with $270 million in new aid.
If the case is fairly made, if burdens are fairly shared with others, and if civil peace can be maintained, this is an effort that Americans can be persuaded to support.


Rwandan Doctor's Journey Through Horror and Death
Like the Western doctors who have come from around the world to the camps here, Dr.
Emmanuel Kazima, a soft-spoken Rwandan physician, has treated thousands of sick refugees and watched in helpless frustration as many died.
But few scenes in the camps -- the vast scale of the cholera epidemic, the stress of not being able to save more lives -- compare with the first chapter he witnessed: the massacres of countless thousands of people felled by machete while most of the world stood by.


Team USA Gets Victory But Fails to Make Point
Reggie Miller may be the only one who knows this, but the United States, despite a 23-point victory over Brazil this afternoon, still trails in the competition against the original Dream Team.
While the 105-82 victory boosted the United States record to 3-0 in world championships, it did little to cut into the overwhelming margin of victory recorded by Dream Team I en route to a gold medal at the 1992 Barcelona Olympics.


Foxwoods, a Casino Success Story
It is no surprise that Foxwoods, the two-year-old casino here that is the pride and joy of the 305-member Mashantucket Pequot tribe, is doing so well.
Its success, said G. Michael Brown, the casino's president, was virtually guaranteed by "location and exclusivity."
But the magnitude of that success is still setting pulses racing in an industry not easily excited by big numbers.
Marvin Roffman, an investment consultant in Philadelphia, judges Foxwoods to be "the most profitable casino in the world." And back-of-the-envelope calculations indicate that the tribe is clearing more than $400 million a year in profit.
The sheer scale of the casino and its market explains much.
Foxwoods grosses about $800 million a year -- half again as much as Donald J. Trump's Taj Mahal, the largest casino in Atlantic City.
But unlike the Taj Mahal, which spends a fortune to keep patrons from going to any of the 11 neighboring casinos, Foxwoods has no nearby competition.


Abroad at Home; Time To Be Serious
For more than two years Bosnian Serb leaders have been tweaking the nose of the powers trying to stop their aggression and genocide.
The United States and the others have responded by huffing and puffing -- and then doing little or nothing.
Thus we warned the Bosnian Serbs that they had better accept our new plan to divide Bosnia, or else.
They said no.
The five-power contact group said it would tighten sanctions.
Ho hum.


Seeing a Bigger Picture for Schubert's Songs
Most rearrangements of song accompaniments go from big to little, and by necessity.
Singers, and for that matter instrumentalists, want to do big pieces in recital, and so an orchestra is boiled down to grand-piano size.
When the process reverses, as it did at Friday evening's Mostly Mozart concert in Avery Fisher Hall, listeners may stop and wonder.
Hermann Prey singing Schubert with Gerard Schwarz's Festival Orchestra gave them a chance to do just that.
Enlargement of musical means may or may not enlarge the experience of beauty, but it almost certainly alters it.
Indeed, changing the character of Schubert's piano originals comes close to creating another song.
Even when the orchestrators are Liszt, Webern, Britten or Felix Mottl, such transactions become a little slippery.
The potential to warp and mislead is at least as great as the ability to enhance and instruct.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
Some mutual funds are betting on stocks they'd have shunned in the past, as competition intensifies to offer investors a better return.
Some managers are investing not only in the low-priced, volatile securities known as penny stocks but in companies whose executives or advisers have repeatedly run afoul of stock market rules.
A result has sometimes been an unpleasant surprise for investors in those funds.  [ Page A1. ]  Investing in the cultivation of a 15-pound pearl?
In a cure for baldness?
Such speculations were made on the Vancouver Stock Exchange, where a number of U.S. mutual funds are rushing in.  [ D8. ]


In Washington, Saving Scenic View Takes on Importance in Firefighting
On a ridge of Tumwater Mountain, 11,000 feet above town and a long, long way from their home 10 miles north of the Arctic Circle, Wesley Pete and Marion Cleveland dug into ashy, smoldering stumps, trying to save a view.
The vast organization that is battling the forest fires sweeping the Cascade Mountains here can call on fleets of helicopters and the latest computer technology, but firefighters on the ground like these Alaskan Eskimos are still the front edge, working with the old tools of the forest: a shovel and the heavy pick and hoe called a pulaski.


Hidalgo Moya, 74, Retired Architect Based in London
Hidalgo Moya, an architect known for his painterly eye and engineering talent, died on Wednesday in Hastings, England, in the Conquest Hospital, which was designed by his firm.
He was 74 and lived nearby in Rye.
The cause was prostate cancer, said his wife, the former Jean Conder.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  GIULIANI CLEANS HOUSE
It is common for new mayors to bring with them scores of aides, deputies and new commissioners and to award jobs to campaign workers and party officials who helped get them elected.
But former and current city officials say that at the middle levels of government, the Giuliani administration is carrying out the largest political housecleaning in years, with the Republican Mayor unbound by ties to the Democratic establishment.


Dividend Meetings
Following is a partial list of dividend meetings this week:
MONDAY


Corrections
An article in some editions on July 29 about the slashing of a 15-year-old boy at Andrew Jackson High School in Queens misidentified the hospital where the teen-ager was treated.
Mary Immaculate Hospital is not a city hospital.


AFTER SIX MONTHS, PEACE FADES AWAY AGAIN IN SARAJEVO
After a spring that silenced the guns and that brought back a taste of the way life used to be, the last few weeks have seen this bedraggled city slide swiftly to a new low point in its struggle to recover from war.
Serbian sharpshooters are once again training their high-powered rifles on the city, reviving the fears of some residents who ventured out only rarely in the months when snipers ruled the streets.
Last week, the Bosnian Serbs forced the closing of the only overland route into Sarajevo and shut down the aid airlift by shooting at cargo planes.


Gordon Hears the Roar Of the Hometown Fans
Jeff Gordon did not spend his entire life in this town 20 miles west of the Indianapolis Motor Speedway, just the years that mattered.
Gordon, who turned 23 on Thursday and turned into Victory Lane at the inaugural Brickyard 400 two days later, moved to this farm town about 10 years ago with his mother and stepfather.
Like the seeds that sprout into the cornstalks that block your view as you drive across the flat terrain, Gordon was deposited in fertile soil for an aspiring race driver.


After School Burns, Grief and Suspicions
The destruction of an Alabama high school where the principal threatened to cancel the prom this spring if interracial couples attended is suspected of being arson.


It's an Illusion: Coslet Can't Be So Happy
The smile is quick, the stride bouncier.
The conversation is light and easy.
The answers to questions are unencumbered by the search for double meanings and hidden agendas.
Bruce Coslet sat on a forest-green metal bench facing the Bengals' practice field before a recent afternoon workout here at Wilmington College.
He was so relaxed he might as well have been sitting on his living room couch.


Convention Of Dissent For Mexicans
With just two weeks to go before elections that will shape the future of Mexico, thousands of people gathered here this weekend at a political convention called by the Zapatista rebels who started an armed uprising on these same streets seven months ago.
Organizers said that on Saturday about 5,000 delegates attended opening sessions in five sites around this colonial city in the state of Chiapas.
The topics for discussion included housing, health and the central idea of full democracy in Mexico.


A Chamber Festival Is French for a Day
At the start of what the Norfolk Chamber Music Festival chose to call "Le Weekend en France" this evening, Joan Panetti's ". . . in the Raw Wind of the New World . . ." seemed less out of place than might have been expected.
Though American, Ms.
Panetti studied in Paris with Olivier Messiaen, and her music, the advance publicity stated, "is Gallic in its temperament."
More to the point, Ms.
Panetti's work, a new 13-minute cycle of songs without words for cello and piano, seemed a natural and not particularly advanced outgrowth of the sort of modernist-tinged post-Romanticism represented here by Ernest Chausson's Concerto for Violin, Piano and Strings, of 1891, and Maurice Ravel's Sonata for Violin and Cello, of 1922.
Indeed, the certifiably French Jean-Philippe Rameau proved the odd man out, with his antiquated but delightful Pieces de Clavecin en Concert.


When Mercury Turns Its Back to the Sun
To the Editor:
In explaining that the "dark side" of the Moon is not the same as "the far side," Victor Wouk (letter, July 31) got carried away and misapplied the lesson to the planet Mercury.
From the fact that the Moon's near side always faces the Earth because of a bulge in its mass, he went on to give the outdated view that one side of Mercury similarly always faces the Sun for the same reason.


Louis H. Bean, 98, Analyst Best Known For 1948 Prediction
Louis H. Bean, who was an Agriculture Department economist when he became nationally known for a book that predicted Harry S. Truman's surprise victory in the 1948 Presidential election, died on Friday at his home in Arlington, Va.
He was 98.
The cause was congestive heart failure, said his daughter, Elizabeth Fountain.


Health Care Issue Raises Anxiety In Most Anxious Month for House
August in an election year is, by definition, an anxious time on the floor of the House.
The balance of politics and policy at the heart of every vote, conscious or not, becomes all the more complicated.
"All those concerns increase exponentially this year, with the biggest social legislation to ever come down the pike hanging out there, completely unresolved," said Representative Bob Wise, Democrat of West Virginia.
Indeed, one week before the House takes up the health care bill, the August angst could hardly be heavier for the Democrats, weighed down by every imaginable interest group, an ever more partisan Republican opposition, an ever more unpredictable Senate.


Arson Retrial Marked by Uncertainty
A giant model of a former Waldbaum's supermarket sits squarely in the center of the courtroom.
The model is greatly detailed, made up of hundreds of pieces of wood and cardboard.
There are mock air shafts and beams and utility rooms.
And, of course, there is a roof with a gaping, ragged hole in it.
"That's where the collapse was," said a court officer, staring at the tear in the roof.


A Russian Family Copes With Stalinism's Evils
Generations of Winter By Vassily Aksyonov Translated by John Glad and Christopher Morris. 592 pages.
Random House. $25.
There are a few hurdles to overcome before you can get caught up in the powerful sweep of Vassily Aksyonov's "Generations of Winter," a Tolstoyan historical novel that is a departure from the author's previous, less traditional fiction ("The Island of Crimea," "Say Cheese," "The Burn") and traces the roller-coaster fortunes of one Russian family from 1925, the year of Stalin's ascent to power, to 1945, the end of World War II.


Police Worker Dies, and 911 Is Under Fire
A group of police employees is charging that New York City's antiquated 911 system led to the failure to respond to a fatal attack on one of the Police Department's own emergency communications workers, an advocacy-group leader said yesterday.
The victim, Nelson Rawlins, 48, was stabbed repeatedly in his Bronx apartment last month while on the telephone with an operator from the 911 service.
His body was discovered three days later by his family.


Players Play To Honor Art Farmer
Art Farmer's particular genius is delicacy, and a forceful one at that.
Virtually every solo Mr.
Farmer performed on flumpet (a combination of fluegelhorn and trumpet) as part of a concert in his honor at Alice Tully Hall on Friday, dropped the level of his band down to a rustle, as if he wanted to make sure that everyone got off to a clean start.
Mr.
Farmer was the person who, with a whispered aside, stopped all the conversation in a crowded room.
The concert, part of the Classical Jazz program at Jazz at Lincoln Center, started out with a blues by the guitarist Jim Hall, the bassist Ron Carter and the drummer Lewis Nash; they didn't play a single cliche.
Mr.
Farmer makes an audience concentrate to hear his story, and each of his phrases hinted at a previous idea, or added shadows to a melody he was about to play.
Mr.
Hall, who performed brilliantly all night, took a geometrical route through the piece, providing sharp angles and odd harmonies where there had been none.


Benny Ong, 87, Reputed Godfather of Chinatown Crime, Dies
Benny Ong, a Manchurian-born immigrant who rose through underworld struggles in New York to become what law-enforcement officials called the leader of the most powerful organized crime group in Chinatown over the last 20 years, died on Saturday at New York Downtown Hospital.
He was 87 years old.
The cause of death was not disclosed, but Mr.
Ong's family, who had kept a vigil at his bedside in recent days, had said in an interview with The Daily News earlier in the week that he entered the hospital two weeks ago, suffering from prostate cancer and pneumonia.
The family made no statement on Saturday.


Demonizing Iran Doesn't Equal Foreign Policy; Buenos Aires Deja Vu
To the Editor:
Beyond the horrific loss of life caused by the terrorist bomb that destroyed the Jewish community center in Buenos Aires on July 18, there is also a gruesome historical irony.
The attack not only destroyed lives, but it also ravaged history.


Essay; Clinton's Good Deed
Five years ago, an inflammatory piece titled "Free the Baltics" appeared in this space.
Its theme was that "a great struggle has begun" to dismember the Soviet empire, and I went to the Baltics a few months later to be able to put the message in a dateline redolent with pro-independence propaganda: "Riga, Soviet-occupied Latvia."
The three tiny Baltic republics -- Latvia, Estonia, Lithuania -- were the keys to the kingdom.
The West had never recognized Stalin's deal with Hitler to swallow up the three states; for a half-century, U.S.
Presidents of both parties kept the diplomatic faith with the peoples of these "captive nations" (a phrase derided by anti-anti-Communists here).


New Counsel Is Being Urged Not to Start Inquiry Anew
Senior White House advisers said today that they hoped the newly named Whitewater independent counsel, Kenneth W. Starr, would accept the findings of his predecessor and not reopen portions of the investigation that have already been closed.
As the appointment of a new independent counsel with longstanding ties to President Clinton's political opponents began to sink in, White House officials went on television news programs today to voice their support once again for the findings of the outgoing independent counsel, Robert B. Fiske Jr.
He concluded last month that the evidence did not warrant criminal charges against any officials involved in the discussions between the White House and the Treasury Department about investigations into a failed Arkansas savings and loan association, Madison Guaranty, with ties to the Clintons.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article on Friday about the Amtrak derailment in upstate New York misidentified the train in some editions.
It was the Lake Shore Limited.


School Fire Fuels Passions in Racially Torn Town
It was like a death in the family.
People cried.
Some brought wreaths and floral sprays.
And they sat, as they would before a coffin, in front of the fire-blackened and now roofless building that had once been Randolph County High School.
The floral arrangements bore simple messages from classes as far back as 1945.
"Thanks for the memories," said one.
"We will never forget," said another.


Clock Keeps Ticking and Two Sides Keep Staring
Negotiators for baseball club owners and players expect to meet daily this week, but it will be a short workweek if they don't have anything new to talk about when they get to the critical topic: the game's economic system.
The players are set to walk out before Friday's games if the two sides don't work out a new collective bargaining agreement, and nothing has happened to suggest that either side has a new or different idea it will present to try to avert the strike.


A Clearer View for Those Looking


Digital Said to Select 2 Shops for Account
The Digital Equipment Corporation has named the Ryan Partnership of Westport, Conn., and Maritz Inc. of Fenton, Mo., to share its marketing communications account, advertising executives who spoke on condition of anonymity said Friday.
Billings were estimated at $50 million.
The executives said that while the roles of the two shops had yet to be defined, Ryan and Maritz would handle responsibilities like direct marketing, sales promotion, collateral, promotions and trade shows.
The two shops were selected after a review that also included Clarion Marketing and Communications of Greenwich, Conn., and the Pacific Marketing Group of San Francisco.


The Price of Pizza
To the Editor:
To read "Unfair to Pizza Hut" (letter, July 30), what the health care issue comes down to is this: German workers have "universal medical care, generous pensions and long vacations" -- not to speak of a less violent society and livable cities -- but Americans can buy the prefabricated trash called "fast food" for 50 percent less.
PAUL LAUTER  New York, Aug. 1, 1994


Japanese Immigrant Dies After Queens Shooting
A Japanese man who was shot in the stairwell of his Queens apartment building last Thursday died early yesterday morning at Elmhurst Hospital Center.
The man, Kei Sunada, 22, had been living in New York for only four months when he was shot in what the police say may have been a robbery in his apartment building at 97-15 Horace Harding Expressway in Lefrak City.
A chef in training at Nakagawa restaurant in midtown Manhattan, Mr.
Sunada had come to the United States to pursue his interests in race car driving, boxing and cooking.


Market Place; A takeover fight at Hexcel's Chapter 11 proceedings
HOSTILE takeovers are not normally associated with Chapter 11 proceedings, but in coming weeks a nasty dispute is likely to be played out in front of a Federal bankruptcy judge in Oakland, Calif.
At issue is the fate of the Hexcel Corporation, a developer and manufacturer of a variety of materials used in the commercial aerospace, military and general industrial markets.
Even though it is in bankruptcy, Hexcel is still turning out quality products and is likely, analysts said, to re-emerge as a profitable enterprise once orders from companies like Boeing, its biggest single customer, start turning up.
But many bumps will be negotiated before that happens.
A protracted, largely unforeseen downturn in its main markets took its toll on Hexcel last year.
Management was slow to adjust to the change and was ousted last summer.
In December, the company filed for Chapter 11.


It's Another Jam Session on L. I. Highways
On an island where the automobile is both a necessity and a curse, where the crawl is performed as often on the highways as in the swimming pools, this has been a summer for the record books.
From the Elmhurst gas tanks to the potato fields of Riverhead, cars idle and motorists stew.
On every parkway, expressway and causeway, lanes are closed, roadbeds are torn up and shoulders are packed with construction equipment.
Flashing arrows direct traffic off jammed freeways to jammed service roads and jammed side roads.
Forests of orange traffic cones sprout everywhere, taunting exasperated drivers trapped in endless tie-ups.


Believers in Ancient Egyptian Faith Hold New Year's Celebration


To Some Fund Managers, Red Flags Don't Mean No
For Sale: Stock in an untested technology company whose previous chairman is being sued for fraud.
Or how about a company whose investment banker served a prison term?
Then there is the mining company whose chairman was nudged out by regulators.
Shares available cheap, if you hurry.
Not long ago, American mutual fund managers would not have dreamed of investing in stocks like these.
But as the number of funds has multiplied and competition to offer investors a better return has grown, some funds are betting on companies they would have shunned in the past.
The result has sometimes been an unpleasant surprise for investors in those funds.


Breyer Wasn't Bound to Seek Possible Conflict
To the Editor:
If, as your July 26 lead editorial states, "a cloud is still hanging" over the nomination to the Supreme Court of Judge Stephen G. Breyer, which has now been approved by the Senate (news article, July 30), it is because you are blowing smoke.
Seldom has there been a purer example of the "there's something there because we say there's something there" gambit.


INSIDE
Stowaways Saved in Harbor Three stowaways on a freighter entering New York Harbor jumped from the ship and tried to swim to shore.
They were rescued by the Coast Guard.
Page B1.
Rwanda Horror Remains
A Rwandan doctor in a refugee camp in Zaire says the horror of mass killings in Rwanda overshadows the suffering in the camps, and his story encapsulates the tragedy.
Page A3.
Whitewater?
What's That?
Aside from Washington regulars and scandal junkies, the hearings on the matter that gets its name from the Clintons' investment in the 1980's is drawing unstifled yawns.
Page A8.
A2 Arts


Hrbek Starts His Party Early
Forget the impending strike for a moment, if you can.
Forget the uncertain future that clouds each baseball game the Yankees play, if you can.
Remember, while you still can, the beautiful aspects of baseball.
Today, the Yankees and Twins provided thrilling reminders.
Baseball is one-run games, changing leads, excitable fans and classic confrontations, and those elements existed today.
It is a reliever like Steve Howe chewing gum fiercely in the eighth inning while trying to protect a one-run lead with two runners on base.
It is a hitter like Kent Hrbek waiting and watching for the pitch that could deliver those runs.
It is a valid excuse to lean forward in your seat.


After Benny Ong, Silence in Chinatown
At the Buddhist Temple at 16 Pell Street, two barefoot female worshipers were going through a succession of hand motions yesterday afternoon as incense burned.
A man passing by stopped and bowed.
It was unclear whether the worship was for the soul of Benny Ong, who died Saturday and was often called the Godfather of Chinatown for his reported role in organized crime.
After the service, one woman said that Mr.
Ong, known as Uncle Seven because he was a seventh son, had come to the temple often.
The other said he had never been there.
A picture of him and his family was on the wall.


France's Summer Hit Is a Circus. Sort Of.
A young woman, an Indian dancer, sits at the edge of a round pool of black water.
Floating candles ring the pool, but all else is dark.
Magically, the floating candles converge toward the woman.
As each nudges up to the shore, she picks it up and blows it out.
Just as she is about to extinguish the last candle, she hears a soft splashing sound, looks up and sees a huge brown horse and a robed rider with a long lance, reflected in the water.
She blows out the last candle, all is blackness, and the vision is gone.
But not gone entirely.
It remains in the memories of the 1,200 nightly spectators of the new show "Chimere," by the Paris equestrian circus and theater troupe Zingaro.
"Chimere" was the hit of this summer's Avignon Festival.
A two-hour panoply of images of India, "Chimere" blended conventional circus excitement (acrobats leaping on and off galloping horses, a clown) with moments -- the best moments -- that were indistinguishable from art.


Giuliani's Patronage Power Helps Reshape Government
Before Rudolph W. Giuliani was elected Mayor, Albert L. Buzzeo was a caterer in Queens and serving as a Republican district leader.
Leonard B. Guttman was a rabbi close to Mr.
Giuliani who ran for City Council as a Republican in 1991 and lost.
Today they are assistant commissioners in the Department for the Aging, making $73,500 a year.
Rosemarie O'Keefe, a Republican district leader from Bay Ridge, Brooklyn, was working as a $26,000-a-year aide to Representative Susan Molinari.
Now she is an assistant commissioner of recreation at a salary of $73,500.


Races Are Finished, but for Cauthen the Stars Remain
At 16, he rode his first winners in the big leagues of thoroughbred racing.
At 17, he was the nation's leading apprentice jockey.
At 18, he won the Kentucky Derby aboard the champion Affirmed and swept the Triple Crown, and he was the youngest to do that, too.
At 24, he became the leading jockey in England, the first American in 71 years to do that.
By the time he was 27, he had won the Epsom Derby twice.
And he is the only jockey in history to win the Kentucky, Epsom, Irish, French and Italian Derbys.
Now, at 34, Steve Cauthen is back home with his trophies and his memories and, still reaching for the stars ahead of his time, he is the youngest person ever elected to the Racing Hall of Fame.


No Breakthrough in Syria, Christopher Says, but He Is Upbeat
After his first face-to-face talks with Syria's leaders since Jordan and Israel signed their landmark friendship pact two weeks ago, Secretary of State Warren Christopher indicated tonight that there was still no breakthrough in the indirect peace talks between Israel and Syria.
Nonetheless, Mr.
Christopher said that in his unusually long five-hour meeting tonight with President Hafez al-Assad, the two men were "laying the basis for future progress" in the drawn-out negotiations in which Israel has signaled that it would withdraw from the Golan Heights in exchange for a comprehensive peace with Syria.


Equity Issues This Week
The following equity and convertible debt offerings are expected this week:
A.S.V.
Inc., Marcell, Minn., an initial public offering of 1.2 million shares.
Summit Investment Corp.


Corrections
An article on July 12 about the increasing use of curfews at California beaches misstated the location and the reason for the police shutdown of an area in the Venice district of Los Angeles.
A part of the boardwalk, not the beach, was briefly closed one day in June because of overcrowding and scuffles between young people, not because of gang violence.


High Risks Don't Deter U.S. Funds From Vancouver Deals
VANCOUVER, British Columbia -- It is not clear why anyone entrusted with money earmarked for widows and orphans would invest in a venture as farfetched as Cross Pacific Pearls, a Vancouver company whose pearl-cultivation business had plans to grow a 15-pound pearl in a giant clam to be set up as a tourist attraction at a shopping center in Hawaii.
But just such an investment -- and dozens of other speculations on the Vancouver Stock Exchange, from a cure for baldness to a nonchlorine pool cleaner -- were made by the West Midlands Regional Authorities Pension Fund, an account of $:2.3 billion, or about $3.5 billion (United States), for retired public workers in Birmingham, England, and six other industrial cities around it.


Hill's 16th 'Clinches' N.L. East For Expos
Expos 6, Phillies 4
Ken Hill (16-5) became the National League's first 16-game winner and the Montreal Expos beat the host Philadelphia Phillies, 6-4, yesterday for their 17th victory in 19 games.
Moises Alou tripled, doubled and singled and drove in two runs for the Expos.
Atlanta's loss in Cincinnati insured that the Expos will be in first place in the National League East on the Friday strike date.


Comdata Holdings Corp.(CMDT,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Shared Medical Systems Corp.(SMED,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


The Quest: Perfection In Popcorn
A HIGH summer day with the breeze in perfect pitch, and Dr.
Sherret S. Chase is talking popcorn, naturally.
"Big, tender, fluffy flakes," he said, almost in a reverie.
"It's all a matter of genetics."


Bush Industries Inc.(BSH,N) reports earnings for Qtr to July 2


Executive Changes
ALLIED HEALTHCARE PRODUCTS INC., St.
Louis, named David V. LaRusso president and chief executive.
DOMINICK &amp; DOMINICK ADVISERS, INC., New York, a unit of Dominick &amp; Dominick Inc., named John R. Redican chairman and chief executive.


Cirrus Logic Inc.(CRUS,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to July 2


Santa Fe Pacific Gold Corp.(GLD,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


MAY DEPARTMENT STORES CO. (MA,N)
In the quarter that ended on July 30, the May Department Stores Company continued its practice of beating its own records.
Its per-share earnings, net earnings and sales were the highest for any fiscal second quarter or six-month period in the company's 117-year history.
And analysts expect the company to continue as the industry's pacesetter, particularly now that its appetite for acquisitions has returned.


Algoma Central reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Some Mets Beating It to the Bushes
General Manager Joe McIlvaine and Manager Dallas Green met for nearly an hour behind closed doors before the Mets' game against Philadelphia tonight to prepare a battle plan for the probable end of the season on Thursday, the eve of the expected players' strike.
McIlvaine said he anticipated the assignment of at least a few young players to the Mets' Class AAA affiliate in Norfolk, Va., with the moves most likely to come immediately after the Mets' game here Thursday night.
Should a strike appear imminent at that time, the Mets almost certainly will demote outfielder Jeromy Burnitz and rookie pitcher Jason Jacome.


Results Plus
N.F.L.
Redskins' Shuler Off Mark It was an easy night for the veteran Jim Kelly and a rough night for the rookie Heath Shuler.
Kelly, who had been bothered by tendinitis in his throwingshoulder, didn't show it last night in an exhibition game in Orchard Park, N.Y.
He completed his first 7 passes and was 9 for 12 over all for 141 yards and 1touchdown during his 2 series and the Buffalo Bills went on to beat theWashington Redskins, 13-11.
Shuler, the No. 3 pick in this year's draft, didnot practice with the Redskins until Wednesday because of a contract holdout.Playing the second quarter, he was 4 for 10 for 47 yards with 1 interception.Washington trailed by 10-3 late in the third quarter when Gus Frerotte, theRedskins' No. 3 quarterback, led a 7-play, 52-yard touchdown drive.
Frerotte, 15for 25 for 178 yards, hit Stephan Hobbs with a 13-yard pass to make it 10-9.
In his coaching debut, Norv Turner chose to go for a 2-point conversion, andWilliam Bell ran it in to give Washington the lead with 28 seconds left in thethird quarter.
The Bills then won on Steve Christie's 33-yard field goal with 9 minutes 56 seconds left. (AP)


Shades of Baseball: N.H.L. Labor Impasse
After a five-month hiatus, negotiations are set to resume next week on a new collective bargaining agreement for the National Hockey League, but only after the league adopted a tough new labor stance.
The leverage to force the union back to the negotiating table was apparently a 16-point list of unilateral policy changes the league threatened to impose if it has not concluded a new collective bargaining agreement with the players by the start of training camp early next month.


Zurn Industries(ZRN,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Bob Evans Farms Inc.(BOBE,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to July 29


Rwanda Agrees to a U.N. War-Crimes Tribunal
The new Government of Rwanda agreed today to support an international war-crimes tribunal to judge those accused of genocide during the civil war, and not to prosecute or punish the criminals itself.
The agreement was announced by John Shattuck, the Assistant Secretary of State for Democracy, Human Rights and Labor, in a telephone interview from Bujumbura, Burundi, where he arrived this evening after concluding the agreement in the Rwandan capital, Kigali.


Corrections
A caption yesterday about an Egyptian New Year's celebration in New York City misidentified two participants in some editions.
The woman at left was Tepit Arit Anuqua Atum, a senior priestess, and the man at center was Sn Ur Hru Anjh Ra Semahj Se Ptah, senior priest.


With French Exit Near, Rwandans Fear the Day
The commander of a French marine unit here, Lieut.
Col.
Erik de Stabenrath, traces his military heritage to a general in Napoleon's army.
His paternal grandfather was an officer in World War II.
His own father was an officer killed in combat at Dien Bien Phu in 1954, the battle that ended French colonial rule in Vietnam.
But as he prepares to leave in the next few days, this 42-year-old career military man, hardened by duty in Beirut and Bosnia, will not carry with him scars from battles.
What will remain with him, he says, is the knowledge of what happened to Rwanda's Tutsi in the weeks before the French arrived.


Farmers and Consumers Have Been Had
To the Editor:
Re your July 25 front-page article on the rebellion of Iowa farmers against subsidies: Farmers are not getting a good deal from the Government.
Farmers reluctantly accepted that if we increased production at artificially low prices, a subsidy would replace the shortfall.
That allows the political establishment to give an appearance of cheap food.


Mr. Coffee Inc.(JAVA,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to June 26


CHRONICLE
Once he reigned supreme.
Now CONSTANTINE, the former King of Greece, who has lived in London since going into exile in 1967, is involved in disputes with the Socialist Government of his homeland.
In a statement issued in London yesterday, the King charged the Government with breaking into and seizing his summer residence, Mon Repos, on the island of Corfu.
The Government of Prime Minister Andreas Papandreou, which plans to convert the home into an archeological museum, contends that it is state property and does not belong to the former monarch.


INSIDE
Starr Appointment Attacked
Democrats stepped up their criticism of the new Whitewater counsel, Kenneth W. Starr, saying his selection "reeks of politics." Page A14.
City Hall's Overtime Bill
New York City spent nearly $500 million on overtime for the last fiscal year, far more than the $260 million budgeted, officials said.
Page B1.
Out From the Ivory Tower
A growing number of scholars are trying to reach beyond the bounds of academia to speak to broader audiences on broader issues.
Page B1.


Adoption Judges Should Listen to the Children; Baby Richard's Debt
To the Editor:
I read with dismay about the revoked adoption of Baby Richard, a 3 1/2-year-old Chicago boy (front page, July 15).
The court's decision is not only an unwarranted intrusion into the family, but it also represents a crass refusal to understand the nature of the adoption process itself.


Observer; The Usual Suspects
What about the fans?
Another baseball strike looms, and nobody cares about the fans.
Not the players, whose average pay is over $1 million a year.
Players don't care about the fans.
Neither do the owners.
To owners the fans are zilch.
That's what the fans mean to owners: zilch.


Midwest Resources Inc.(MWR,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Haiti Trains Military Recruits as It Contemplates a Possible Invasion


Mercantile Stores Co.(MST,N) reports earnings for Qtr to July 30


2 Companies Look to Leave Manhattan
In a reflection of the growing strength -- and rising prices -- of the midtown Manhattan real estate market, two large companies said yesterday that they were considering leaving the city for offices in the suburbs.
The Equitable Life Assurance Society is considering several existing buildings in Westchester County, and the Swiss Bank Corporation said it might build on vacant land in downtown Stamford.


Harold Delaney, Educator, 74, And Wife, Geraldine, Are Slain
Dr.
Harold Delaney, a retired professor and college president, and his wife, Geraldine, were found beaten to death on Thursday at a home they owned in Pilot Mountain, N.C.
Dr.
Delaney, 74, and Mrs.
Delaney, 71, also lived in Silver Spring, Md.
The authorities in North Carolina said a warrant had been issued in the killings.


Proposed Rail Link to Airports Ignores Needs of New Yorkers; Take the F Train
To the Editor:
The airport rail link (news article, July 27) is not needed.
One can go to La Guardia Airport via the F train to Roosevelt Avenue and the Q33 bus; and to Kennedy via the F train to Kew Gardens and the Q10 bus.


Healthsource Inc.(HS,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Democrats Build Pressure On New Prosecutor to Quit
President Clinton's personal lawyer and Congressional Democrats today stepped up their criticism of the appointment of Kenneth W. Starr as the new Whitewater independent counsel.
But Mr. Starr showed no sign that the attacks would dissuade him from filling the post.


Outsiders Looking Into Redirection
A Stranger in This World  By Kevin Canty 180 pages. Doubleday. $20.


POP
Walking on the Dark Side With Post-Beatnik Angst  Mercury Lounge


Lyubertsy Journal; Guns for Hire: Policing Goes Private in Russia
The day started early with riot troops in black masks storming a bank and freeing six hostages.
Soon after, paratroops dropped into a blazing house to capture three terrorists.
Then men in combat gear ran a gantlet course -- each carrying a moneybag in one hand and an automatic weapon in the other.
Land Rovers dodged grenades.
Sharpshooters fired from speeding cars at bank robbers.
And all the while a popular band played blues in the background.


By Design; Flared at Any Length
There doesn't seem to be any agreement among designers and stores about skirt lengths for fall.
But everyone does agree about the shape of skirts.
They should be flared, not straight.
Barneys New York has short skirts that range from mid-thigh to just above the knee, and long ones that graze the ankles.
Among the short styles are a glen plaid by Plein Heir ($76), a white low-riding skirt with sailor buttons by Mark Eisen ($110), a side-buttoned black skirt by Claudie Pierlot ($128) and a pleated Black Watch plaid by DKNY ($225).
The store's prettiest long skirts are two murky prints in smoky gray or taupe by Plein Heir, at $112.


POP
A Female Quartet From the Canadian Southeast CBGB


Eric Johnson; Author, 76, Guided Youths
Eric Warner Johnson, a Quaker educator and author of scores of books intended largely for young readers or their parents, died on Thursday at Chestnut Hill Hospital in Philadelphia.
He was 76 and lived in the Germantown section of Philadelphia.
The cause was head injuries from a fall the day before, his family said.


Markel Corp.(MAKL,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Corrections
A map with an article on Sunday about Mexican efforts to reduce illegal drug traffic mislabeled the state directly west of Texas.
It is New Mexico, not Arizona.


Matlack Systems Inc.(MLK,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Chess
It's a long, long way from March to July, as Anatoly Karpov can testify.
Karpov, the world champion recognized by the International Chess Federation, produced one of his greatest triumphs last spring in the Linares International Tournament in Spain, one of the strongest ever held, but hasn't done anything notable since.
Indeed, his latest underachievement has been to tie for fourth-to-seventh places with Artur Yusupov, Aleksei Dreyev and Viktor Korchnoi with 4 1/2 points at the Dortmund International Tournament in Germany in late July.
Top honors went to Jeroen Piket of the Netherlands, first with 6 1/2 points, Michael Adams of England, second with 5 1/2 points, and Vladimir Yepishin, third with 5 points.


U.N. Seeks Demilitarized Status for Sarajevo
Reacting to a surge in cease-fire violations in the Sarajevo area, the United Nations military commander in Bosnia today proposed the demilitarization of the area around the Bosnian capital.
The United Nations has on several occasions proposed demilitarization of Sarajevo without success, and there was little indication tonight that it is any closer to persuading the Muslim-dominated Bosnian Government and the besieging Serbian nationalist forces to accept the plan.


Q&amp;A
Lightning Rods
Q.  Why don't people seem to use lightning rods anymore?


Mob Figure Acquitted in Murder and Racketeering Case
A man whose possible succession as a Mafia leader reportedly helped spark a bloody mob war was acquitted yesterday of murder and racketeering charges stemming from the violence.
Alphonse Persico was found not guilty in Federal District Court in Brooklyn of having participated in the bloodshed.
He had been accused of plotting some of the war's murders from prison, where he was serving time for a previous racketeering conviction.


Teleglobe Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Smokers Add to Los Angeles Smog
THE thick smog that often hovers over Los Angeles certainly looks like an ashtray in the sky and, scientists say, to some extent it is just that.
Cigarette smoke accounts for 1 to 1.3 percent of the fine particle mass in the atmosphere there, researchers have found.
The report on cigarette smoke, published in the July issue of the journal Environmental Science and Technology, was prepared by a team of scientists headed by Dr.
Glen R. Cass, an environmental engineer at the California Institute of Technology in Pasadena.


DEBATE TO START IN SENATE TODAY ON HEALTH ISSUE
After decades of vain and intermittent efforts, the Senate prepared today to open formal debate on restructuring the nation's health care system, the most ambitious social legislation to face Congress since the passage of civil rights measures in the mid-1960's.
The debate, scheduled to begin late Tuesday afternoon, will bring the results of months of arduous committee work to the floor of a body fractured by philosophical differences with no sure sense of where it will wind up.
The Democratic leadership and President Clinton hope Congress will approve legislation by Election Day.


USlico Corp.(USC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Variants of AIDS Virus Can Elude Blood Tests
Variants of the AIDS virus can elude detection by most tests now used in the United States to screen blood supplies for AIDS and diagnose the disease in people, an official with the Federal Centers for Disease Control and Prevention said today.
But the official, Dr.
J.
Richard George, who heads the development technology section in the centers' AIDS division, insisted that there was no risk that blood supplies in the United States were contaminated by H.I.V., the virus that causes the deadly disease.
In part, he said that was because there are no known cases in the United States of people being infected by these variants of the virus, which were discovered in western Africa.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-12  VATICAN PRESSURE ON U.N.
The Vatican issued a detailed attack on the United States and participants in the upcoming United Nations conference on population, saying their policies would promote abortion.
A1


Piccadilly Cafeterias Inc.(PIC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Foodmaker Inc.(FM,N) reports earnings for 12wks to July 10


Picturetel Corp.(PCTL,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to July 2


Geico Corp.(GEC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Pinnacle Micro
Shares of Pinnacle Micro Inc. plunged 11.3 percent yesterday after the maker of optical data storage systems said it would restate results of the last nine months.
The decision came after an internal review of company books showed errors in when and how sales were recorded.
Pinnacle said all sales reported were completed and payment was collected.


Market Place; WPP Group is having a good year after some shaky ones.
AFTER years in which its survival seem threatened by a bloated debt load and the pinch on marketing budgets caused by the recession, WPP Group P.L.C., the London-based advertising holding company that is an important force on Madison Avenue, has generated a steady stream of good news during the last 12 months.
Clients began spending more on advertising as economic recoveries took hold in the United States and Britain, aiding results at J. Walter Thompson and Ogilvy &amp; Mather, WPP's two biggest agencies.
The company has shored up its balance sheet, in part through the sale late last year of Scali, McCabe, Sloves, another of its agencies, for $70 million.
And in May, Ogilvy scored the biggest account gain in advertising history when I.B.M. consolidated its account, with billings estimated at $400 million to $500 million, there.


Mentor Graphics Corp.(MENT,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Canines at the Conservatory


Velarde Lifts Yankees Over Orioles in 11th
Buck Showalter thought his player took the news rather well.
Randy Velarde shrugged his shoulders, painting a slightly different picture.
"He knew how I was feeling when I left his office," Velarde said of Showalter, who kept him out of the starting lineup against a left-hander for the first time this season.
"I walked out of there angry. But it was a good anger, not the beat-down-the-clubhouse anger, just one I needed to channel."


For One Korea, Soon
To the Editor:
Re "Unifying? Not Now, Please" (The Week in Review, July 24): I am one of the 10 million Koreans whose families have been divided for 44 years.
Although I live comfortably as an American citizen in the United States, I am depressed by your description of Korean reunification as a remote goal.


F.D.A. Approves Compound for Heart Scans
Molecular Biosystems Inc., a San Diego-based biotechnology company, said yesterday that it had received permission from the Food and Drug Administration to sell Albunex, the first contrast-imaging agent for ultrasound commercially available in the United States.
Albunex was approved to improve contrast in echocardiography, a procedure used to diagnose heart disease.
Albunex, which was developed and will be manufactured by Molecular Biosystems, will be marketed in North and South America by Mallinckrodt Medical, an operating unit of the Mallinckrodt Group of St.
Louis.


No Headline
"It's a world where the cops are in Ford Escorts and everybody else is driving a Ferrari. You're just not going to catch many crooks." -- PHILIP FEIGEN, top securities regulator for the State of Colorado.  [ A1:2. ]


Adoption Judges Should Listen to the Children
To the Editor:
Re "Taking Jennifer Ireland's Daughter" (editorial, Aug. 1): Michigan's Judge Raymond Cashen removed Maranda from her birth mother recently because she had the baby enrolled in day care.


Proposed Rail Link to Airports Ignores Needs of New Yorkers
To the Editor:
While La Guardia and Kennedy International Airports need rail links, the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey's plan to build rapid transit to them (news article, July 27) is flawed in the following ways:


Mikasa Inc.(MKS,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Investigators Say Letter Writer Is Not Original Zodiac Gunman
The person who wrote a letter claiming responsibility for recent attacks under the name Zodiac is apparently not the elusive gunman of the same name, the police said yesterday.
Four years ago, a man calling himself Zodiac killed one person and wounded three others in Brooklyn and Queens.


Coming: An Urban Primary
For two decades the Federal Government has neglected many critical needs of America's cities, from affordable housing to education to transportation to human services.
Mayors around the country have searched desperately for ways to refocus national politics on the priorities of urban Americans.
Now we have a powerful instrument to attract political attention: City Vote, the first national urban Presidential primary.
It will take place on Tuesday, Nov. 7, 1995 -- three months before the Iowa caucuses and New Hampshire primary.


Motor Coach Industries Intl(MCO,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Card Game Helps Trump Old Age; Five Times a Week, Six Ladies Find a Comforting Anchor
The table was loaded with money, piles of money, as the six players sat down for their regular Monday night game of poker.
There were raises, calls, a flurry of furtive glances and finally, a show of hands.
"Full house," said Martha Diasparra. "I win."


Corrections
A picture caption yesterday about people relaxing along a waterfront promenade misstated the location in some editions.
They were at the Hudson River Park near Battery Park City, not on Brooklyn Heights.


Campbell Taking Step Up to Ranger Coaching Job
In a move that comes as no surprise, the Rangers will name Colin Campbell as head coach today to replace the recently departed Mike Keenan.
Campbell, 41, was the team's top assistant the last two seasons and has been the front-runner to take over as coach ever since Keenan stunned the Stanley Cup champions by declaring himself a free agent in a contract dispute and signing to become coach and general manager of the St.
Louis Blues.


Adoption Judges Should Listen to the Children; No Such Syndrome
To the Editor:
I probably do not need to explain there is no evidence of "adopted-child syndrome," as a July 26 news article about the creative insanity defense of the accused serial killer Joel Rifkin does that and quotes experts.


Bombay Co. (BBA,N) reports earnings for Qtr to July 3


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt *
BankAmerica Corp., San Francisco, is selling $150 million of 8.125 percent subordinated notes due in 2004 at 99.729, to yield 8.165 percent, through CS First Boston.
The issue, callable in five years, is rated A-3 by Moody's Investors Service and A- by Standard &amp; Poor's Corp.


Adams Resources &amp; Energy Inc.(AE,A) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Strike Nears, But the Song Remains Same
The players' labor leader is resigned to a strike.
The owners' chief representative is "much less optimistic" than he had been about the chances of averting a strike.
In short, after yesterday's brief and meaningless bargaining session, no one had any suggestion that something would happen to keep the players playing after Thursday's games.
"There is an air of inevitability that we will not reach an agreement," said Donald Fehr, head of the union.


Results Plus
N.F.L.
Redskins' Shuler Off Mark It was an easy night for the veteran Jim Kelly and a rough night for the rookie Heath Shuler.
Kelly, who had been bothered by tendinitis in his throwingshoulder, didn't show it last night in an exhibition game in Orchard Park, N.Y.
He completed his first 7 passes and was 9 for 12 over all for 141 yards and 1touchdown during his 2 series and the Buffalo Bills went on to beat theWashington Redskins, 13-11.
Shuler, the No. 3 pick in this year's draft, didnot practice with the Redskins until Wednesday because of a contract holdout.Playing the second quarter, he was 4 for 10 for 47 yards with 1 interception.Washington trailed by 10-3 late in the third quarter when Gus Frerotte, theRedskins' No. 3 quarterback, led a 7-play, 52-yard touchdown drive.
Frerotte, 15for 25 for 178 yards, hit Stephan Hobbs with a 13-yard pass to make it 10-9.
In his coaching debut, Norv Turner chose to go for a 2-point conversion, andWilliam Bell ran it in to give Washington the lead with 28 seconds left in thethird quarter.
The Bills then won on Steve Christie's 33-yard field goal with 9 minutes 56 seconds left. (AP)


T. Baumritter, 94, Furniture Executive
Theodore Baumritter, a founder of the home furnishing company that grew into the giant Ethan Allen Inc., died on Saturday at his home in Boca Raton, Fla.
He was 94 and also lived in Manhattan.
The cause was cancer, said his grandson Rabbi Richard Jacobs of Scarsdale, N.Y.


Cincinnati Milacron Inc.(CMZ,N) reports earnings for 12wks to June 18


Scott Paper Ltd. reports earnings for Qtr to July 2


Continental Can Co. (CAN,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Sequent Computer Systems Inc.(SQNT,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to July 2


Interactive TV Bidder Fights F.C.C.
The top bidder in the Federal Communications Commission's experimental auction of interactive television airwaves challenged the agency today, saying it would not pay its required down payment on 20 regional licenses.
The F.C.C., which had issued a strong warning to high bidders on Friday that there would be no extension of the down payment deadline, reiterated today that if the top bidder, Commercial Realty of St.
Pete Inc., failed to make its down payment the licenses would be revoked and stiff penalties imposed.


Cambior Inc.(CBJ,A) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Pillowtex Corp.(PTX,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Fresenius USA Inc.(FRN,A) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Health Care Chain Names A President
Integrated Health Services Inc., a diversified chain of nursing homes and other health care operations in 27 states, named Lawrence P. Cirka president and a member of the company's board yesterday.
Dr.
Robert N. Elkins, chairman and chief executive of Integrated, has also been serving as its president.
He said Mr.
Cirka, who has been chief operating officer since 1987, had been instrumental in the rapid growth of the company.


Senators Angered Over Cost Of Spy Agency's New Offices
Senior members of the Senate Intelligence Committee said today that they were shocked to find that a huge new spy satellite headquarters under construction outside Washington would cost up to $350 million.
They said the Pentagon and Central Intelligence Agency had concealed the full expense of the project from them.
"You've got to see it to believe it," said Senator John W. Warner of Virginia, the ranking Republican on the committee.
"I was absolutely astonished at the magnitude and the proportions of this structure."


Trial for Barnett, Former Chief
The former Kansas City Chiefs wide receiver TIM BARNETT was bound over for trial yesterday in Milwaukee on a charge of sexually assaulting a 14-year-old girl.
Circuit Court Commissioner AUDREY BROOKS closed Barnett's preliminary hearing at the request of the prosecuting and defense attorneys.
Barnett, 27, was released by the Chiefs last month.
He remained free on $3,500 bond.
No trial date was set. (AP)


Noranda Forest reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


FPI Ltd. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


In First Official Visit to Jordan, Rabin Opens a New Border Crossing


Vastar Resources Inc.(VRI,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Physicists Ponder Life After the Demise Of the Supercollider
PARTICLE physicists meeting here last week to ponder the uncertain future of their arcane science relished a host of new ideas for penetrating the secrets underlying universal existence.
But their branch of science has fallen on economic hard times, and many physicists were mainly looking for new ways to make a living.
A cloud of gloom shrouded the meeting of the Division of Particles and Fields of the American Physical Society, the first meeting the group had held since Congress killed the superconducting supercollider accelerator last October.
The supercollider, a $10 billion proton accelerator that was under construction in Texas, would have been the most powerful such machine ever built.
With its demise, thousands of scientists and engineers have lost jobs or suffered professionally in other ways.


Sudbury Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Flouting Tradition, Scientists Embrace An Ancient Taboo
FOR all its secular posturing, science has in common with many religions a zealous adherence to the concept of sin.
There are the deadly scientific sins, like fabricating results or failing to give proper credit to one's peers; and then there are the little sins, like sloppiness or appearing once too often on television.
Among researchers who study the behavior and ecology of nonhuman animals, the biggest of the little sins has long been the dread practice of anthropomorphism: to ascribe to the creature under scrutiny emotions, goals, consciousness, intelligence, desires or any other characteristics viewed as exclusively human.


Leonardo's Inventions on the Screen
LEONARDO DA VINCI'S notebooks are an astonishing puzzle.
As Daniel J. Boorstin wrote in "The Creators": "No other artist bequeathed so copious a record of his thoughts and yet told us so little of himself." It is not even known whether the ideas expressed were his own or an anthology drawn from his reading.
Many of the drawings of flying machines, tanks and other inventions "may only depict devices that he saw," in Mr.
Boorstin's words.
Still, the notebooks continue to attract.
Leonardo the Inventor, a CD-ROM from the Interactive Publishing Corporation of Spring Valley, N.Y., draws on them and much more for an entertaining and educational presentation of Leonardo's life and works.


Behind Bars, an Opera on Redemption
In a prison near the edge of the Everglades, encircled by tomato fields and razor wire, Elton Edwards, a convicted murderer, is putting the final touches on his first opera.
He and other inmates at the Dade County Correctional Institution, a maximum-security state prison, have just completed the book and score of "El Caido,," or "The Fallen One," a partly autobiographical tale of a convicted killer who redeems himself through music.
As far as anyone can tell at Opera America, a nonprofit service group in Washington, or at The Metropolitan Opera in New York, "El Caido" is the first opera ever written and produced by prisoners in the United States.


Martin Marietta Materials Inc.(MLM,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Corrections
An article last Wednesday about the refusal of the Lutheran Archbishop of Latvia to ordain women misstated the name of the church's world body.
It is the Lutheran World Federation.
A picture caption with the article misstated the Archbishop's name.
It is Janis Vanags, not Vargas.


Firefighters Are Having A Grim Year
The number of New York City firefighters killed or seriously injured in the line of duty this year is the highest in at least a decade, fire officials said yesterday.
In the latest incident, Capt.
Wayne Smith suffered burns over 40 percent of his body, as well as to his lungs, in a Queens fire on Sunday.
Four firefighters have died so far this year, but fire officials said that the number of fires was not markedly higher, nor were incidents of arson.


'N.Y.P.D.' Star Returns, But for How Long?
After a fractious dispute with producers, David Caruso, the star of ABC's hit police drama "N.Y.P.D. Blue," agreed to an amended contract yesterday and is to begin filming new episodes of the series today.
But how many new episodes is unclear.
No executives from either ABC or Steven Bochco Productions, which produces the show, would elaborate on Mr.
Caruso's status.
Privately, however, several executives close to the deal acknowledged that the actor would leave the series sometime this fall to pursue film roles.


RECORDINGS
Giving a Classical Instrument A Modern Sensibility  Donald Martino: Piano Music
Eliza Garth


Post-Massacre Mission Fulfilled, Observer Force Leaves Hebron
An international observer force left Hebron today, three months after it was sent here to help restore calm after a massacre of 29 Muslim worshipers by a Jewish settler.
It was the only international force stationed in the occupied territories since Israel captured them in the 1967 Arab-Israeli war, and the end of its term left questions about the effectiveness of such a force there.


Marcus Corp.(MCS,N) reports earnings for Qtr to May 26


Corrections
A picture caption in Business Day yesterday about the Foxwoods casino in Ledyard, Conn., misstated the number of slot machines at the casino in some copies.
It is more than 3,000.


Ingles Markets Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 25


BUSINESS DIGEST
Markets
The regulators who oversee the nation's 4,900 mutual funds have no sophisticated computer systems to help them safeguard the more than $2 trillion entrusted to them by Americans.
Nor is prompt disclosure required.  [ Page A1. ]


A Dancer Who Helps Feld to Shape Form Around the Impulse of Music
What does it take to be a muse?
Buffy Miller has served as a major inspiration to Eliot Feld since the late 1980's.
Mr.
Feld choreographed three demanding solos for her, each filled with small, clipped footwork that must be danced with an almost mathematical precision.
And tomorrow night, the 25-year-old ballerina is to perform in Mr.
Feld's very different, new "Gnossiennes," a highlight of the Feld Ballets/NY's "summer preview season," which runs through Aug. 20 at the Joyce Theater.
"Gnossiennes," set to the music of the same name by Satie, is a ghostlike journey for two women.
One is a novice, danced by Ha-Chi Yu, an apprentice dancer from the New Ballet School, which is affiliated with the Feld.
The other is an adult, danced by Ms.
Miller, who is midway through the journey.


CABARET
A Slight Twist on a Standard: A Man Sings Women's Lyrics  Ballroom


Fashion Ads Find the Great Outdoors
The underwear wars in Times Square and the showdown between fashion and film for the best real estate on the Sunset Strip are long running.
And Calvin Klein and Donna Karan are familiar fixtures in the outdoor galaxy, as are Benetton, Bijan and the Gap.
But what began in the late 80's as a bicoastal phenomenon is becoming a national movement, as fashion brands and retailers of all stripes turn to billboard and bus advertising in smaller markets from Boston to Seattle to avoid the clutter in magazines.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
7.25
7.25
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.50
3.50
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
4.25
4.28
3.04
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.43
4.45
3.00
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.93
4.89
3.14
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.28
7.27
5.79
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.53
7.54
6.46
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.29
8.31
7.18
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.38
6.37
5.69
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Mylan Laboratories Inc.(MYL,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Energy Ventures Inc.(EVI,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Wisconsin Central Transportation Corp.(WCLX,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Polaris Industries Partners L.P.(SNO,A) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Genmar Holdings Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Quarterback Duel? What Quarterback Duel?


Data Base Decision Making
Ambitious plans to use medical data to make health care policy decisions may have unexpected drawbacks, experts say.
Page A20. (Data Base Decision Making)


Pride Cos. L.P.(PRF,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Handy &amp; Harman (HNH,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Starbucks Corp.(SBUX,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to July 3


Rising Resentment Over the Two-Edged Sword
Despite the best efforts of Commissioner Paul Tagliabue and Gene Upshaw, the executive director of the National Football League Players Association, to portray the free agency-salary cap system as beneficial to the health of the league, some players continue to grumble about it.
Count Colts defensive tackle Steve Emtman among them.
He feels both sides have betrayed the players.


Wajax Ltd. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Weird Mound Offers Clues To Mysteries Of the Deep
AN uncommon assault on the mysterious depths of the sea is getting under way as ships, manned submersibles and unmanned robots probe an eerie mound in Atlantic waters more than two miles deep.
A mass of sulfurous ores the size of the Houston Astrodome, the mound was formed in the last 20,000 to 50,000 years by a kind of hidden volcanic action.
The mound continues to grow as its towering chimneys emit thick black smoke and extraordinarily hot water measuring up to 685 degrees Fahrenheit, hot enough to melt tin or lead.
Millions of sea anemones and shrimp live atop the mound, contradicting the old view of the ocean floor as a biological desert.


Guess Where Gordon Went
JEFF GORDON, winner of the inaugural Brickyard 400 in Indianapolis, canceled a contracted promotional appearance at a southern Indiana race track in order to serve as grand marshal at a Disney World parade in Florida.
TOM HELFRICH, owner of the Tri-State Speedway in Haubstadt, said yesterday that Gordon already had been paid part of his appearance fee and that the track's lawyer was trying to negotiate a settlement with the driver.


Effects of El Nino Reach Across Ocean And Linger a Decade
THE influence of El Nino, the quasi-periodic warming of the equatorial Pacific Ocean that is one of the world's most powerful weather makers, may be even more far-reaching and more responsible for the last decade's climatic extremes than has been thought.
Warm sea-surface temperatures in the Pacific, and especially those associated with El Nino, are known to set off chains of atmospheric events that dictate the weather in many parts of the world, including North America.
But it has generally been assumed that once the sea temperatures around the Equator return to normal, after one to three years, El Nino's influence is over.


METRO DIGEST
A NEW POWELL BATTLES FOR A HARLEM SEAT
Over and over, as people of a certain age pass by, they stop and marvel, "You look just like your Daddy!" And again and again, Adam Clayton Powell 4th says "Thank you for your support." The scene helps explain why Mr.
Powell, a 32-year-old City Councilman with a neophyte's nondescript three-year record, is giving Representative Charles B. Rangel, the 64-year-old dean of the state's Congressional delegation and the war horse of Harlem politics, his first real re-election challenge since he took office.
A1.


Cauthen and Croll Head Field At the Hall of Fame Induction
Words of praise were mingled with words of warning today as Steve Cauthen and Jimmy Croll were inducted into racing's Hall of Fame along with four star horses of the past.
The words of warning came from John Nerud, the long-time trainer and racing manager, who said in his keynote speech: "Owning a horse today is a fascinating experience, but a very hazardous one. We have political control and unfair taxes to deal with. But the business has no unity. If we spoke with one voice, we could change things."


Simpson Is Moved to a New Cell to Save Money
Anticipating the long-term costs of housing a notorious prisoner, officials at the Los Angeles County jail have moved O. J. Simpson from one high-security cell to another where it will be cheaper to have his quarters cleaned and his meals delivered.
Mr.
Simpson, who is awaiting a Sept. 19 trial on charges of murdering his ex-wife and a friend of hers, had been housed in a 9- by 7-foot cell in the hospital section and was moved on Friday to comparable accommodations in what is called the high-power section of the one-million-square-foot downtown jail.


RECORDINGS
French Choral Music With Unmistakable Voices
Faure et Son Temps: Secular Works for Chorus
Ensemble Vocal Jean Sourisse


Oil Prices May Be at a Turning Point
The decline in oil prices that helped bring inflation in the United States down to an annual rate of 3 percent may be ending.
Many oil analysts and economists are suggesting that the sharp price increases this year, which have brought the price of oil up nearly $6, to about $20 a barrel, are going to hold.
Some others contend that they see signs that point to rising oil prices for the rest of this decade.


Lincoln Electric Co. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


COMPETITORS TRY TO BLOCK AT&amp;T'S MCCAW BID
The Bell Atlantic Corporation and the Nynex Corporation asked a Federal court in New York yesterday to block the AT&amp;T Corporation's plan to acquire McCaw Cellular Communications Inc., saying the deal would harm competition.
The suit comes three weeks after the Justice Department's antitrust division approved the merger with only a few minor conditions.
Bell Atlantic and Nynex both recently agreed to merge their cellular telephone interests into a wireless network covering much of the eastern United States.
AT&amp;T hopes to build its own nationwide cellular network using McCaw.


Seaport Museum Reduces Operation
Faced with a year-end budget deficit, the South Street Seaport Museum has laid off eight staff members, closed its boat-building and metalworking shops, and eliminated its public-relations department.
The cost-cutting moves, described as a "mid-course correction" by Peter Neil, the museum's president, and Peter A. Aron, its chairman, will reduce this year's $3.4 million budget by nearly $350,000.
Both Mr.
Neil and Mr.
Aron said more cuts could come in October.


New Frontier in Research: Mining Patient Records
Buried in bulging files and stored in computers in doctors' offices, drug stores, insurance companies and hospitals is information on nearly everything that the health care profession has done to or prescribed for Americans in recent years.
To some, the records are a gold mine.
To others, they are a minefield.
But one thing is certain: the material is being unearthed.
Insurers, drug companies and large health maintenance organizations are mounting an extensive effort to use medical data to decide which treatments are best, which doctors are best and which health plans keep people healthiest.


Cobi Jones to Coventry City
COBI JONES, the speedy midfielder with dreadlocks on the United States World Cup team, is joining the American Roy Wegerle as a member of Coventry City in the English Premier League this season.
The central English club said Jones signed a one-year contract with the Sky Blues with an option to stay two more seasons.
Coventry also has agreed to pay a transfer fee to the United States Soccer Federation for Jones's rights.


Review/Fashion; For Resorts: Bare Midriffs, Snug Fits
The new collections opening this week on and around Seventh Avenue are bright and unassuming and, in a general way, point to where fashion is headed.
They are called cruise and resort collections, recalling the time when midwinter vacations consisted of lengthy ocean voyages or extended visits to sun-drenched resorts.
The airplane has replaced the cruise ship as the major means of transportation, and travelers are more likely to stay for a weekend than a month.
Nevertheless, the season lingers and is even growing in importance.
Basically, there is a need for cheerful styles in the stores in November, before spring clothes arrive and after fall stocks have been thinned.


When This Serb Changes Course, So Do Lots of Others
Readers of the Serbian press and viewers of pro-Government television may be forgiven if they feel a bit dizzy.
For the last three years, reporters and commentators in Belgrade have been steadily beating the pan-Serbia propaganda drum.
They have portrayed the Bosnian Serb cause as a glorious crusade and have elevated its leaders to near-mythic heroes.
Criticism of the cause, its leaders or their tactics was considered virtual treason.


Manitowoc Co.(MTW,N) reports earnings for Qtr to July 2


Tele-Communications Sets $1.4 Billion Telecable Deal
Tele-Communications Inc., the nation's largest cable television operator, said yesterday that it would acquire the Telecable Corporation, a privately held company, in a deal valued at $1.4 billion.
The takeover represents further consolidation in the cable industry, with large operators continuing to acquire small- and medium-sized ones, said Dennis Leibowitz, a media analyst at Donaldson, Lufkin &amp; Jenrette.


Adoption Judges Should Listen to the Children; When Agencies Assist
To the Editor:
Betty Jean Lifton (letter, July 9) takes us to task for reporting a more positive message in our newest study of the impact of adoption on adolescents than we reported in 1993.


VATICAN ATTACKS POPULATION STAND SUPPORTED BY U.S.
Arguing that "the future of humanity" is at stake at a coming United Nations population conference, the Vatican today made its most detailed and acerbic attack on the position endorsed by the United States and other participants, accusing them of promoting abortion on demand and homosexuality.
The statement by Joaquin Navarro-Valls, the Pope's spokesman, deepened the already profound rift between the Roman Catholic Church hierarchy and a lobby of Clinton Administration officials and feminist groups that has cast the conference, next month in Cairo, as potentially one of the most significant turning points for the rights of women.


Mesa Airlines Inc.(MESA,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Merisel Inc.(MSEL,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Wiretap Access Bill Is Ready
Telephone and cable television companies would have to modify their networks to make it easier for law-enforcement agencies to conduct wiretaps and trace messages, under legislation expected to be introduced in the House and Senate on Tuesday.
The bill, long sought by the Federal Bureau of Investigation and backed by the Clinton Administration, promises $500 million in Federal money to help communications companies pay for the development and installation of the necessary software.


On My Mind; The Ghost People
In Budapest, the newly elected leader of Hungary was talking to me about strengthening the country's economy and drawing closer to the West.
He said sensible things that the Prime Minister of a country recovering from decades of Communist rule could be expected to say.
All the while I felt astonishment and disappointment that this politician would be presiding in the office of the Prime Minister at all.
It was like talking with the ghost of a non-beloved departed.


Patterns
Computerized Beauty
The September issue of Mirabella carries the cover line "Who is the face of America?" next to the image of a blank-eyed young woman with flawless sun-tanned skin, perfect pink lips and damp brown hair that falls below her shoulders.
Traces of sand and droplets of moisture cling to her face and bare shoulder as if she'd just emerged from the sea, like Botticelli's Venus.


India Extends Emergency Powers in Kashmir
The Indian Government followed its decision to pull its troops back from the holiest Muslim shrine in the Indian-controlled part of Kashmir today with a decision to extend for six months the powers under which it rules the disputed territory.
Senior Indian officials said that the moves reflected the quandary that faces the Government of Prime Minister P. V. Narasimha Rao after four years of insurgency by Muslim militants in Kashmir.
With divisions among his top advisers on the balance to be struck between seeking a military victory and a political settlement, Mr.
Rao has apparently settled on a middle course.


Corrections
The Pulse chart in The Metro Section yesterday misstated the average number of felonies reported in the subways each day this year.
There have been approximately 26 a day, not 12.


Peace Talks Set Up Between Insurers and Doctors
Fearful that patients are the losers in the intensifying battle between doctors and health insurers, officials in New York, New Jersey and Connecticut have begun trying to bring the antagonists together to work out a truce.
Acting independently of one another, legislative leaders in New York and Connecticut and the State Health Commissioner in New Jersey are trying to set up meetings in their states between insurers intent on keeping costs down and doctors who say their hands are being tied when it comes to choosing treatments.


Pierre Menard, 53, Violinist, Is Dead
Pierre Menard, a violinist and founding member of the Vermeer Quartet, died on Wednesday at his home in Warren, Me.
He was 53.
The cause was AIDS, said his companion, John Ladley.


Brokers' Paychecks Kept Swelling in 1993
Stockbrokers are different from you and me -- they make more money.
Last year, retail brokers' mean earnings hit a record $128,553, a 10 percent increase over 1992, according to a survey done by the Securities Industry Association.
That is several times what the average New Yorker made, government statistics show.


U.S.-North Korea Talks Show Progress
The United States and North Korea said today that they had made some progress in dealing with an array of issues related to North Korea's nuclear program and its future.
After nine hours of talks in the North Korean Mission to the United Nations in Geneva, North Korea's chief delegate, Kang Sok Ju, said he had a proposal for handling 8,000 spent nuclear fuel rods, which Washington fears might be reprocessed into weapons-grade plutonium.
He did not offer details.


Improving the Mitchell Bill
The Senate begins a momentous debate on health care today when it takes up the leadership bill put forward by George Mitchell, the majority leader.
Republicans and other opponents of reform will do their best to weaken or eviscerate the bill, which even President Clinton acknowledges is the most ambitious likely to win Senate approval.
But as the battle rages, advocates of reform need to struggle not just to preserve Mr.
Mitchell's handiwork but to fix some substantial flaws that threaten to blunt its effect.
The Mitchell bill starts off well.
It would provide universal coverage over time, trying a voluntary approach first, followed by mandates if necessary.
And it would seek to control costs through a variety of market reforms.


Amoco Canada reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


In China, It's Time for 10,000 Hoops to Bloom
One night during the first round of the world basketball championships, the coaching staffs of the United States and China sat down to dinner, and had an exchange of ideas.
What the Chinese received were some valuable training tips.
What the United States got was some spicy food for thought.
"Since the Dream Team played at the Olympics in Barcelona, basketball in our country has become very popular," the Chinese coach, Xingquu Jiang, told Don Nelson and assistants through an interpreter.
"In China right now, there are more people who play basketball than the entire population in all of Europe."


Israel Praises Syria for Help In Stopping Militia Attacks
In unusually kind words directed at a longtime enemy, the Israeli Government praised Syria today for helping to press the Party of God militia in southern Lebanon to stop firing rockets into northern Israel.
Eager to see further progress in indirect peace talks with Syria, Foreign Minister Shimon Peres of Israel not only gave Syria high marks for helping to end the rocket attacks, but also sounded pleased about the state of the peace talks.


Rescue Bid Planned For Robot
THE Dante 2 robot, which successfully explored an Alaskan volcanic crater before an accidental fall stranded it, could be rescued by a helicopter if weather permits, project officials said yesterday.
An attempt to pull up the eight-legged robot, which toppled over last Friday while trying to climb out of the active crater of Mount Spurr, could be made in the next few days if weather around the mountain allows a helicopter to maneuver, they said.


Yellow Corp.(YELL,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


DSG International Ltd.  (DSGIF,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


SPS Technologies Inc.(ST,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Ann Taylor Stores Inc.(ANN,N) reports earnings for Qtr to July 30


Some Fans Are Striking Before a Strike Even Begins
With a baseball strike looming in three days, some grass-roots groups around the country are trying to get a jump on the owners and players with a walkout of their own.
"Our group is not taking sides," said Pat O'Rourke, a co-founder of an impromptu organization called Fans First.
"But the fans are the ones who have been forgotten. We are their customer base and they don't even think about us. They just take us for granted."


Creative Technology Ltd.  (CREAF,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Southern California Water Co.(SCW,N) reports earnings for 12mos to June 30


Seeking Data on Funds, Investors And Regulators Find Frustration
If the price of a company's stock surges before important news is announced about that company, stock exchange computer systems will detect the move and alert market regulators to the possibility of illegal insider trading.
If the chief executive of a publicly traded corporation quits or the company changes its line of business, the company must promptly disclose that information.
Corporate regulators can see if the company has met its legal duty simply by checking if the news was distributed through the web of market information services that now spans the globe.


Disney to Sample the Interactive Era
The Walt Disney Company, which has long resisted announcing plans for the information highway, said yesterday that it would join with three of the nation's big telephone companies in a venture to provide video services to homes.
Although the time frame for the venture was unclear, as was the amount of money to be spent on the effort, Disney said its partners would be three regional Bell companies -- Ameritech, BellSouth and Southwestern Bell -- which collectively serve 50 million telephone lines in 19 states.


A Hutu Family Tries to Rebuild in Tutsi-Led Rwanda
In the six days that Laurent Ngwijabanzi and his wife, Constantine Nyiramahne, have been back in their mud-brick house on a hill high above banana plantations, it has been strangely silent.
Almost all their neighbors are still refugees across the border in Zaire.
The schools are closed, the few public buses were stolen and the goats that used to roam the countryside disappeared with their owners.


Cantrex Group reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Reliance Group Holdings Inc.(REL,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Action Continues for Albus
Professional golfers with more than $2 million in earnings usually take the week off following a victory.
But JIM ALBUS is not your usual golfer, one of the reasons he has earned the nickname Ironman on the Senior PGA Tour.
A native of Staten Island and for 14 years a club professional in the metropolian area before he joined the Tour four years ago, Albus will be playing his 23d event of 1994 this weekend -- the First of America Classic in Ada, Mich. -- after Sunday's triumph at the Bank of Boston Classic, his second Tour victory of the season.


Before Leaving the 20th Century, Listening to It
Made your plans yet for New Millennium's Eve?
Carman Moore has.
He expects to be at the Cathedral of St.
John the Divine in Morningside Heights, where he and his instrumental ensemble, Skymusic, are artists in residence, leading a performance of his "Mass for the 21st Century."
Although Mr.
Moore discussed the meaning of the Christian Mass with the Very Rev.
James Parks Morton, the dean of St.
John, before beginning work, he conceived his piece in theatrical rather than religious terms.
And it will follow a circuitous route on its way to the cathedral, including, perhaps, performances in South Africa, Japan and Brazil.


Thinking Out Loud: The Public Intellectual Is Reborn
It was one more attack on the condition of universities, this one on the cover of The Atlantic Monthly, that drove the young professor to wander off the academic reservation and fire back from a decidedly non-scholastic publication, The Village Voice.
The professor, Michael Berube, had no idea how his unorthodox behavior might affect his chances of getting tenure.
But the time seemed ripe for a good polemic, rather than another juiceless article in a scholarly journal.


M/A-Com Inc.(MAI,N) reports earnings for Qtr to July 2


Loewen Group (LWNGF,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


COMPANY BRIEFS
ALL AMERICAN COMMUNICATIONS INC., Santa Monica, Calif., a television and music production company, acquired certain assets and a nonvoting interest in Fremantle International Inc., a television production and distribution subsidiary of Interpublic Group of Companies Inc., New York City, an advertising and marketing company, for $63 million in cash and equity.


Making the Most of a Little Friendly Competition
"Battle Royale: Trombones and Alto Saxophones" at Alice Tully Hall was mild-mannered as far as cutting sessions go.
Cutting sessions, at which musicians try to out-improvise one another, are a practical result of one of jazz's axioms, that competition can produce revelations.
But Sunday night's concert, part of the Classical Jazz series at Lincoln Center, didn't produce many.
Instead, it made it clear that everybody involved knew exactly what to play, and that the musicians all respected their competition.
Nobody lost, and everybody played well.
Coming after a bitter, wide-ranging debate between Wynton Marsalis, the artistic director of the series, and the biographer James Lincoln Collier, the show's graciousness was a relief.
The concert opened with four trombonists, Al Grey, Slide Hampton, Wycliffe Gordon and Ronald Westray, who started with "Just Jazz," a composition by Mr.
Grey arranged by Virginia Mayhew.
Mr.
Grey led off the solos with long, growling notes, followed by Mr.
Westray, a 23-year-old trombonist who has been making appearances with the Lincoln Center Jazz Orchestra.
Mr.
Westray has his own melodic arsenal, and he flashed it from his opening notes, patiently creating an angled structure that hung there until he introduced a line.


Man With a Knife Hurts Seven in a New Haven Coffee Bar
A man sitting by himself in a coffee bar in New Haven's arts district pulled out a knife at closing time Sunday night and attacked the other patrons, stabbing or slashing seven people as they screamed and struggled to escape.
The man, identified by the police as Daniel Silva, 38, was caught shortly afterward, trying to pedal away from the bloody scene on a bicycle.
Authorities said he cried, "Shoot me!" before he was tackled and subdued.


Genetic Approach to Preventing Regrowth of Arterial Plaque
EVERY year, about 400,000 Americans have a procedure called angioplasty, in which tiny balloons are inflated in their coronary arteries in an attempt to push artery-clogging plaque against the blood-vessel walls.
And every year, one-third to one-half of these operations fail within six months: the plaque comes back with a vengeance.
Cardiologists have tried about 50 drugs to stop this process, called restenosis, but none have worked.


Abrupt End to a Free-for-All on Lobsters
It started when an anonymous caller gave wildlife officials a tip: an employee at a New Hampshire power plant, the caller said, was illegally sneaking home lobsters that had been sucked into the plant's cooling system.
So last week, officials stopped the accused employee, Joseph Couture, as he was leaving the Schiller Station Plant in Newington.
They found 28 live lobsters in the trunk of his car.
They went to his apartment and found 480 lobsters -- more than 70 pounds of lobster meat -- in two freezers.


An Argument for the Full-Size Choir
The plush sound of massed voices has remained a guilty pleasure for many in recent decades despite the best efforts of the early-music movement to propagate a new (old?), lean ideal.
Unfortunately, the kind of megachoir heard most often in New York City of late, with young groups from several states pulled together (more or less) in a day or two of rehearsal, has cast the medium in a dubious light.
Seeing a stageful of voices, a listener has come to expect vague pitch, mushy rhythm and muddy harmonies.
So it is good to be reminded by the Berkshire Choral Festival what a veteran conductor can accomplish with a contingent of experienced, committed choristers in a concentrated week of rehearsal.
This evening, Vance George, well remembered from his days at the University of Wisconsin and now the director of the San Francisco Symphony Chorus, conducted 200 voices and the Springfield Symphony Orchestra in fine performances of Haydn's "Harmoniemesse" and Durufle's Requiem.


Educating Elderly On AIDS
The frank sex talk was right out of a college orientation program, but the men and women who gathered here in a community center lunchroom several weeks ago to hear about AIDS were far beyond their freshman year.
Juaquin Abaroa, 76, earnestly wanted to know if he could get AIDS from oral sex.
Eugenia Astiazarain, 80, coyly asked if she could take some condoms home with her.
And when 78-year-old Natalia Arzuaga walked off with a dozen, 68-year-old Obdureo Garcia called after her, "Natalia, save one for me!"


One Hat Discarded at Oregon
RICH BROOKS announced yesterday that he was stepping down as athletic director at the University of Oregon to concentrate on his duties as football coach.
Brooks, who is entering his 18th season as the Ducks' head football coach, took on the athletic director's responsibilities in November 1992 after BILL BYRNE resigned to become athletic director at Nebraska.


Labor Secretary's Plea Is Hardly a Solution
The Clinton Administration has enough trouble without blundering into baseball's labor dispute, but its labor representative has done just that.
Robert Reich, the Secretary of Labor, was at Fenway Park in Boston Sunday, watching a doubleheader but first speaking to players on both teams about the impending players' strike.
He spoke to reporters, too, and used that opportunity to call on fans of all ages but especially young fans to write to him at the Labor Department asking players and owners to continue talking.


If Welfare Mothers Must Go to Work In Clinton Plan, Will Children Gain?
Dorothy Carmona, a mother and relative newcomer to the world of work, thinks her children are better off now in day care than they were when she was on welfare.
"I see many, many women who just get up in the morning and do nothing with their lives," she said.
"My kids learn more at the day care center than when I was at home."
Gail Abney, a mother and no stranger to work, nonetheless calls it cruel to ask welfare mothers to work when their children are young.
"A child's most important year is the first year," she said.
"You build a bond with that child."


Washington Water Power (WWP,N) reports earnings for 12mo to June 30


Dick &amp; Don's Show: A Fright in August
For two weeks, the most yawn-inspiring series this side of "The Whitewater Somnambulants" has been "The Network Battle of the Baseball Grinches," starring Richard Ravitch, for the owners, and Donald Fehr, for the players.
Dick &amp; Don's Traveling Salary Cap Revue stars two men, one grim, the other grimmer ("Frick and Frack," Dave Marash of ABC News called them), snarling politely through negotiationese.
From show to show, they regularly repeat arguments, word for word.
Yet in the event that Charlie Rose or David Brinkley settle the dispute, I keep watching.
Here's a post-mortem on each program:


Ragan (Brad) Inc.(BRD,A) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Hadson Corp.(HAD,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


SPS Transaction Services Inc.(PAY,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Cadigan, a Casualty of the Cap, May Return to the Jets
Dave Cadigan, seemingly a casualty of pro football's new strangling salary cap, may play for the Jets again this season.
A decision may come Tuesday.
Cadigan played the last six seasons for the Jets and started all 16 games last season at left offensive guard.
During the winter, he exercised a $25,000 buyout clause in his contract.
He thought that some team would grab him as an unrestricted free agent and pay him as much as $2 million a year.


Premier Industrial Corp.(PRE,N) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


General Growth Properties Inc.(GGP,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Who's the Coolest Internet Provider?
IF one gives Time magazine credit for being hip enough to define what is hip for its readers, as it did in a recent issue, the millions of users of the global Internet are the digital heirs of the Beatniks and the Woodstock Generation.
Time produced consecutive cover articles on The Internet and Being Hip, concluding that "one likely successor for the old hip culture is the world of the Internet."
It's true; in cyberspace, we are all good-looking, thin, sexy, witty, cleverly tattooed and attired in nattily ratty clothing that is shredded in strategic places to reveal various pierced body parts.


Big Cities Win Appeals Ruling On '90 Census
A Federal appeals court ruled yesterday that the Government had failed to justify a 1990 Census that undercounted black and Hispanic residents, reducing the official population and the political clout of many of the nation's major cities.
The ruling sends the long-running case back to a lower court to give the Government another chance to defend the count that was adopted by the Bush Administration.
But it also sets a much higher standard for the Government to meet in justifying that count.


CHINA AND TAIWAN IN HIJACKING PACT
Officials from China and Taiwan signed an agreement today intended to end a recent string of hijackings from China.
Diplomats on both sides described the accord as a breakthrough in the relationship between the two old rivals.
The agreement was welcomed because the hijackings had undermined Beijing's latest air safety drive and threatened its tourism industry.
But more importantly, the accord represented a first step in cooperation between the two Governments, which have no formal diplomatic relations.
Both describe themselves as the sole legitimate authority in all of China.


Multicare Cos.(MLTI,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Equity Residential Property Trust (EQR,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Bond Prices Are Mixed Ahead of U.S. Auctions
Prices of government securities were mixed yesterday ahead of this week's quarterly Treasury refunding.
The market was also bracing for a fresh batch of economic reports that should show how fast the economy is growing, and thus provide a clue as to whether the Federal Reserve is likely to raise interest rates very soon.
Reports on July producer and consumer prices and retail sales could reinforce last Friday's stronger-than-expected employment report, which, analysts said, painted a picture of an economy growing at a brisk pace.


Tipper Gore Visits Refugee Camp in Zaire


Zeos Intl(ZEOS) reports earnings for Qtr to July 2


American Rice Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


New York City Exceeds Limit On Overtime
Last winter's storms and the Giuliani administration's emphasis on increasing street-level arrests helped push the city to spend almost $500 million on overtime for the last fiscal year, far higher than the $260 million budgeted, officials said yesterday.
The jump in overtime costs, 17 percent more than in 1993, creates two budgetary problems for Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani.
First, New York City has to cover a shortfall in the 1994 fiscal year, which ended in June.
But just as critically, the costs pose a potential problem for the 1995 budget, which has been criticized by fiscal monitors as being based on overly optimistic assumptions.
The current budget, for the fiscal year that began on July 1, allots $250 million for overtime.


For Hurdler, Big Strides to Success
In 1992, as a Georgia Tech senior and pre-race favorite, Derrick Adkins tripped and fell in the 400-meter hurdles at the N.C.A.A. championships.
In 1993, he fell at the Weltklasse Grand Prix meet in Zurich, Europe's premier event.
And last May, he fell at the New York Games in front of friends and family.
Now, as he prepares for the United States-Pan Africa meet in Durham, N.C., this weekend, Adkins stands tall at the pinnacle of international track and field.


Mistreatment Of Stowaways Investigated By Officials
Immigration officials said yesterday that they were examining allegations that six young stowaways from the Dominican Republic were beaten and subjected to forced labor last week after being discovered aboard an Estonian freighter bound for New York.
But an American agent for the Estonian Government, which owns the 420-foot freighter, the Narva, denied the allegations and said that the stowaways -- the third group this year on the same ship -- had been found ragged, gaunt and hungry on a 1,800-mile voyage from Santo Domingo and that the captain, after reporting their discovery to the authorities in Estonia, had followed instructions to treat them humanely.


St. Lawrence Cement reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


SPI Pharmaceuticals (SPI,A) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Rabin Makes First Visit to Jordan by an Israeli Leader
Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin, in the first official visit to Jordan by an Israeli leader, met King Hussein today in his seaside summer palace in Aqaba and opened a border crossing.
The meeting and ceremony, after years of secret contacts, come just two weeks after the Washington meeting between Mr.
Rabin and the Jordanian King, which ended the state of war between the two neighbors.
Phone links between Jordan and Israel were established on Sunday, and the King may visit Jerusalem as early as next week, according to Israeli officials.


Why End It? Mets Are Just Warming Up
Bobby Jones thought about the potential players' strike before he walked to the mound tonight in Veterans Stadium.
He thought about how this might be his last start of the season.
He thought about what he had already accomplished this season.
And he decided that he wanted to put an exclamation point on a pitching performance that had already exceeded so many people's expectations.
Jones did exactly that.
With yet another strong outing, Jones -- so often labeled a 10- or 11-victory pitcher -- defeated the Philadelphia Phillies, 3-2, to earn his 12th triumph of the season and keep alive the Mets' hopes of entering an Aug. 12 strike with a record better than .500.


Elek-Tek Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Adoption Judges Should Listen to the Children; No Such Syndrome
To the Editor:
I probably do not need to explain there is no evidence of "adopted-child syndrome," as a July 26 news article about the creative insanity defense of the accused serial killer Joel Rifkin does that and quotes experts.


CHRONICLE
Senator EDWARD M. KENNEDY handed out chocolate cigars in Boston yesterday morning, and when he arrived in his Washington office in the afternoon, his staff applauded him and greeted him with a banner reading "Congratulations, Grandpa."
The Senator's elder son, EDWARD M. KENNEDY JR., and his wife, Dr.
KATHERINE (KIKI) KENNEDY, have a daughter, who was born yesterday at Yale-New Haven Hospital.
The baby will be named KILEY ELIZABETH KENNEDY.


Correction
An Editorial Notebook on July 30 about the British playwright Dennis Potter's last interview erred in stating that it was produced for the BBC.
The interview was an initiative of Channel 4 Television in England.


Haircut
Like all high school seniors who are accepted by the colleges that head their lists, Shannon Faulkner surely celebrated on the day the happy letter arrived from the Citadel, a 151-year-old South Carolina military college.
The festivities, however, were premature.
When the Citadel found out that the exemplary student it had admitted to its all-male halls was Ms. and not Mr.
Shannon Faulkner, it rescinded her acceptance.
She sued, reasoning -- correctly -- that since the school had state funding, it had no right to discriminate against her as a female.


Metro-Richelieu reports earnings for Qtr to July 2


Sports of The Times; No Room For the Ruby Legs
I CLIMBED into a taxicab in Manhattan one day recently and told the driver, "Yankee Stadium."
He half-turned to me and in a foreign accent said, "Is that in New Jersey?"


Smith Corona Corp.(SCO,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Once Again, It's Rangel vs. Powell in Harlem
At the terminus of the No. 3 train at 149th Street in Harlem, three signs hang on a street lamp.
The first is a campaign poster for Representative Charles B. Rangel, emblazoned "Keep the Power." A few inches higher is another poster, of a darkly handsome, mustachioed young man, with the words "Change is Coming. Powell for Congress!"
And floating above them both is the official city street sign proclaiming that this is a corner of Adam Clayton Powell Jr.
Boulevard, named for the legendary preacher and Congressman who was first elected 50 years ago.
It is his youngest son who is shaking hands outside the subway this summer morning, campaigning for the seat that Mr.
Rangel wrested from his father by 150 votes in 1970.


Biblical Puzzle Solved: Jerusalem Tunnel Is A Product of Nature
UNDER the oldest part of Jerusalem, the area known as the City of David, a maze of tunnels and shafts runs through the rock and deep into biblical history.
In ancient times, the people inside the city walls depended on this system to deliver water from the ever-flowing Gihon Spring outside, insuring a dependable water supply in war and peace.
But nearly everything else about the old underground waterworks, especially its recorded role in two pivotal events in the history of ancient Israel, has left scholars shaking their heads in puzzlement.


Police Link 2-Boat Crash To Defects
Suffolk County authorities said today that mechanical failure was the likeliest cause of a collision between two boats on the Great South Bay on Sunday evening that left two people dead and another seriously injured.
It was the third fatal boating accident this summer in Long Island waters.
"It looks at this point as if it was an accident," said Sgt.
Vincent Ward, a spokesman for the Suffolk County police.
He added that authorities do not expect to file charges against the owner of the bigger boat, which the police say struck a smaller vessel just off Fire Island, killing two of the three people on the smaller boat and injuring the third.


Mercury General Corp.(MRCY,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Gossage Gets Save No. 310 At Age 43
Mariners 14, Rangers 4
He's the oldest active player in the majors and Goose Gossage intends to stay active.
His overpowering fastball now a memory, the 43-year-old reliever is still able to pitch effectively, as he did last night in Seattle's 14-4 victory over the Rangers.


High Intensity Lighting to Be Installed at Herald Square


A Wider Look for the New Jersey Turnpike


WorldCorp Inc.(WOA,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Canada Malting reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Doskocil Cos. (DOSK,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to July 2


Aquila Gas Pipeline Corp.(AQP,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


South Korea's Self-Inflicted Wound
For more than a month, South Korea has been waging a fierce campaign against student radicals and labor militants with methods that have no legitimate place in a democratic society.
Washington has muted its public criticism in deference to Seoul's anxieties over the North Korean nuclear program and the delicate succession to Kim Il Sung.
But a month has elapsed since his death, and the repression shows no sign of abating, posing a far graver threat to democracy than any subversive scheme hatched in Pyongyang.
South Korea's true friends need to speak up.
The crackdown began in June, amid a wave of labor unrest.
In the first phase, riot police swept through factories making mass arrests.
They also raided university campuses, arresting activist students for allegedly supporting North Korea.
That charge falls under Seoul's fearsome National Security Law, which allows long sentences merely for expressing proscribed opinions.


Adoption Judges Should Listen to the Children; What's Natural
To the Editor:
Justice James H. Heiple of the Illinois Supreme Court wrote that the "tragedy is the wrongful breakup of a natural family" in support of his decision to revoke the adoption of Baby Richard (front page, July 15).
By natural, I assume he means biological, a much more accurate term.
Obviously, profound "natural" ties are formed within adoptive families.
Justice Heiple maintains an astonishingly dismissive attitude regarding the negative impact of removing the child from his home.
Otakar Kirchner, the boy's biological father, believes that he has a closer tie to this child than do the parents who have been that child's whole world for three and a half years.
Of the parents, he says that they can "replace the kid." I gasped when I read this ("Gee, honey, let's exchange our 2-year-old and 5-year-old for two new boys!").
According to Mr.
Kirchner, "Your own kid is your own kid." The tragedy here is that this kid is being treated as property.
AMY CHALFY KELTZ  Larchmont, N.Y., July 28, 1994


Amtran Inc.(AMTR,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Productivity Of Workers Down 1.2%
In a sign that the current business expansion is reaching a mature phase, the Labor Department reported yesterday that the productivity of American workers fell at an annual rate of 1.2 percent during the second quarter -- the first decline in more than a year.
And, in a report economists said could lead the Government to revise downward its estimate of second-quarter growth in coming months, the Commerce Department said stockpiles of unsold wholesale goods fell four-tenths of 1 percent during June.


Court Ruling Delays Return Of Immigrant
A Federal District Court judge in Manhattan has rejected an immigration court ruling that denied asylum to a Chinese passenger of the freighter Golden Venture, adding a new legal tangle to Government efforts to expel him and fellow passengers from the country.
Although the ruling is not binding on other judges, lawyers said that the decision, announced yesterday, could affect more than 200 similar cases for Golden Venture passengers who are appealing their claims for political asylum.


The Lively Past of New York City's Sexual Mosaic
Gay New York
Gender, Urban Culture and the Making of the Gay Male World, 1890-1940
By George Chauncey
Illustrated. 478 pages. Basic Books. $25.
It was considered smart to go slumming in the New York of 1890.
Men and women of the better classes could tour, for a fee, the dance halls, saloons, opium dens and red-light venues of the city, watching or selectively mingling with showgirls, dancers and prostitutes, renegades of all races and sexes.


Top-Secret Spy Palace
The public has long been denied its right to know how much is being spent on intelligence activities and what the money is used for.
But there was solace at least in believing that Congressional oversight committees were exercising vigilance in secret briefings.
Now it turns out that even these overseers can be flimflammed by the spy chiefs and their deeply hidden, hard-to-follow "black budget."
Nothing brings home the cost of secrecy -- and the weakness of Congressional oversight -- more graphically than the exorbitant $350 million headquarters that the National Reconnaissance Office is building in northern Virginia.
In an unusually frank news conference on Monday, members of the Senate Intelligence Committee said they were shocked at the spiraling cost of the project.
They charged that the Pentagon and Central Intelligence Agency had concealed the truth from them.


Bill to Restrict China's Imports Loses in House
A last-minute lobbying campaign by President Clinton and his Cabinet succeeded tonight in heading off a potentially embarrassing vote by the House of Representatives to restrict trade with China as a way to punish Beijing for reported human rights violations.
The House defeated, 270 to 158, a proposal to impose steep tariffs on imports from factories owned by the Chinese military.
The original bill would have banned such imports.


Census Justice for Cities
After 14 years of frustrating litigation, New York and other major cities have won a major judicial ruling that holds out hope for correcting the Census Bureau's habitual miscounting of the nation's population.
The U.S.
Court of Appeals in New York held on Monday that the Bush Administration had failed to justify its refusal to adjust the skewed undercounting of minorities and ethnic groups that cheats cities of the political representation and economic benefits their true numbers deserve.
Almost certainly the Supreme Court will have to review this decision, a profoundly merited intrusion into the Federal Government's discretion in running the census.
If upheld, the ruling could shake up the decade's political maps for Congress and state legislatures and force state and Federal governments to rectify inequities in population-based distribution of benefits.


A Likely Eye-Opener: Frida Kahlo's Journal
Since Frida Kahlo's death 40 years ago, her private journal has been locked in a case in a bank in Mexico City, controlled by a tightly held private trust and seen only by a select few.
But now the journal -- 170 pages of musings, poetry, letters to Kahlo's husband, the great muralist Diego Rivera, and drawings and paintings that have never been exhibited -- is being offered in an auction, to American publishers.
For the many admirers of Kahlo, a Mexican painter known for her sometimes brutal self-portraits who was largely unrecognized in her lifetime, the diary presents a rich trove of new material about her art and life.
"The pictures are much freer than her paintings," said Hayden Herrera, the author of a 1983 biography of Kahlo, who was given rare permission to see the journal as she researched the book.
"This would be an eye-opener for people who think that Frida Kahlo is a rigid self-portraitist. It's the closest thing she ever did to Surrealism."


Donnelly Corp.(DON,A) reports earnings for Qtr to July 2


Woodstock of Legend Was a Legal Fest Too
To the Editor:
It is interesting to read the romanticized stories about the Woodstock festival that took place 25 years ago.


Elco Industries(ELCN,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Lawyers Call For Fairness For Simpson
After weeks of wrangling over evidence, prosecutors and lawyers for O. J. Simpson were in rare agreement today, telling a court that Mr.
Simpson's right to a fair trial could be compromised by the disclosure of crime-scene photographs and transcripts of meetings held in the privacy of a judge's chambers.
They were responding to a motion filed by news organizations that seeks access to such transcripts and to photographs of the bodies of the two people Mr.
Simpson is accused of killing: his former wife, Nicole Brown Simpson, and her friend Ronald L. Goldman.


Bookshop Fans Have a New Fourth Avenue
To the Editor:
"The Last Bookshop" (Topics of The Times, Aug. 1) laments the relocation of the Pageant Bookshop, symbolizing the fact that "Book Row has now gone" from Fourth Avenue.


In School; High school students build the foundations of a career while staying in school.
When President Clinton signed the School-to-Work Opportunities Act in May, no one had to draw a diagram for the National Academy Foundation.
The private nonprofit group has pioneered the linking of schools and corporations to prepare students for skilled jobs in growth industries.
In the last academic year, 6,500 high school students nationally participated in the foundation's three academies: 4,000 in finance, begun in 1982; 2,000 in travel and tourism, begun in 1986, and 500 in public service, begun in 1990.


To Bernstein, Music Meant More Than Politics; Damaged Lives
To the Editor:
Re "Files Detail Years of Spying on Bernstein" (front page, July 29): I too was "investigated" because of my civil rights sentiments and activities, though my dossier didn't reach 666 pages.


CHRONICLE
What do historians do on Saturday night?
ARTHUR M. SCHLESINGER JR. went with his wife, ALEXANDRA, to see the movie "Barcelona" on Saturday, and they were suddenly called outside with the news that their Upper East Side brownstone was on fire.
"My stepson, PETER ALLAN, was home and summoned the fire brigrade," Mr.
Schlesinger said yesterday.
"Then he came to get us out of the movies."


Food Notes
Studying Chinese
A conference on "Chinese Cuisine and the American Palate" will be held Sept. 22 through 24 at Queens College in Flushing.
It will explore some of the health aspects and lore of Chinese cuisine, regional Chinese cuisines, the evolution of Chinese restaurants in America, Chinese cooking in American homes and Chinese food as a business.
There will be cooking demonstrations and exhibits of food, equipment and cookbooks.
The keynote speaker will be the cookbook author Ken Hom.
A banquet will be held at 7 P.M. on Sept. 23.


U.S. Petroleum Data
In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
Aug. 5
July 29
Aug. 6
1994
1994
1993
Gasoline production, daily
7.1
7.2
7.3
Distillate production, daily
3.4
3.3
3.1
Gasoline stocks
210.6
210.8
209.2
Distillate stocks
130.2
129.3
120.9
Crude imports, daily
6.9
8.2
6.4
Product imports, daily
2.2
1.8
2.0
Crude stocks
324.8
327.6
353.1
Crude production, daily
6.5
6.5
6.7
Refinery utilization (%)
95.5
94.1
95.3
Source: American Petroleum Institute


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-9  U.S.
INACTION CONFUSES HAITIANS  Now that the United Nations has authorized an invasion, many Haitians are wondering why the United States does not act to oust their military leaders.
Economic shortages are acute, and anxiety is soaring as the people wait.
A1  DOUBT RUNS DEEP ON MEXICAN VOTE  Some polls indicate that the governing party candidate has a 20-point lead in Mexico's presidential race, scheduled for Aug. 21.
But almost no one believes the polls.
A3


Results Plus
BOXING  Holmes Wins, Talks of Quitting  The former world heavyweight champion Larry Holmes says he might have one more fight in him, hopefully against George Foreman, and then he plans to hang up the gloves for good at the end of the year.
"We don't have too much in this game left, I realize that," the 44-year-old Holmes said last night after winning a unanimous 10-round decision over Jesse Ferguson in Prior Lake, Minn.
"If I fight again, great. If I don't, so be it. I don't need boxing. I've already made my place in history." Holmes, who held the world title from 1978-85, improved to 61-4 in a career dating back to 1973. (AP) TRACK AND FIELD Spain Takes Top Two Spots  Spain notched its first double in European Championship history last night as Fermin Cacho and Isaac Viciosa finished 1-2 in the men's 1,500-meter final in Helsinki, Finland.
Cacho took the lead with about 250 meters left and won unchallenged in 3 minutes 35.27 seconds. (AP) TENNIS  Martinez Overcomes Raymond  Top-seeded Conchita Martinez of Spain overcame a second-set letdown to beat Lisa Raymond, 6-0, 3-6, 6-1, yesterday in the Virginia Slims of Los Angeles tournament. (AP) GOLF  And Off to the U.S.
Amateur  Jerry Courville Jr. of East Norwalk, Conn., shot rounds of 74 and 68 yesterday for a two-under-par 142 to earn one of five berths in the United States Association Amateur championship, which will be played Aug. 22-28 at the Tournament Players Club in Sawgrass, Fla.
Courville, 35, finished five strokes ahead of 21-year-old Greg Bisconti of Mount Vernon, N.Y., who shot 75-72 -- 147, and John Kiernan of Greenwich, Conn., who shot 74-73 -- 147 at the Fenway Country Club in Scarsdale, N.Y.
The other two spots went to Dave Muraskin (72-76 -- 148) of Scarsdale and Joe Plizzano (77-72 -- 149) of Stratford, Conn. (AP)


Market Place; Tough Choice in Offering by Icahn
The investors in a real estate partnership run by Carl C. Icahn are being presented with a choice reminiscent of the prisoners' dilemma studied by generations of philosophy students.
Mr.
Icahn announced plans yesterday to change the structure of the deal.
In so doing, he made it fairer to the thousands of small investors who own the partnership.
But at the same time, he has made their choice more difficult.
The prisoners' dilemma involves the choices faced by two criminals who have been arrested and are being questioned by the police separately.
If they both keep quiet, they may be freed, for the police case is weak.
If they both talk, each will get a long prison sentence.
But if only one talks, he will get a light sentence, while the other will go to jail for even longer than if both had talked.


National Sea Products reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Oceaneering Intl(OII,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


In Back-Country Connecticut, a Gospel Brunch
WHEN gospel music comes to mind, the suburban enclaves of Fairfield County aren't exactly part of the image.
Yet, the unmistakable surge of gospel resonates on Sunday afternoons on Long Ridge Road in Stamford, Conn., from a former roadhouse still known locally as the Olde Country Tavern, though the place was recently rechristened Restaurant Miche Mache.
With its exposed beams, wagon-wheel chandeliers and fieldstone fireplace, the restaurant still looks like an old country tavern, even though the weekday menu offers voguish delights like cilantro pesto and radicchio with melted gorgonzola.


Bard P. Rogers, 83, Volunteer; Widened Social-Service Boards
Bard Pendleton Rogers, who encouraged people served by social-service agencies to become involved in their leadership, died on Aug. 1 at his home on the East Side of Manhattan.
He was 83.
The cause of death was cardiac arrest, his family said.


Showboat Inc.(SBO,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Victor Pasche, Reporter and Union Organizer, 90
Victor Pasche, the first secretary-treasurer of the American Newspaper Guild, died on July 28 in Seattle.
He was 90.
Mr.
Pasche, who was a reporter for The New York Times from October 1929 until he took the full-time post with the newspaper union in 1934, served under Heywood Broun, the columnist who founded the union in 1933.
Mr.
Pasche was defeated for re-election on Oct. 15, 1941.


Stolen Geraniums And Other Crimes
CRIME you won't hear about on the evening news:
*
Fourteen geraniums were viciously plucked from a planter outside the Top Drawer Lingerie shop in East Hampton, L.I.


Herschel Halbert, Religious Leader, 78
The Rev.
Herschel Halbert, a founder of the World Conference on Religion and Peace, died on Aug. 2 at his home in Norwood, N.J.
He was 78.
He died of natural causes, his family said.
Mr.
Halbert was long active in promoting interreligious cooperation for peace, a cause for which he traveled across the country and around the world.
The campaign reached a new stage in 1970, when more than 300 religious and lay leaders met in Kyoto, Japan, to start the conference.
He played a role in strengthening the organization with the formation of 30 national chapters and affiliated religious bodies in 60 different countries.


Wine Talk
DO you find some wine advertisements intimidating?
Just long lists of unintelligible names in barely legible type?
Take heart because those laundry-list advertisements are not really meant for you.
Like Scholastic Aptitude Tests, they assume a certain knowledge on the part of the reader.
Wine drinkers in the know love those advertisements; they read them like stock tables, racing forms or real estate offerings, looking for winners others may have missed.
Here is a sample from one such advertisement published recently:


Security-Connecticut Corp.(SRC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


17 Garbage Haulers Charged in Bribes to Evade Dump Fees
Seventeen garbage-hauling companies were indicted yesterday on charges of paying nearly $2 million in bribes to New York City sanitation workers in exchange for avoiding the usual dumping fees at the Fresh Kills landfill on Staten Island.
The defendants were also charged with receiving millions in payments from the city for landfill cover that was ineffective or unapproved, the type of material that haulers are usually charged $40 a cubic yard to dump.


2 Suspects Are Shot In a Stolen-Car Case
Three Newark police officers suffered minor injuries and two suspects were shot early this morning in a confrontation between the officers and five men who were crowded into a stolen two-seat sports car, the police said.
The officers, in an unmarked car, came upon the stolen red Pontiac Fiero at about 12:30 A.M., said Detective Derek Glenn, a spokesman for the Newark police.


No Headline
"I see some of these signs that look like they've been around since Social Security, about socialism." HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON, on the battle over health care.  [ A16:1. ]


Talent Scout at Yearling Sale Seeks Derby Winner for '96
More than 260 of the finest yearlings went on sale tonight at the opening of the annual Saratoga auction, and Mike Ryan had scouting reports on all of them.
And if you were willing to write a check for maybe $250,000 to buy a young horse who might win the Kentucky Derby in 1996, you would probably hire Mike Ryan to call the shot.


Sanders Arrested in Cincinnati
DEION SANDERS spent the first few hours of his birthday in police custody yesterday, charged with two misdemeanors for an altercation with a guard at Riverfront Stadium.
The Cincinnati Reds outfielder was arrested after allegedly ignoring a police officer's warning and driving his motorcycle through a restricted gate after a game Monday night.
The officer allegedly was dragged 15 to 20 feet and suffered injuries to his hands, an ankle, wrist, shoulder and knee, the police said yesterday.
Sanders was arrested and charged with failing to provide a driver's license and resisting arrest.
The first-degree misdemeanors carry maximum sentences of six months in jail and a $1,000 fine.
JAMES KEYS, a lawyer for Sanders, entered written pleas of not guilty to both charges yesterday in Hamilton County Municipal Court in Cincinnati. (AP)


German Court Criticized for Its Treatment of a Holocaust Skeptic
A German court has come under criticism for suspending the one-year sentence of a veteran far-right leader convicted of publicly inciting racial hatred against the Jews.
The court said he probably would not do it again now that he knew it was against the law.
The far-right leader is Gunter A. Deckert, national chairman of the 5,000-member National Democratic Party.
He was found guilty in 1992 after organizing a meeting in Weinheim where he translated and embellished a speech by an American skeptic, Fred A. Leuchter Jr., casting doubt on the historical fact of the Holocaust.


New Whitewater Counsel Briefed by Predecessor
Kenneth W. Starr reported to work today for his first day as the independent counsel in the Whitewater investigation and met with his predecessor, Robert B. Fiske Jr.
As he had ever since his appointment on Friday by a special Federal court, Mr.
Starr declined to discuss anything about his plans, leaving many here and in Washington to wonder where the investigation was headed.


Minnesota Power &amp; Light Co.(MPL,N) reports earnings for 12mos to June 30


Experts in Data Storage to Merge
The Storage Technology Corporation and the Network Systems Corporation said today that they had agreed to merge in a stock swap valued at about $307 million.
Storage Technology produces large data storage systems, while Network Systems makes computer networking hardware and software.
The proposed deal paves the way for the production of huge automated data storage devices, using both tape and disk drives, which could be reached by many computers over a network.
Storage Technology, based in Louisville, Colo., and Network Systems, based in Minneapolis, have had joint development agreements covering such devices in the past, but the merger insures that these projects will go forward, analysts said.


Giants Bringing an Issue to Berlin
The Giants couldn't have asked for a better week, and so far the Giants' first trip to the American Bowl has gone off without a hitch.
They practice on luscious grass fields that would make any National Football League coach back home jealous.
The weather has been beautiful, and instead of the Manhattan skyline serving as a backdrop, there is historic Olympic Stadium, where Hitler once made raucous speeches before hundreds of thousands and Jesse Owens captured gold medals that made an even louder statement.
The players have been catered to, even adored, by the German people.
Everything is perfect.
What more could they ask for?
Well, maybe for this quarterback controversy to end.
In Berlin, the Germans may not know Kent Graham from Kent Schmidt, but the Giants are still in search of a quarterback, and that dominates what is going on here.
Actually, there is no longer a dispute as to who the quarterback will be: As long as Dave Brown doesn't throw 19 interceptions against the San Diego Chargers in the Giants' third exhibition game on Saturday, the job is his.
Period.


French Bind: Algerian Ties
For Algeria's besieged army-backed Government, France's arrest of 17 sympathizers of the Islamic Salvation Front after the killing of five French citizens in Algeria last week represented a rare expression of foreign support for its battle against Muslim fundamentalism.
But in clamping down on suspected Islamic militants operating among the large Muslim population here, France's conservative Government has assumed the risks of becoming drawn ever more deeply into a conflict over which it has little influence.


Metall Mining reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Lotus Bolsters Groupware With Intel Pact
The Lotus Development Corporation and the Intel Corporation said today that they had entered a joint development and marketing agreement for software and hardware used in computer data and video conferences.
The agreement calls for Lotus to develop products for its Lotus Notes software that would be based on Intel's Pro Share "personal conferencing" technology.


First Brands Corp.(FBR,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


All Campbell Has to Do Now Is Win Another Cup
Mark Messier attended.
So did Brian Leetch, Mike Richter and Sergei Zubov, sitting amid a flock of reporters and Ranger executives.
The Stanley Cup was there, too, a sparkling centerpiece near the buffet table, but even its gleam couldn't quite brighten the subdued mood at this noontime gathering in a windowless restaurant in Madison Square Garden.
"That's right," said Bob Gutkowski, president of the Garden, as he walked into the news conference and surveyed the silverware.
"We did win the Stanley Cup."


CBS and Letterman Give Snyder Official Welcome
CBS and David Letterman made it official yesterday: starting next December, at 12:35 A.M. on weeknights, immediately after "Late Show with David Letterman," will be "The Late, Late Show with Tom Snyder."
The selection of Mr.
Snyder, the talk-show veteran who had his biggest impact on late-night television in the 1970's on NBC, was made long ago.
But Mr.
Letterman and CBS confirmed Mr.
Snyder's selection last night, holding a news conference to introduce Mr.
Snyder formally as Mr.
Letterman's follow-up act.


Ultra-Secret Office Gets First Budget Scrutiny
An unprecedented investigation into the secret spending practices of the nation's most highly classified spy agency is under way, following the Senate Intelligence Committee's belated discovery that the agency was building a $350 million headquarters outside Washington without the panel's full knowledge.
On orders from the White House, the National Reconnaissance Office, which manages the nation's spy satellites, is being investigated by its two parent departments, the Central Intelligence Agency and the Pentagon.


Novacare Inc.(NOV,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Personal Health; Strength workouts can help keep aging at bay.
IN just 10 weeks of a strength-training program, 50 frail men and women in their 80's and 90's were able to increase their weight-lifting ability by 118 percent, their walking speed by 12 percent and their stair-climbing ability by 28 percent, according to a study published last month in The New England Journal of Medicine.
This study and previous work by the same researchers at Tufts University shows that strength training can help the elderly be more active and remain more independent.
Impressive though these accomplishments are in stemming some of the costly and debilitating incapacities of old age, they pale in comparison with what strength training can do for younger people who want to maintain or improve physical prowess even as their biological clocks keep ticking toward decline.


Crew Members of Derailed Train Were Sober, Investigators Say
The engineer of an Amtrak passenger train that derailed last week near Batavia, N.Y., was not under the influence of alcohol or drugs when the last nine cars of the train rocked off the tracks and plunged down an embankment, Federal investigators said yesterday.
The mystery surrounding the derailment grew murkier yesterday, as toxicology tests showed that the engineer, the conductor and three assistant conductors were all sober.
Moreover, an extensive mechanical inspection of a set of wheels believed to be the first to derail revealed no flaws that would explain the cause of the wreck, Federal officials said.


Anti-Cancer Role Hinted for Silicone
A SMALL but provocative study suggests that silicone-gel breast implants might help reduce the risk of breast cancer in women who have used them for more than a decade, a scientist said yesterday.
Dr.
Leo Garrido, a researcher at the Massachusetts General Hospital in Boston who explores the fate of silicone in breast implant recipients, stressed that the finding was extremely preliminary.
"It is premature to make any recommendations to women who are worried about their implants," Dr.
Garrido said.
"And it is impossible to say at this time how silicone might protect against cancer."


Aleve's Advertising Challenged in Suit
The American Home Products Corporation, which markets the over-the-counter pain reliever Advil through its Whitehall-Robins Healthcare subsidiary, said yesterday that it had filed suit in a Federal district court in New Jersey against the Procter &amp; Gamble Company and the Syntex Corporation for making what it called "unwarranted and unsubstantiated" claims in their advertisements for Aleve, a competitor to Advil introduced last month.
In the suit, American Home Products contends that the advertising and promotional campaign for Aleve falsely claims that Aleve offers longer-lasting pain relief than Advil and that there are times when Aleve will work and Advil will not.
The suit also contends that a recommendation by P.&amp; G. and Syntex that Aleve be taken less frequently than Advil means it cannot be safely taken as often as Advil, not that it lasts longer.


Nordstrom Inc.(NOBE,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt *
Federal Home Loan Bank is selling $101 million of debentures due in 1995 at 100 to yield 5.625 percent through CS First Boston.


INSIDE
Bosnian Army Gains Ground
The outgunned Bosnian Government Army is advancing on several critical fronts, including a northwestern area where a Serbian-backed businessman declared his own state.
Page A8.
Race Perplexes Mexico
Polls give Mexico's governing party candidate a solid lead in the Aug. 21 presidential race, but many people are skeptical, apparently reflecting a lack of faith in the system.
Page A3.
All the President's Lawyers
The favorite to succeed Lloyd Cutler as White House counsel is Abner Mikva, Chief Judge of the Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia, officials said.
Page A14.
Fatal Cuban Boat Hijacking
Cuba demanded the return of 27 people who landed in Florida after a boat hijacking in which a Cuban Navy lieutenant was killed.
Page A12.


DEBATE IS BEGUN ON MITCHELL PLAN FOR HEALTH CARE
Torn between its sense of history and its partisan imperatives, the Senate today began debating national health insurance, the last unfinished business of the New Deal.
Senator George J. Mitchell of Maine, the majority leader, said providing health insurance to all Americans was "a matter of simple justice." Speaking to a relatively large audience of senators, he said his goal was "guaranteed, private health insurance to provide high-quality health care for every American family."


Player Panic Rumors Discounted By Fehr
As baseball's players and club owners inched closer to a seemingly unstoppable work stoppage after tomorrow's games, ghosts of the 50-day players' strike of 1981 surfaced yesterday.
According to word emanating from some clubs, owners are saying they have been told that once the players strike, they will come back after missing their second paycheck.
That would be Sept. 15.


The Littlest Victims


To Bernstein, Music Meant More Than Politics
To the Editor:
Re your July 29 front-page article on newly released files detailing more than three decades of spying on Leonard Bernstein by the Federal Bureau of Investigation: Whatever else Leonard Bernstein may have been, he was not a Communist.
As professional administrator for the State Department's international cultural exchange program, I had the rewarding, and arduous, responsibilities of arranging and supervising the 1958 New York Philharmonic tour as the first event under a cultural exchange treaty with the Soviet Union.


Ethan Allen Interiors Inc.(ETH,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Rodent Killer Wants Vindication, Not Absolution


Bookshop Fans Have a New Fourth Avenue; Original Strand
To the Editor:
"The Last Bookshop" (Topics of The Times, Aug. 1) fails to account for the continued existence of one of the Fourth Avenue Booksellers Association's original members (1942), the Strand Book Store, which lost its lease in the spring of 1956 and, while forced to relocate from 81 Fourth Avenue, where it had been for the previous 15 years, continues to flourish at the northeast corner of Broadway and 12th Street.


Testimony Given at Retrial in 1978 Arson in Brooklyn
In a trial recalling deadly events of 16 years ago, a Brooklyn jury heard testimony yesterday that the defendant had confessed separately to three people that he helped set a 1978 supermarket fire that killed six firefighters.
The defendant, Eric Jackson-Knight, is being retried because his 1980 conviction on murder and arson charges was thrown out in 1988 by a judge who found serious misconduct by the prosecutors at the trial in 1980.
The judge ruled that the prosecution withheld information that could have helped the defense's argument that Mr.
Jackson-Knight was not involved in the fatal fire at a Waldbaum's in the Sheepshead Bay section of Brooklyn.


Yankees Lose Game As Abbott Loses Plate
Jim Abbott shook his head in disbelief before he gave the baseball to Buck Showalter and then walked to the dugout staring at his shoelaces.
There was a smattering of boos because Abbott had just walked in a run and turned a sticky game into a stickier game.
Paul Gibson replaced Abbott, pitched to one batter and earned more robust boos upon his departure because stickier became stickiest.
The Yankees trailed against the Orioles in the first inning and then came back to tie the game.
They trailed again in the third and rebounded for another tie.
After the Yankees finally stabbed the lead, the Orioles received a pleasant surprise as Abbott's control vanished, Gibson failed to retire one important left-handed hitter and they scored three runs to sneak in for a 6-5 victory.


Public &amp; Private; The Conscience Clause
On the long and winding road to health-care reform there has been an interesting and little-remarked cul de sac known familiarly as the conscience clause.
The clause raises interesting and troubling questions about the separation of church and state, the true universality of universal health care, and the ability of one religious group to affect the lives of many others who are not of the same faith.
The conscience clause would allow a hospital or doctor to refuse to provide any service on the basis of religious or moral objections.
One version also allows health plans and employers to exclude any services from the insurance they provide if they object to them on moral or religious grounds.
So while a national health-care plan might cover contraceptive services, Catholic hospitals, for example, could as a matter of Federal law be absolved from providing those services.
And they could refuse to offer insurance coverage that included those services for their employees, Catholic or not.


Douglas &amp; Lomason Co.(DOUG,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Accounts
*
Schering Corp., Kenilworth, N.J., to William Douglas McAdams Inc., New York, to introduce Cedax, an oral antibiotic.
Billings were not disclosed.


Not Just Another Brick in the Wall; Central Park Stoneworkers Revive Some Old Traditions
From the day it was finished in 1887, the man-made jewel that is Central Park began to fall apart.
Over the last decade, impressive work has been done to start reversing the damage.
But the crafts that produced some of the park's most distinctive features -- ornamental bridges and arches, stone walls and monumental terraces -- have faded in this mechanized era.


Doubts Raised on Number of Internet Users
Has the Internet been overhyped?
Even as cyberspace is being touted as the hippest place to congregate since the original Woodstock, some experts now contend that estimates of the number of people actively using the Internet web of computer networks may be grossly exaggerated.


Nigeria Finds a Hero
Nigeria's military rulers have backed themselves into a box.
They thought it a good idea to jail Moshood Abiola, the presumed winner of Nigeria's canceled presidential vote in June 1993, when he claimed the office two months ago.
Mr.
Abiola was charged with treason and held incommunicado.
But behind bars he has become a symbol known to more people around the world than is Gen.
Sani Abacha, the faceless soldier who currently presides over Nigeria's permanent Government caste.
After Mr.
Abiola was detained in Abuja, Nigeria's political capital, strikes and demonstrations paralyzed Lagos, the commercial capital.
In a clumsy attempt to foil the pro-democracy campaign, the military then offered to release Mr.
Abiola on condition that he not talk to the press or address political rallies.
When he refused, his defiance proved contagious.


Mets' Strike Motto: What, Us Worry?
Bobby Bonilla heard about the offer and had to smile.
After reading that Bonilla, the Mets' third baseman, would lose more than $31,000 in salary for every day of a baseball players' strike, a New York-area restaurant owner offered to pay Bonilla $12,000 a week to act as host at his business.
Just a little extra cash, he explained, in case Bonilla needed something to tide him over.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY 17 GARBAGE HAULERS CHARGED IN BRIBERY
Seventeen garbage-hauling companies were indicted on charges of paying nearly $2 million in bribes to city sanitation workers in exchange for avoiding the usual dumping fees at the Fresh Kills landfill on Staten Island.
B2.


Foote, Cone &amp; Belding Communications Inc.(FCB,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


The Swarm of Life Underneath New York
Tonight's "48 Hours" dig-in finds life in several varieties underneath New York City.
To begin, of course, there are the subways, seen from the point of view of Transit Authority employees at Grand Central Terminal.
Although their efforts are not always appreciated by the people who have to ride in a hole in the ground and know what it's like to get stuck there, Harold Dow's report invites sympathy for stalwarts in the control room who must grapple daily with exasperating acts of God, man and machinery.
You will also meet the garbage collectors and rat killers who try to keep the tracks clear, including a very likable man named P. C. Taylor, a soft touch for the subway's tenants who provide the garbage.
Susan Spencer visits a few of the 5,000 people who are said to reside down below, a couple of whom show off their television sets, stereos, dishwashers and other home comforts.
They seem to prefer the sunless security of the city's tunnels to the stress of its sidewalks.


Sports of The Times; Now Rangers Have a Duty To Amuse Us
IN the coming post-baseball era, we must all find ways to occupy our time.
Simple little things we never thought were important will suddenly loom monumental.
Take hockey, for example.
Normally, it is not possible to pay much attention to hockey until November, or maybe even April, when the Stanley Cup playoffs begin.
But this year, hockey will have a grave responsibility for amusing North America once the baseball players walk out tomorrow night.


Clinton Is Expected to Strengthen the Diplomatic Status of Taiwan
President Clinton is expected to approve a policy change in the next few weeks and raise the political standing of Taiwan, a step that is likely to anger Beijing.
Administration officials said the policy review is on the President's desk awaiting final choices on some options.
But in its overall thrust, the new policy will recognize Taiwan's growing economic power in Asia and elevate the status of its diplomats and business representatives.


Taylor Delivers View on Simms
Lawrence Taylor will always find time to speak up, particularly with regard to his good friend Phil Simms.
Here to take part in a series of promotions, he made his first comments about the Giants since they released Simms, citing his ailing shoulder and $2.25 million salary.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
7.25
7.25
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.50
3.50
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
4.19
4.30
2.96
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.41
4.43
3.02
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.91
4.93
3.16
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.30
7.28
5.80
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.57
7.53
6.44
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.36
8.29
7.17
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.41
6.38
5.67
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


F.C.C. Changes Mind: No Free Wireless Licenses Offered
The Federal Communications Commission ruled today that three companies that had won "pioneer's" licenses for new wireless telephone services would now have to pay for them.
The ruling will mean hundreds of millions of dollars of new costs for the three companies: American Personal Communications Inc., which is controlled by The Washington Post; Cox Enterprises of Atlanta, and Omnipoint Communications, a start-up business based in New York.


Mark VII Inc.(MVII,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to July 2


Clinton Is Said To Pick Judge As His Counsel
Abner J. Mikva, the chief judge of the Federal Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit here, has emerged as the probable successor to Lloyd N. Cutler as White House counsel, Administration officials said today.
The officials said Judge Mikva, who is 68 years old, had indicated he would be willing to accept the post, and said his appointment could be announced by the end of the week.


Midwest Grain Products Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Blue Charged With Battery
VIDA BLUE, a former major league pitcher, has been charged with battery and brandishing a firearm in a confrontation with two bicyclists near his Northern California home.
The incident occurred in April, but Blue was not charged with the misdemeanors until Monday.
Two students said Blue tried to stop them from riding along a ditch past his house in Twain Harte.
One cyclist, ALLAN ZUCKSWERT, claimed Blue called him a racially derogatory name, pointed a gun in the air and shoved him into the ditch.
However, Blue, who is black, said the cyclists yelled a racial slur at him.
Blue also denied brandishing his .380 semiautomatic handgun. (AP)


Bosnian Army Makes Gains On Key Fronts
Though its advances are relatively modest and may not endure, Bosnia's outgunned army has for the first time in more than two years pressed forward along key battlefronts across this war-ravaged country.
United Nations officials announced today that forces of the Muslim-led Bosnian Government were on the verge of winning their most significant victory of the war after routing the main body of a pro-Serbian Muslim militia.


Democratic Chief Being Forced Out By Party Turmoil
In another sign of Democratic disarray as the party enters a difficult electoral season, the national chairman, David Wilhelm, disclosed today that he would step down after the voting in November and that at the insistence of the White House he would play a limited role until then.
The change reflected a deep concern among President Clinton's advisers about his dwindling popularity with the voters.


TRANSACTIONS
Football  National Football League  ATLANTA FALCONS -- Signed Jim Ritcher, offensive lineman, to a one-year contract.
GREEN BAY PACKERS -- Waived Keombani Coleman, linebacker, and Eddie Blake, guard.
LOS ANGELES RAIDERS -- Announced the retirement of Warren Powers, defensive end.
MIAMI DOLPHINS -- Signed Keith Byars, fullback, to a two-year contract extension.
TAMPA BAY BUCCANEERS -- Signed Errict Rhett, running back, to a four-year contract.


Anxiety on Fed Makes A Rally Short-Lived
Prices of Treasury securities declined yesterday, amid continued uncertainty about the economy and the direction of interest rates set by the Federal Reserve.
The Treasury's quarterly auction, which many analysts thought might go poorly because of the threat of another increase in short-term interest rates, began yesterday with a slightly-better-than-expected sale of three-year notes.
Dealers and traders have worried that a rate increase during the quarterly refunding could leave them holding new notes and bonds that would be hard to sell.


U.S. Picks Up Cuban Group Near Florida
The Coast Guard today intercepted a group of 26 Cubans who Cuban diplomats said had hijacked a Government boat and killed a Cuban Navy lieutenant.
The Cuban officials demanded that the United States prosecute the hijackers or return them to Cuba.
The Coast Guard cutter Monhegan picked up the men, women and children 60 miles southwest of Key West, Fla., said Petty Officer Jeff Hall, a Coast Guard spokesman in Miami.


School Board Said to Misuse Consultants
An ethnomusicologist was hired by the New York City Board of Education to evaluate a math program.
A recent high school graduate, whose only work experience was in day care and air-conditioning maintenance, won a contract to write bureaucratic forms.
A third person got a $4,000 contract to write a "needs assessment," aimed at determining whether the board should hire a consultant or a full-time employee for a project.
After determining that the board should hire a consultant, he was awarded the $16,200 contract.


Now playing: sushi and De Niro.


Schultz Sav-O Stores Inc.(SAVO,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to July 16


Suncor Inc.(SU,A) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Study Says New York Lags In Seizing Criminals' Guns
The New York City police were less successful in seizing guns from criminals than many other police departments across the country in 1993, according to a study released yesterday.
Of 30 cities that responded to inquiries by Lawrence W. Sherman, a criminologist from the University of Maryland, New York ranked last or next to last in the number of guns seized in 1993 in proportion to the size of the police force, the population and the number of murders.


Main-Dish Salad Full Of Contrast
THE muse for this main-dish salad is Kinkead's Restaurant in Washington.
It is a simplified version, but nothing has been lost in the translation: the sweetness of the onions contrasts with the tartness of the tomatoes, the softness of the goat cheese with the crunch of the lentils.
And suffused throughout is the summery flavor of basil.
If you choose, complete the meal with some crusty country bread.
Lentil, Tomato  And Goat Cheese Salad
1 cup red lentils  1 pound red onion (about 1 very large)  1 large leek to yield 1/2 cup finely chopped  1 small bulb fennel to yield 1/2 cup finely chopped, reserving leftovers for future use  1 teaspoon olive oil  12 ounces ripe tomato (if possible one red and one yellow)  4 tablespoons balsamic vinegar  2 medium cloves garlic  1/8 teaspoon salt  Freshly ground black pepper  4 tablespoons reduced-fat goat cheese (4 slices about 1/8 inch thick)  2 large sprigs basil to yield 4 tablespoons chopped.
1.
Cook lentils in partially covered pot until they are tender but not mushy, 12 to 15 minutes.
2.
Slice onion into rings about 1/4-inch thick.
Prepare stove-top grill, and grill onion, turning once or twice.
3. Wash, trim and cut white part from leek; mince white part.
4. Wash, trim and chop fennel bulb.
5.
Heat olive oil in small nonstick skillet, and saute leek and fennel until fennel softens.
6.
Wash, trim and slice tomatoes into 1/4-inch thick slices, and place in bowl with 1 tablespoon of balsamic vinegar, mixing to coat well.
7. Mince garlic.
8.
When lentils are cooked, drain and rinse.
Stir in leek, fennel, garlic and remaining balsamic vinegar.
Season with salt and pepper.
9.
Slice cheese, and heat at 400 degrees in toaster oven for a couple of minutes, until it begins to bubble.
10. Wash, dry and chop basil; stir 2 tablespoons into lentils.
11.
Arrange lentil mixture on serving platter.
Top with tomatoes.
Place grilled onions in center, place cheese rounds on top of tomatoes, sprinkle with basil.
Yield: 2 servings.
Approximate nutritional analysis per serving: 690 calories, 6 grams fat, 4 milligrams cholesterol, 450 milligrams sodium, 35 grams protein, 125 grams carbohydrate.


Corrections
An article on Thursday about a political dispute that has stalled final passage of the Clinton Administration's comprehensive crime bill characterized the voting patterns of Republicans in the House incorrectly.
While Republicans often vote as a block to oppose key Democratic measures, they do not always do so.


Educational Insights
The share price of Educational Insights Inc. fell more than 20 percent to reach a record low yesterday after management of the specialty toy company predicted weakening sales for the third and fourth quarter.
The company, which is based in Dominguez Hills, Calif., develops and markets electronic learning aids and science kits.


U.S. Asks Bishops to Discuss Family Issues
Despite a disagreement over abortion, the United States has invited American Roman Catholic bishops to meet with Administration officials to explore other areas where they may be able to reconcile their positions before a United Nations population conference next month in Cairo.
The Administration seems determined to play down the abortion issue and to emphasize areas where Washington and the Vatican share goals, even as the church attacks proposals that the United States has supported as the Cairo conference approaches.


MCN Corp.(MCN,N) reports earnings for 12mos to June 30


Lam Research Corp.(LRCX,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Philip P. Hallie, 72, Professor and Writer
Philip P. Hallie, professor emeritus of philosophy and the humanities at Wesleyan University who wrote on the nature of cruelty, died on Sunday in Middlesex Hospital in Middletown, Conn.
He was 72 and lived in Middletown.
The cause was cardiac arrest, said Jill Grossman, a spokeswoman for Wesleyan.


10 Pacers for Wilson
In what continues to shape up as a strong harness season for the Allen family, CR Buddy Carl, owned and bred by the father-son team of trainer Carl Allen and his son, driver Rod Allen, drew the No. 1 post position yesterday for Saturday night's $774,750 Woodrow Wilson Pace for 2-year-olds at the Meadowlands.
The 10-horse Woodrow Wilson highlights a stakes-filled program on the final night of the Meadowlands's harness meet.
Also on the card is the $567,500 Sweetheart Pace for 2-year-old fillies and the $347,750 Mistletoe Shalee for 3-year-old filly pacers.


Pact in '94 Is Assad's Goal, U.S. Says
American diplomats said today that President Hafez al-Assad of Syria still hoped to sign a peace agreement with Israel by the end of this year, a goal that has also been set by President Clinton.
A senior Administration official traveling with Secretary of State Warren Christopher said Mr.
Assad had told the Secretary that he still wanted to meet the objective he announced in January of achieving peace with Israel this year -- a goal that many Middle East experts thought had slipped because of the talks' slow pace.


Jagr and Penguins Agree
JAROMIR JAGR, the Pittsburgh Penguins' top scorer last season, has agreed to a five-year contract with the team.
Terms weren't given.
However, the contract is believed to be worth nearly $20 million and to include a clause giving all Jagr's marketing rights to the Penguins.
Jagr, 22, had 32 goals and 67 assists in 1993-94 and his 99 points ranked ninth in the league. (AP)


Months After the Quake, Ghost Towns in the City of Angels
In one abandoned apartment after another along Hubbard Street in Sylmar, wall calendars are open to January, when normal life came to a halt.
Scavengers have picked through the rooms so thoroughly that there is almost no sign left of the lives that were lived here before the Jan. 17 earthquake.
Only a few mattresses and broken couches remain.
Air-conditioners, refrigerators, even door handles and wall thermostats, have been stripped away.


Bernadette by Another Name Would Simply Be Ralph
Terence Stamp's wistful blue eyes, so memorable for their look of martyred innocence in the 1962 screen version of "Billy Budd," will now be remembered in a distinctly different way.
Heavily mascaraed, peering out from beneath bright eyeshadow and behind a long, luxuriant Veronica Lake hairdo, Mr.
Stamp cuts a spectacular figure as a sardonic transsexual named Bernadette, part of a three-queen drag act on a bus tour through the wilds of Australia.
Even on his own, marvelously ladylike and loaded with sly, acerbic wisecracks, he's worth the price of admission.
And together, the trio of Bernadette, Mitzi (Hugo Weaving) and Felicia (Guy Pearce) is enough to shake the kookaburras right out of the trees.
Or to rattle the small-town mentality of the provinces, which is what Stephan Elliott's flamboyantly colorful new film is really about.
Taking its name from the tour bus on which this trio travels, "The Adventures of Priscilla, Queen of the Desert" presents a defiant culture clash in generous, warmly entertaining ways.
For all its glitter, this is the sort of film in which everyone becomes happier and nicer by the final reel.


Likely Effect of Ruling on Census: More Litigation
The Federal appeals court ruling on Monday that the Government had not justified its use of 1990 census data that undercounted blacks and members of other minority groups is but the latest step in a legal battle that will surely take many more years to resolve.
If the case is ultimately decided the way the appeals court ruled, the result could mean increased Federal aid for New York and other cities with large numbers of minority residents and perhaps even a reapportionment of Congress.


Corrections
The Personal Computers column in Science Times yesterday rendered two electronic mail addresses incorrectly.
To obtain a current list of Internet service providers, the address is: info-deli-server@netcom.com
The Internet Network Information Center address for information on the Internet is: info@is.internic.net
In addition, the 800 number for the center was discontinued on Monday.
The new information number is (619) 455-4600.


U.S. Lawmakers Agree On Bosnia Arms Measure
Senate and House lawmakers have agreed on a measure instructing the Clinton Administration to seek the lifting of the arms embargo against the Muslim-led Bosnian Government before the end of October if the Bosnian Serbs do not agree to a peace settlement.
If by then the Serbs had not agreed to the peace plan and if the United Nations Security Council failed to approve an exemption to the arms embargo, American military forces would be barred from enforcing the arms ban under the Congressional plan.


White House Seeks Settlement of Health Suit
The Clinton Administration urged a group of doctors today to agree to a swift settlement of their lawsuit seeking disclosure of the records and working papers of Hillary Rodham Clinton's Task Force on National Health Care Reform.
For more than a year, the White House has resisted disclosing the records.
But Administration officials said today that they wanted the lawsuit settled as soon as possible, in part to avoid the need for having Mrs.
Clinton and Ira C. Magaziner, a White House aide who coordinated the work of the task force, testify.


Invasion That Never Comes Has Many Haitians Skeptical
Haitians are asking foreigners here, especially Americans, many variations on a single question, now that the United Nations has authorized an American-led invasion of this country and economic sanctions are at last fully in place: What are you waiting for?
When are you coming?
Why aren't you already here?
The Haitian economy is in a shambles, with half the work force said to be unemployed.
A lack of electricity and gasoline has severely circumscribed all aspects of daily life, leaving most people at home with nothing to do.
Tempers are short and the anxiety level, already high, is rising as a result of the state of siege Haiti's military-dominated Government declared last week in response to the United Nations resolution.


Watts Industries(WATTA,NNM) reports earnings for Year to June 30


Venture Stores Inc.(VEN,N) reports earnings for Qtr to July 30


In a new men's fragrance, sensuality and social responsibility are important marketing ingredients.
TO create a successful fragrance nowadays, a perfumer may find that the images it blends into its marketing plan may be more important than the spices and flowers it blends into the scent.
As the Parfums Guy Laroche unit of Cosmair Inc. introduces Horizon for Men, a line of fragrance and grooming products, the advertising, which begins running tomorrow, will present a mix of sensuality, sensitivity and social responsibility to complement the brand's pleasant mix of aromas like grapefruit, wild geranium and cypress.


Off the Menu
Metropolitan Club Addition
Pierre Chambrin's cooking was too buttery -- and too French -- for the Clinton White House, but not for the members of the Metropolitan Club in New York City.
This venerable private club at 1 East 60th Street has hired Mr.
Chambrin, President George Bush's White House chef.
He started there on Monday.
"We felt it would be a great addition to the club," said James L. Nolletti, the general manager.
Mr.
Nolletti began looking for a chef when the previous one, Bruno Mella, took another job.
"Some people I know at the Woodmont Country Club in Rockville, Md., where Mr. Chambrin worked before he went to the White House, suggested I contact him, and they knew where to find him in France," Mr.
Nolletti added.
"Now we have one of the finest chefs around."


Book by Book, Library Goes Underground
Librarians and students at the University of California here are midway through one of the largest, and shortest, migrations in the history of the West, transferring 1.5 million volumes from the university's old main library to a new underground repository next door.
It amounts to rolling stock of 200,000 books a week, enough to fill four miles of the new site's 52 miles of shelves.


Maddux Not Bad But Mets Not Good
If there was a bright spot for the Mets in tonight's game, it was Mike Maddux.
This assessment came courtesy of Manager Dallas Green, who has not had more than, perhaps, 10 kind words to say about Maddux this season.
In other words, then, tonight's game was a nightmare for the Mets.


Excerpts From Opening Statements in Senate Health Care Debate
Following are excerpts from the opening statements of the debate on health care bills in the Senate today.
The statements by Senator George J. Mitchell of Maine, the Democratic majority leader, and Senator Bob Dole of Kansas, the Republican minority leader, were provided by Reuters and the Federal Information Systems Corporation, a private transcription service.
The texts of statements by Senators Edward M. Kennedy, Democrat of Massachusetts, and Nancy Landon Kassebaum, Republican of Kansas, were provided by their offices.
STATEMENT BY SENATOR MITCHELL
Madam President and members of the Senate, tonight we begin debate on health care reform legislation.
We will undertake no more important task in this Congress.
What we do will affect every American family.


Royal LePage reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Never Mind Flattery: Americans Win Big
It is as if there are two separate tournaments going on here, one for the silver medal and another for the gold, each uniquely competitive.
Though there are people here who are actually starting to believe that Croatia might stick with the United States should they meet in the World Basketball Championships on Sunday at the Skydome, it is far more likely that Dream Team II's greatest challenge will come from the ghost of Dream Team I.


Watchdog's Deal Raises Revenue and Eyebrows
They seem no different from the direct-mail solicitations that swamp the average householder, these circulars that have appeared in 600,000 New Jersey mailboxes from companies like Aristo Aluminum Siding of Lake Hopatcong, the East Coast Mortgage Company of Clark, King Oldsmobile of Verona and nearly 200 others in the state.
But these fliers arrived in Better Business Bureau of Northern New Jersey envelopes, accompanied by letters emblazoned with the bureau's trademarked "torch" logo.
And the nonprofit watchdog group was paid by the advertisers for the mailings.
Expanded Services
The New Jersey bureau, the first and so far the only one in the nation to engage in such a venture, is using the money to expand its services.
But consumer advocates and some other Better Business Bureau executives say the experiment presents a conflict of interest, because it promotes the very companies the bureau monitors.


Molex Inc.(MOLX,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Doubts on Internet
Some experts contend that far fewer people use the Internet web of computer networks than the 20 million to 30 million generally estimated.
But there is widespread agreement that the number of users is growing rapidly, perhaps doubling each year.
Business Day, page D1.


Rally's Hamburgers Inc.(RLLY,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to July 3


De Niro Shares Bill With a Sushi Chef
ROBERT DE NIRO'S latest production, Nobu, opened last night in TriBeCa -- with sashimi instead of a screenplay.
Nobu, the New York spinoff of the popular Matsuhisa in Beverly Hills, Calif., the highly personalized Japanese restaurant owned by Nobuyuki Matsuhisa, where Mr.
De Niro has long been a customer, is at 105 Hudson Street, near Franklin Street, just down the block from Mr.
De Niro's film company and his other New York restaurant, TriBeCa Grill.


Executive Changes
HUDSON GENERAL CORP.
Great Neck, L.I., named Fernando DiBenedetto senior vice president of operations.
INTEGRATED HEALTH SERVICES INC., Owings Mills, Md., named Lawrence P. Cirka president.


Reliance Electric Co.(REE,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Wynn's Intl(WN,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


In Wilder's Senate Bid, Winning Is Only One Goal
Ask L. Douglas Wilder to say something nice about his fellow Democrat and arch-rival, Senator Charles S. Robb, and Mr.
Wilder, the normally voluble former Virginia Governor, is stumped.
"Help me out," he implored, unable to conjure up even a gracious platitude.
"You put me to terrible stress."
He needed no prodding for bad things to say: "He lacks leadership. Lacks conviction. Lacks commitment. Lacks candor." That was the warm-up.
Mr.
Wilder then called Mr.
Robb a liar.
Yet he insisted that he held no grudge.
"The fact that he is not a friend of mine doesn't mean that I hate him," Mr.
Wilder said.
"I just don't have any feeling in that regard."


Lawyers Without A Cause
The law is where policy ideals confront political realities.
A basic test of any Administration is how it manages this encounter.
Led by a President who was trained at Yale Law School, taught constitutional law and claimed Camelot's Attorney General, Robert F. Kennedy, as a spiritual mentor, the Clinton team came into office confident that it would ace this test.
It seemed intent on rebuilding a national consensus about the direction that the law should take.
This summer, however, the sometimes paralyzing, even cynical, pragmatism that many have criticized in the Administration has shown up unmistakably in its handling of legal issues. (What's lost in the contretemps over Kenneth Starr's replacement of Robert Fiske in the Whitewater inquiry, for example, is that the whole affair probably could have been cut short if the Administration had come clean at the start.) In the balancing of policy and politics, there has been no contest.
The Yale-trained lawyer has been pushed aside by the office-holder from Arkansas who is intent on limiting his losses.


A Leap Into Another World


Don't Cut Syria Out of the Peace Talks
To the Editor:
Leon Wieseltier is so exasperated with Damascus that he counsels Washington to forget Syria for now in the Middle East peace process (Op-Ed, July 27).
With satirical eloquence, he portrays President Hafez al-Assad's only allies as Iranian mullahs and American diplomats.


Election Near, Mexicans Question the Questioners
With the approach of what is generally expected to be the most competitive presidential election in Mexican history, the great paradox of the campaign is this: according to most opinion polls, there isn't much of a race at all.
Some of the latest surveys give the candidate of the governing Institutional Revolutionary Party, Ernesto Zedillo Ponce de Leon, more than a 20-point lead over his closest rival, Diego Fernandez de Cevallos, of the right-of-center National Action Party.
One relatively reputable national poll gives Mr.
Zedillo a more modest advantage of 14 points.
Only one recent study, of widely challenged methodology, has shown an opposition candidate narrowly in the lead.


Whitewater Hearing Wisely Follows Rules
To the Editor:
"Censorship, Gonzalez Style" (editorial, July 28) fails to explain several points in your criticism of Henry B. Gonzalez, House Banking Committee chairman.
If he and the majority of his committee "bowed" to the independent counsel Robert Fiske in limiting the committee's Whitewater hearings to only those matters already investigated by Mr.
Fiske, there was good reason for doing so.


Arava Journal; On the Road to Peace, a Gate Is Thrown Open
As the first sunburned visitors straggled toward his small trailer, lugging bulky backpacks and vinyl bags, the Jordanian border official placed a stack of free postcards on the shelf in front of him.
He also set out a collection of maps of Aqaba.
"Here they come," said the official, Nidal Ali Mohammed.
"I hope my English will be O.K. It is much better to be invaded by tourists than soldiers."


Brainy Self-Absorption As a Revolution Begins
"Breaking the Silence," Stephen Poliakoff's 1984 drama about a wool-gathering Russian aristocrat doing his best to ignore the Bolshevik Revolution, would seem to be an inspired choice for a summer repertory troupe.
It has a single setting, a small cast and a theme that hums with topical resonance in a time when record numbers of people are fleeing their homelands.
Yet the fact remains that Mr.
Poliakoff's play, which felt labored even in its original London production 10 years ago, isn't what you would call actor-friendly, particularly when actors have only the limited amount of rehearsal time afforded by summer theaters.
Lacking the animating spleen of Mr.
Poliakoff's better-known diatribes against a spiritually impoverished England, it is a slow-moving, exposition-heavy work built around stiff social archetypes.


Central Reserve Life (CRLC,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


To Live And Die In Harlem
WOE to those who live in this patch of Harlem and are prone to dreams about the dead.
On these streets, no one mistakes gunfire for a backfiring car, and the fatalities are among the young.
Children collect black T-shirts with the photographs of the dead, which they wear to funerals, as if they were baseball cards.
Lynda Gray, director of the Harlem Branch of the Y.W.C.A., missed Donald Bonaparte's funeral on Saturday, but he haunts her thoughts.
He was 21.
Someone shot him in the head and dumped his body out of a moving car.
His hands were folded and he looked peaceful in his white coffin, but his father wept bitterly inside the musty, low-ceilinged funeral home.


Getting Better at Protecting Children
For too many New York City children in abusive homes, being rescued by the government is a mixed blessing.
The city's Child Welfare Administration, the agency that is supposed to protect abused or neglected children, is as troubled as many of the families it is charged to help.
Mayor Rudolph Giuliani has announced that Kathryn Croft, a Columbia University administrator who has also managed a social services agency, will assume responsibility for the agency later this month.
She will need significant help from City Hall and a commitment to fundamental change if she is to prevent children from being victimized twice.


Down and Not at All Far From Out
"Zombie and the Ghost Train" was shown as part of the 29th New York Film Festival.
Following are excerpts from Janet Maslin's review, which appeared in The New York Times on Oct. 4, 1991.
The film opens today at the Joseph Papp Public Theater, 425 Lafayette Street, East Village.
Zombie (Silu Seppala), the central figure in Mika Kaurismaki's "Zombie and the Ghost Train," really looks the part.
With his pasty skin, dark-ringed eyes and matted black hair, he seems to have joined the ranks of the living dead, and so Mr.
Kaurismaki does what he can to explain how Zombie got that way.


U.S. Official to Shift Funds Toward Basic AIDS Research
The Federal coordinator of AIDS research in the United States said today that he would trim spending on clinical trials of potential new drugs to provide more money for the "revitalization and expansion" of basic research on AIDS.
In a speech and at a news conference at the tenth International Conference on AIDS, the official, Dr.
William E. Paul, said the money could be found by making the drug-testing efforts more efficient.


A Broader 'Boris' And Offstage Conflicts At Salzburg Festival
One thing a great arts festival should not do, Gerard Mortier said the other day, is provide entertainment: "It should not be 'nice.' "
This might seem odd coming from the artistic director of the Salzburg Festival, the most expensive, extensive and prestigious arts festival in the world, but Mr.
Mortier is still making news because he never lets anything be taken too lightly, either on the stage or off.
While many music institutions are obsessed with demographics, image and income, his ambitions, he said, are to deal with matters like good and evil, power and corruption, love and hatred, the "great myths" as well as the "great problems of our time."


COMPANY BRIEFS
MOTOROLA INC., Schaumburg, Ill., announced that its cellular communications unit had received a $30 million contract to expand the Pilipino Telephone Corporation's cellular phone network in the Philippines.


Dillard Department Stores Inc.(DDS,N) reports earnings for Qtr to July 30


Cornelia Cameron; Peat Expert Was 83
Cornelia C. Cameron, a geologist and leading expert on peat who worked for the United States Geological Survey for more than 40 years, died on Friday at her home in Winchester, Va.
She was 83.
She had colon cancer but the cause of death was not immediately available, the geological survey said.
Dr.
Cameron had worked until a few weeks before her death.


Metropolitan Diary
DEAR DIARY:
Another in this summer's succession of sweltering days.
An errand took me from the Upper West Side to Fifth Avenue in the lower 20's.
By the time I emerged from the subway I was dripping wet.
Oh, how I longed for cool air.
That's when I spotted the B.F.O. (Buyers' Fashion Outlet) store.
Ah! the solution to my perspiration!
I planned my strategy.
I would duck into the store and browse among ties; B.F.O.'s selection is usually good and I would cool off in the bargain.


Lawmakers' Bills Get Tough on Sex Offenders
Sex offenders would have to prove that they have been rehabilitated or spend the rest of their lives in prison under a provision in a legislative package to be introduced in the New Jersey Legislature later this month, leaders of both houses said today.
And Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman today signed three related bills that would toughen penalties for preying on children, for criminal trespassing at schools and for luring children into buildings or isolated areas.


Rolland Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Vigoro Corp.(VGR,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Senecas Ponder Novel Deal On Tax-Free Tobacco Sales
Prodded by the United States Supreme Court, officials of New York State and the Seneca Indian Nation are discussing a novel solution to a costly bootlegging problem involving sales of tax-free cigarettes and gasoline at reservation stores.
The deal would establish the tribe as the only wholesaler allowed to supply a lucrative chain of reservation stores.
In return, tribal officials would help the state for the first time by using their sovereignty to close down wildcat Indian dealers involved in bootlegging.


Iced Tea, Hold the Pitcher
THE dark, steamy flood of espresso that gushed into snowbound New York City last winter has been followed, in this most tropical of summers, by a torrent of iced tea.
Corner groceries now carry bottled and canned iced teas in every shape, color and flavor.
To front-porch purists who believe iced tea needs no more than lemon and sugar, some of the zany new combinations seem farcical at best.
Strawberry iced tea?
Cranberry iced tea?


AGRICULTURE CHIEF MAY FACE INQUIRY ON BUSINESS GIFTS
Attorney General Janet Reno said today that she had asked a panel of Federal appeals court judges to appoint an independent counsel to investigate whether Agriculture Secretary Mike Espy illegally accepted travel, lodging, entertainment and other gifts from the country's largest poultry producer.
In an application to the special three-judge panel on Monday, Ms.
Reno said an initial inquiry showed that further investigation was warranted into Mr.
Espy's association with Tyson Foods Inc., the Arkansas-based agricultural empire, and other companies with business before the Agriculture Department.


Willcox &amp; Gibbs (WG,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


BUSINESS DIGEST
Business Technology
Some experts say that far fewer people use the Internet web of computer networks than the 20 million to 30 million estimated.
Indeed, that may be 10 times too high, even though cyberspace is touted as the hippest place since the original Woodstock.  [ Page D1. ]
The F.C.C. ruled that companies awarded pioneer's licenses for new wireless telephone services will have to pay for them.
The costs will run into the hundreds of millions of dollars for American Personal Communications, which is controlled by The Washington Post; Cox Enterprises, and Omnipoint Communications.  [ D2. ]


Corrections
An article in some editions yesterday about a Federal appeals court's ruling that the Government failed to justify a 1990 Census that undercounted black and Hispanic residents reversed the positions of two of the appellate judges.
Judge Pierre N. Leval concurred with the ruling, which was written by Judge Amalya L. Kearse; Judge William H. Timbers dissented.


CHRONICLE
Dr.
BOB ARNOT, a medical correspondent for CBS News, rescued a young Rwandan boy while covering the refugee crisis in Zaire and caught cholera in the process.
En route to a refugee camp about three weeks ago, Dr.
Arnot and his television crew spotted a boy, about 5 or 6, lying on the road.
"The sound man thought his chest moved, so I felt his pulse, which was very rapid," he said.


Rat's Tale, the Sequel: Prosecutor Backs Off
Frank Balun lived a quiet life except for a stint as a B-25 gunner in World War II -- until the day last month when he trapped and killed the rat that was the prime suspect in raiding his little tomato patch here.
For that crime, he was told, he could be sent to jail for six months and fined up to $1,250.


Connors Misses Flair
Love him or leave him, most tennis fans would agree that JIMMY CONNORS had a certain flair on the tennis court.
Connors, approaching his 42d birthday on Sept. 2, not only agrees with that, but he doesn't particularly like what he sees on the current men's pro tour.
"They all play the same, act the same and even talk pretty much the same," Connors said this week while preparing for the $150,000 CitiBank Champions tournament for players 35 and over which begins today at the Westchester Country Club in Rye.
"There's a certain sameness out there and something better happen soon." Connors is top-seeded and the headliner of the new, 11-tournament Champions Tour.


Man Indicted In '74 Slaying Of Psychologist
A man who surrendered in March and confessed to killing four women in the 1970's was indicted here today in one of the slayings, that of his psychologist in her Yonkers apartment.
The suspect, Ricardo S. Caputo, 45, who was born in Argentina, disappeared after the Yonkers slaying.
Although a warrant was issued for his arrest, he had never been indicted.


Thomas Fulton, Opera Conductor, 44
Thomas Fulton, a conductor at the Metropolitan Opera, died on Thursday in Milan, Italy, where he was vacationing.
He was 44 and lived in New York City.
The cause was kidney failure, said his brother, Charles.


In Campaign to Curb Bad Student Loans, U.S. Warns of Audits, and Colleges Protest
Eager to show that it is trying to stanch a $2 billion annual drain in bad student loans, the Department of Education warned 2,000 colleges and universities last week that their finances since 1988 would be reviewed and their Federal financing would be in jeopardy if they do not get their records in order.
But there are problems: the review boards are not in place, the Government's list of possible transgressions is vague, and in many cases administrators were not on campus to receive the warning letters anyway.


Life Re Corp.(LRE,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


P.G.A. Winner: Norman, Maybe
It's a risky business trying to pick a winner from a field of 151 players in a golf tournament, a task made chancier still when the tournament is the P.G.A.
Championship.
The P.G.A., the year's final major, which begins Thursday at Southern Hills Country Club, has lately had more surprises than "The Crying Game."
In each of the past six years, the P.G.A. has been won by a player who had never before won a major championship.
Does anyone think for a minute that the 1988 winner, Jeff Sluman, appeared on anyone's list of favorites?
Or 1990 winner Wayne Grady?
Or 1991 winner John Daly?
Hardly.


Thomas Skelton, Lighting Designer, Is Dead at 66
Thomas R. Skelton, a lighting designer who won praise for his work in both dance and theater, died yesterday at his home in Akron, Ohio.
He was 66.
The cause was lung cancer, said Mickey Rolfe, his agent and friend.


Police Commanders Get Word From On High -- and From On Screen


WENDY'S INTERNATIONAL (WEN,N)
Wendy's International Inc. said yesterday that its second-quarter earnings rose 22 percent, spurred by record systemwide sales.
The fast-food restaurant chain, based in Dublin, Ohio, reported second-quarter net income of $33.3 million, or 32 cents a share, a record, and up from $27.4 million, or 27 cents, in the corresponding period last year.


Corrections
A headline yesterday about a new spy satellite headquarters referred incorrectly in some editions to the agency that is to occupy the building.
It is the National Reconnaissance Office, the nation's most secret intelligence agency, not the Central Intelligence Agency.


Rwanda Refugee Clinic Tries to Fend Off Death
The collectors of dead bodies ran up the hill to the Red Cross clinic with a bundle wrapped in the threads of a blue gingham dress they had found along the road.
They had noticed faint breathing and instead of putting the bundle, a girl, on the truck for burial they carried her here.
A few minutes later she was on the ground in the tent with the most serious cases, two doctors kneeling over her, a nurse at her side.


M/I Schottenstein Homes Inc.(MHO,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Prison Term For Abusing Katie Beers
Salvatore Inghilleri was sentenced today to 4 to 12 years in prison for sexually abusing Katie Beers, the little girl who gained national attention when she was kidnapped in 1992 and held captive in an underground bunker for 16 days.
Katie, now 11, was raised in large part by Mr.
Inghilleri, a former cab driver, and his wife, Linda, who is Katie's godmother.


GEORGIA-PACIFIC EXPECTS PULP AND PAPER PROFIT
The Georgia-Pacific Corporation expects to see a profit in its pulp and paper business in the third quarter -- the first for that division in two years -- the company's chairman and chief executive, A. D. Correll, said yesterday.


Trying to Grow Up, at Least Most of the Time
In "Authority Song," John Mellencamp tells a preacher, "Growing up leads to growing old and then to dying/And dying to me don't sound like all that much fun." But he recorded that song 11 years ago, and found himself growing up anyway.
He is now 42, and he has long been trying to reconcile the rowdy young rocker with the disillusioned adult.
At the Jones Beach Theater here on Monday night, he started with a twist: a drumbeat and a babble of band members' voices that turned into "When Jesus Left Birmingham." The music was clean-lined and static, with its bass line frozen in place.
Mr.
Mellencamp kept the same approach for a radically rearranged version of his late-1970's hit "I Need a Lover," and the title song of his new album, "Dance Naked" (Mercury/Polygram).


Dollar General Corp.(DOLR,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Banner Aerospace Inc.(BAR,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Accounting Firm Settles Federal Auditing Charges
KPMG Peat Marwick, one of the Big Six accounting firms, said yesterday that it had agreed to pay $186.5 million to settle Federal charges that it failed to audit a number of failed and distressed banks and savings institutions properly.
The settlement, one of several won by Government agencies seeking restitution from professional firms in the wake of the scandals that decimated the savings and loan industry in the 1980's, resolves all pending and future Federal litigation against KPMG in the matter.


Cadigan Puts Jets on the Hold Button
An offensive guard named Dave will rejoin the Jets on Wednesday.
No, not Dave Cadigan, a starter the last three seasons, but now unemployed.
Instead, it will be Dave Ware, a second-year pro who walked out of their training camp here Monday and seemed ready to quit pro football.
Tonight, he concluded that he really wanted to keep playing.


Corrections
A picture caption yesterday about trombonists in a Classical Jazz concert at Lincoln Center reversed the order of the musicians shown.
From the left, they were Ronald Westray, Slide Hampton, Al Grey and Wycliffe Gordon.


Polygraph Detected Lies by Ames, F.B.I. Finds
The Federal Bureau of Investigation has concluded that polygraph tests administered by the Central Intelligence Agency in 1986 and 1991 to Aldrich H. Ames, the C.I.A. officer who was then spying for Moscow, detected deception in two of his answers, the chairman of the House Intelligence Committee said today.
The results of the tests, administered routinely by the C.I.A.'s Office of Security to officers who hold sensitive posts, have been reviewed by the F.B.I. in recent months as part of the bureau's continuing inquiry into the case of Mr.
Ames, who was arrested in February and has since pleaded guilty of espionage.


To Bernstein, Music Meant More Than Politics; The Peltier Case
To the Editor:
The American Civil Liberties Union's exposure of more than 30 years of effort by the Federal Bureau of Investigation to pin the label "Communist" on Leonard Bernstein (front page, July 29) hardly makes up for A.C.L.U. silence and indifference to a far greater F.B.I. outrage.


A Plea for the Crime Bill


Hitchcock First Strike Victim: Farmed to AAA
The Yankees made their first public concession to believing that there will be a players' strike Friday when they optioned a promising pitcher, Sterling Hitchcock, to Class AAA Columbus after last night's game.
General Manager Gene Michael said the team wanted to keep Hitchcock on schedule to start a game Saturday, so they gambled slightly and sent him down.
"I don't know that there's going to be a strike, but we're taking a chance," said Michael.
"I don't know if we're assuming anything. We just want to get him down there and pitch. We know if he might miss one turn if there is a quick settlement."


In America; Punishing the Victims
There is a raging epidemic of medical incompetence and malpractice in this country, but as the national debate over health care intensifies, the most powerful elements of the health-care industry are engaged in a cruel campaign to limit the legal rights of malpractice victims.
Lobbyists for doctors, hospitals, the insurance industry and others claim that they are fighting on behalf of malpractice "reform," but that is not so.
True reform would be an effort to prevent malpractice.
This so-called reform effort is geared solely toward preventing victims (or their survivors) from collecting the damages they deserve for the dreadful injuries they have suffered.


Assailants Abduct an Infant, Then Release Her Hours Later
After tying up three people and cleaning out the cash register, four armed assailants yesterday grabbed a 2-month-old girl from her mother, a clerk in a Brooklyn telephone center that the police said was a haven for drug dealing.
The baby, Helenandea Salcedo, was found eight hours later at Woodhull Medical and Mental Health Center.
The police said she had been left in a stairwell and was discovered by a guard on his regular rounds.


Don't Cut Syria Out of the Peace Talks; Security for Israel
To the Editor:
While the peace process will go forward without Syria, Leon Wieseltier incorrectly states that "Syria is powerless" before the pro-peace process alliance (Op-Ed, July 27).


Hillary Clinton Finds Critics 'Ranting,' Especially Gramm
Hillary Rodham Clinton today assailed Senator Phil Gramm of Texas and other conservatives who accuse the Democrats of promoting "socialized medicine" in their health care proposals.
In a wide-ranging interview with reporters, Mrs.
Clinton suggested that such criticisms were motivated more by political opportunism than actual beliefs.
She said lawmakers like Mr.
Gramm ought to be asked where they stand on Medicare and Social Security, two popular domestic programs that in their time were also criticized by conservatives as exercises in socialism.


Reinsurance Group of America Inc.(RGA,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


CHRONICLE
What do historians do on Saturday night?
ARTHUR M. SCHLESINGER JR. went with his wife, ALEXANDRA, to see the movie "Barcelona" on Saturday, and they were suddenly called outside with the news that their Upper East Side brownstone was on fire.
"My stepson, PETER ALLAN, was home and summoned the fire brigrade," Mr.
Schlesinger said yesterday.
"Then he came to get us out of the movies."


Phycor Inc.(PHYC,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Breaking the Cycle of Schizophrenia
SHE was 31, the mother of two young children, when she began to hear voices telling her that she was on a "holy mission" and had to sacrifice her children by killing them.
The voices stopped only after she was hospitalized for schizophrenia and given antipsychotic medication.
But after she returned home, she stopped taking her medication, saying she no longer felt sick.
The delusions and voices soon returned, and she was readmitted to the hospital.


LIMITED INC. (LTD,N)
The long-awaited turnaround in Limited Inc.'s core business failed to materialize in the second quarter.
Depressed by slipping sales in its two main women's apparel chains, Limited and Express, the retailer's earnings plummeted 21 percent in the quarter that ended July 30.
Sales in its women's apparel stores open at least one year dropped 13 percent during the quarter, and operating profit in those stores declined 19 percent, analysts said.


AT LUNCH WITH: Fran Lebowitz; Words Are Easy, Books Are Not
IT'S lunchtime at Michael's on West 55th Street, just a manuscript's throw away from the offices of the William Morris Agency and International Creative Management.
Michael's is as Los Angeles as Manhattan gets.
Airy and spare as a piece of virgin white writing paper, it is, along with 44 at the Royalton and the Grill Room of the Four Seasons, a place where publishing pooh-bahs and celebrity authors carry on, pretending not to notice who else is around.
Click.
The notoriously noticeable Fran Lebowitz, looking the essence of cool in white shirt and vest, blazer and jeans, lights a cigarette.
It's about her fifth, and she hasn't ordered lunch yet.
With pink hands that are surprisingly tiny for someone so adept at smacking society around, she holds her Marlboro Light and inhales in a way that has the I-dare-you-even-to-raise-an-eyebrow quality of an artist, rock star or teen-ager.


Hostile Bid At Cyanamid Moves Ahead
Pressing ahead with its $8.5 billion offer to buy the American Cyanamid Company, the American Home Products Corporation said yesterday that its board had formally authorized the payment of $95 for each of the 90 million American Cyanamid shares outstanding.
Although some analysts still expect a higher bid that would value American Cyanamid at $10 billion to $11 billion, no other suitors have yet declared an interest.


National Convenience Stores Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Why Baseball Faces Strike: A Primer on the Salary Cap
In baseball, the players' union hates the very thought of it.
In football, the union embraces it lovingly.


Gulf Canada Resources Ltd.(GOU,A) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Lotus Development
Shares of the Lotus Development Corporation soared yesterday after the company said on Tuesday that it and the Intel Corporation had agreed to pool their efforts to develop software to permit groups of users to collaborate simultaneously on the same computer document.


Some Yankee Players Ponder Question of Values
The fans' perception of the impending baseball strike troubles some Yankee players.
It's forcing them to refrain from mixing public opinion and strike-related issues
"It's tough, but you have to separate the two," said first baseman Don Mattingly.


Market Place; A Foreign Offering's Unsure Pedigree
Peddling a Chinese power company to American investors would appear to be a classic no-brainer.
China, currently one of the world's fastest-growing economies, is badly in need of more electricity; its total output of 181 million kilowatts is already 20 percent less than overall demand, which is expected to grow by a whopping 17 million kilowatts a year until the turn of the century.
Why, then, are American depository receipts for shares of Shandong Huaneng Power Development Company Ltd., which operates three power stations in China's second-fastest-growing province, selling for below their offering price since they began trading on the New York Stock Exchange last week?


Part of the Job


Elron Electronic Industries Ltd. (ELRNF,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


For One Rwandan Family, Hope Tempers Fear
Not long ago Samuel Ntawiniga and his family lived in a three-bedroom house in Kigali, with a television and a videocassette recorder and modern appliances in the kitchen.
Mr.
Ntawiniga had a good job: he was a senior financial officer in the American Embassy, where he had worked for eight years.


If You're Planning a Visit . . .
Delegates to the National Democratic Convention spent more time getting there than discussing the future of Mexico.
The trek from San Cristobal, the nearest large town, to Guadalupe Tepeyac, the village nearest the jungle convention site, began at 5 A.M.
Sunday when delegates, observers and reporters gathered to board buses.
But the 170 buses did not arrive for four hours, and the caravan finally left at 10 o'clock, breezing through military checkpoints and past knots of cheering peasants.


Pat Quinn Turns Over Coaching Duties
The president and general manager of the Vancouver Canucks, PAT QUINN, stepped down as coach of the team yesterday, turning the job over to his chief aide, RICK LEY.
The announcement did not come as a surprise.
In June, after the Rangers defeated the Canucks in Game 7 of the Stanley Cup final, Quinn said he intended to quit coaching.
Around the same time, Ley, an assistant coach for the last three years, said he would be head coach somewhere in hockey this season, even if it meant leaving Vancouver.


Intergroup Healthcare Corp.(IGHC,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Excerpts From Senators' Speeches on the Mitchell Health Care Plan
Following are excerpts from statements made yesterday on the Senate floor in the second day of debate over the health care bill, as transcribed by The New York Times from a broadcast on C-Span.
STATEMENT BY SENATOR ROCKEFELLER
We're all here to confront problems, not to pretend that they don't exist.
We're all here to represent the people of our states as part of the same union, bound together as a nation.
And now we have reached this moment when we confront a problem called health care in America.
In our wake are years and years of speeches about the crisis of rising health care costs and diminishing health care coverage.
. . .
We've reached out in terms of making alliances not mandatory but voluntary; we've stretched out the time line.
If there is ever to be a mandate, it will never happen until the next century, and only then under certain circumstances, only if the Congress doesn't follow the orders of the commission.
We have reached out.
But . . . this does have to be a two-way process.
We cannot constantly be reaching out and out and more and more, and then nothing comes back.
So it's very hard to reach agreement that way.
So here we are with our years of speeches about this crisis.
This debate begins after, as you go over the years, I would say virtually thousands of hearings here in Congress, certainly tens of thousands of hearings.
There've been public meetings at our homes and visits that all of us have had with people of our states, hundreds of reports, hundreds of studies and commissions, mountains.
They fill cabinets in everyone's offices and in distant chambers somewhere in this complex, telling us some of the grim facts about health care in America.
Emphasis on Realism
We have to be realistic.
The Senator from Minnesota spoke about the fact that we let the market work.
That's one of the compromises that Senator Mitchell has made in his bill, is to give more time for the market to work.
But I have to point out to my friends on the other side that the Department of Labor has recently indicated that workers who are insured, who have insurance through their jobs, that their number dropped from 66 percent to 61 percent over the last 10 years, and that the trend is downward under the voluntary system.
That means, Mr.
President, that 5.5 million more working insured Americans are now uninsured.
The market system works in different sectors in different ways.
Does it work perfectly in health care?
I'm afraid not.
At some point we have to draw on everything that we have learned from the experts, from our own constituents and from our own souls, and decide on the actual steps that will solve as much of the problem as we possibly can this year.
With the health care plan submitted by the majority leader, we now have that opportunity.
This is a bill that tries to achieve the major goals of health care reform in ways that will work and that we can afford and that are fair.
The majority leader can only offer the rest of us the opportunity to act; he has no powers further than that.
Then it's up to us.
. . .
If too many senators treat this debate upcoming as only a chance to score points one against the other, one party against the other, their win is the American people's loss.
If too many senators also stay stuck on the idea that we should hold off one more time, until next month or next year or the next election, their delay dashes the hopes of millions of Americans, many in my state, that are now thinking maybe, just maybe, something will soon happen here to help them with their health care nightmares.
STATEMENT BY SENATOR KERREY
The question before us is whether or not we have the capacity to bridge the differences between Republicans and Democrats and pass a bill that is urgently needed by the people, urgently needed.
. . .
There truly are people in America watching now, hoping that this debate gets interesting, and hoping that the debate, as a consequence of getting interesting, leads to a finished product, the enactment of legislation.
The question before us is, Can we bridge the differences? . . .
It is true that we are dealing with a seventh of the U.S. economy.
It is true that we are dealing with something that's life and death for the American people, and so we need to give it our full and serious consideration.
We're prepared to do that.
Demand for Care
Many of us, indeed I would say most of us, have spent a great deal of time studying this issue, a great deal of time at home looking at the problems that are there.
It is, as the President said, bankrupting this country.
There will be a $38 billion increase from last year to this year just in Federal spending for health care -- $38 billion. . . .
It is a tremendous amount of money, and the President of the U.S., when he started this thing, said it's bankrupting America, and it is bankrupting businesses and, increasingly, it's bankrupting families.
Why?
Well, in part we're demanding expensive health care.
Not very many of us walk in and say, "Could you give me the cheapest thing you've got."
. . .
We've gone from a point in 1950 where 80 percent of the bills were paid with cash; today, 80 percent is either socialized through the Government or it's socialized through insurance.
Eighty percent have our health care bills paid for by someone else.
And it's a consequence that most of us don't even know what the price is.
And most of us in this body need to be reminded that, for tens of millions of Americans, even having a baby can be a financial catastrophe.
Mr.
President, it costs $12,000 to have a baby in this city.
Imagine that, $12,000.
That's two-day normal vaginal delivery.
Now the insurance companies only pay for a day.
Two-day normal delivery, $12,000.
Mr.
President, my babies were born 19 and 17 years ago, and I paid cash.
I didn't have to be insured 20 years ago.
Why?
Because having a baby wasn't a financial catastrophe if you weren't insured.
We have driven increased demand into the system.
In order to provide coverage for individuals, in order to reach out and help individuals pay the bills, we've driven increased demand into the system.
The price goes up, the requirement for increased subsidies occurs as a consequence.
. . .
There are tens of millions of Americans out there who do not have the capacity to pay the bills, who are forced to ingratiate themselves, to remain on welfare before they are told that they're eligible.
All of us feel that there's a problem in America.
We can see the gaps and differentials that separate Republicans and Democrats, and my sincere hope and prayer is that the momentum that seems to have stopped, that seems to have caused lots of us to say, "Well, I'm not sure we're going to get a bill" ----
I hope that we are able in a quiet moment to acquire the humility necessary to see that the American people are counting on us to set aside our differences and enact legislation this year.
It is urgently needed.
And we ought to do the best we can and get a bill to the President of the United States so that he can sign it on behalf of millions of Americans who are hoping and praying that we are able to get the job done.
STATEMENT BY SENATOR DOMENICI
I want to talk a little bit about health care reform and the Federal budget.
Now, why would I do that?
Because essentially, whether we like it or not, we are going to be voting on legislation that has a big effect on our children and grandchildren in terms of the budget of the United States, whether we are still in enormous deficit position, whether we are still unable to pay our bills as a nation.
And thus, in a very real sense, the effect on the Federal budget of this plan -- and any major plan -- is of extreme importance, and we ought to try our best up front to understand.
It not so easy because we are sending new things to those who make the estimates all the time.
Evidence of that today when every section in this bill has been changed, and yet we had some estimated costs in here the day before yesterday. . . .
So we must be careful not to saddle our young people and to burden future generations with today's health care costs.
. . .
There is no more compelling case for controlling health care costs than their current and projected impact on the Federal budget.
Indeed, one of the most critical issues facing the country is continued growth of open-ended mandatory spending in the Federal budget.
That is, you create a situation where a citizen is entitled as a matter of law to benefits and if you don't pay them, they can enforce it in a court of law.
That's the definition of an entitlement.
And this is led today by Medicare and Medicaid and the resulting growth in budget deficits. . . .
New Entitlements
These new entitlements will bring millions of Americans onto the Federal Government's subsidy program, and let me give you the best estimates I can there.
An estimated 100 million Americans will be eligible for Senator Mitchell's premium subsidies alone, not counting the long-term care, which is a new program with new beneficiaries, and other entitlements in this bill.
I am not counting them; I am only counting the recipients of subsidies in whole or in part from insurance premiums.
And what's most alarming to me is the growth rate of these new entitlement programs.
According to the Congressional Budget Office, the new premium subsidy program will grow over 10 percent a year even after it is phased in.
So if we thought we had things under control and we're getting them there with new health care reform admittedly, right up front the Congressional Budget Office warns us that these subsidy programs will grow at a rate of 10 percent a year even after they are phased in.
The Medicare drug benefit, a brand new one, grows at 10.5 percent a year even after phased in.
The long-term-care program grows 44 percent a year, according to the Congressional Budget Office once it's in full effect.
So I don't think there can be any mistake about it: The Mitchell-Clinton bill, under the guise of health care reform, will create several new open-ended, runaway entitlement programs.
STATEMENT BY SENATOR CHAFEE
I want to say I'm delighted we're moving into this health reform legislation this week.
It's very complicated, but I think it's time for us to do the best we can do struggle for constructive changes that are going to help our citizens lead healthier lives. . . .
No American's going to remain untouched.
It's going to affect how we're born, how we live, how we die.
And this is far-reaching.
I think I just saw in the paper a note of a little child born in Pawtucket, Diana Rebello, Pawtucket, R.I., born on Sunday night, Aug. 7, in Women and Infants Hospital in Providence.
Think of her life and what it means.
And then I think of Theresa Nigrelli of Westerly -- 100 years old, still stringing pearls every day at Nigrelli Jewelers.
And she doesn't even need glasses.
So we think of her, too.
And the financial aspects of this are mind-boggling.
They've been touched on before, but I'd like to repeat: one-seventh of our economy in the United States of America is devoted to health care, one-fifth of the Federal budget.
Of the five biggest items in the Federal budget -- Social Security, defense, interest on the debt, Medicare and Medicaid -- it's the last two that are going right off the chart, Medicare and Medicaid.
Defense, banging along, going down.
Social Security, fairly stable.
Interest on the debt going up but not such a substantial amount.
But it's the last two that are causing us our principal problem.
Now, the 1,410-page bill before us was only released a couple of days ago, and as I understand -- I'm not sure it's accurate -- I understand that changes are still being made to it.
So it's up to us during this debate to air thoroughly for the American people what's in this proposed legislation and to insure that our actions don't make the situation any worse.
Clearly we don't want to go backwards.
. . .
Now we all know from study and vast experience and listening to witnesses much that's right and much that's wrong with our health care system.
And we acknowledge that in many respects it's exemplary: in technology and innovation, the skill of our professionals and the range of choices.
But we also know there are several things that demand reform.
And it seems to me very important to keep in mind, What are we trying to do?
What's the endgame here?
Goal of Security
And I think our objectives are three:
First, we must give Americans health security.
We want to insure to hard-working people like Christopher North of North Smithfield, R.I., that he doesn't live in fear of losing his coverage.
He, his wife and two sons were covered by his wife's policy through her employer.
She lost her job.
They applied for a new policy.
They were turned down.
Why?
Because their son had a pre-existing condition.
Minor though it might have been, it was enough for the insurance company to turn him down and thus their family's insurance down. . . .
But what about job lock?
In other words, staying in a job you want to leave but you can't because if you go to the new place you won't be able to get insurance.
Donald Bolster, Bristol, R.I., 13 years with Blue Cross.
His wife suffers now from Parkinson's.
No other insurance people, plan, will take them on because of a pre-existing condition.
They can't shop for insurance coverage.
They can't get an alternative plan.
They don't have portability.
They can't move to another job.
That's what's known as job lock.
Covering the Uninsured
The second objective: We must extend health insurance to those -- as many as we can -- who are not now covered.
We want to make sure that the first group can keep their insurance; the second group we want to extend it to them.
We know the statistics: 15 percent of Americans, 37 million Americans, at any one time without health insurance.
In my state, it's 92,000 of our citizens -- 15,000 of them are, regrettably, children.
Can't get, or don't have, health insurance.
Now who are these uninsured?
Many people have the impression that the uninsured are the poor or the elderly.
That's no so. . . .
The very poor have Medicaid; the elderly have Medicare.
Ironically, in our system, single-parent families are better-off in terms of health insurance than two-parent families.
Single parent families are frequently on Medicaid.
But two-family parents aren't.
One of them's working and works for a company that doesn't provide it; the other, the wife, is at home or she's working in a firm where they don't provide the insurance likewise.
Earn too much to qualify for Medicaid.
The vast majority of people without health insurance live in families in which the head of household is employed for at least some portion of the year.
These aren't people who are the unemployed -- never getting a job.
They're employed for at least some portion of the year.
In my state, 76 percent of the uninsured are in families in which the head of household works full time; 85 percent have incomes above the poverty level.
Now we all know it's very costly for society when individuals like these don't have health insurance.
They're the ones that go into the emergency rooms of hospitals for treatments, for procedures that the hospital emergency room is not the right place.
It's far too expensive for these individuals to be.
Or else they don't go anywhere.
And then the child or the individual, the parent, comes down with a devastating illness, that in the end costs our society far more.
Controlling Costs
Now the third objective is to do something about controlling costs.
Cost containment is the buzzword that's used.
The cost of health care in our society is getting tremendously expensive for the individual, for the companies, for states -- particularly through Medicaid -- and for our Federal Government.
In the United States as a whole we spend 14 percent of our gross domestic product on health care, more than any other industrial nation.
The Federal Government spends 19 percent of its budget, nearly 20 percent, nearly one-fifth of all our expenditures on health care.
And that's projected to go up to 25 percent by the end of the century.
And local and state governments, particularly through the cost of Medicaid for state government, spend about 15 percent.
Now the country just cannot sustain these costs.
You talk about what it's doing to businesses.
The statistic is well known that there's a greater cost for health care involved in every automobile that's built by Chrysler and Ford, General Motors, more for health care than there is for the steel in the automobile.
Twice as much we spend for health care in the United States per automobile worker per car than is spent in Japan.
. . .
There should be a minimal level of Government intervention.
Let's not replicate Medicare, which has been fine for the beneficiaries but a disaster in terms of cost containment.
That's the ultimate of the micromanagement program.
It's cumbersome; it's top-heavy with regulation.
It produces a 12 percent annual growth in costs, which is more than double what the private sector's going up in.
. . .
Now it seems to be we can begin to debate in earnest, taking up the bill produced by the distinguished majority leader, Senator Mitchell.
He's worked hard to fuse the two bills in the Finance Committee and the Labor and Human Resources, which is a herculean effort.
And I think we're indebted to Senator Mitchell for the effort he's made.
Seeking a Consensus
Now there are a number of provisions in this that cause me great concern.
And the Senator from Massachusetts says, Well, Dick, list them.
But just don't attack the measure.
Tell us specifically what you're talking about. . . .
Maybe I'm misunderstanding.
Maybe I don't read the legislation right.
Maybe it's changed in the subsequent rewrite.
I don't know.
But the President and Senator Mitchell and others have indicated they're willing to give voluntary market solutions a try before imposing Government controls.
In this bill in many areas in my judgment, that voluntary market solution effort has not been given the chance it deserves.
. . .
The Mitchell bill, but for the employer mandate, appears to reflect few of the principles that those of us in the mainstream have: those of us erring on the side of less government intervention, more marketplace competition and effective cost containment. . . .
Does it mean we can't unite?
I believe we can unite.
Does it make sense for us to try for a bipartisan measure that keeps in mind the two objectives we all say we're for?
I think if you ask people out here what are they for, they'd all say two things: We want to increase the number of Americans who have health insurance with our goal of eventually covering everyone.
Everybody would agree with that, I think, very few not.
And secondly, our objective is to get costs lower for individuals for companies for state governments and for the Federal Government.
Cost containment.
Nearly all of us pay tribute to the effectiveness of the marketplace.
We all seem to subscribe to the notion of competition.
There'd be very few people get up on the floor of this Senate and say, "I don't believe in competition. I don't believe in the effectiveness of the marketplace."
We subscribe to the notion of competition, those of us in the mainstream.
We're for the most part extremely skeptical of government intervention.
So why can't we unite behind a bill that incorporates those beliefs? . . . 'What an Opportunity'
I and all the other members of the mainstream group want to see good health care reform enacted this year.
We'll do all we can to be helpful.
We believe it's extremely important to have a bill with broad support.
What am I talking about? 75 or 80 votes in favor.
That's not an impossibility.
Rather than a measure that sneaks through, 51 or 52.
Time is getting short, but there still remains time to produce a product that will be of great benefit to millions of Americans.
What an opportunity! What a wonderful opportunity!
So let's not let it slip through our grasp.


Two for the Money as Jets Return to Camp
The two showed up at Jets training camp today: one returning, perhaps reluctantly, after leaving the team because he thought football was dominating his life, the other desperately hoping to play after yet another serious knee injury.
The contrast between David Ware and Eric Thomas was dramatic.
Ware is a 24-year-old offensive lineman who majored in drama at the University of Virginia who talks to teen-agers about the role of sports in society, and who spent the off season lifting weights, studying karate and running hard.


Serb vs. Serb, Belgrade vs. Bosnia: Two Men Battle Over Peace
The two most prominent Serbian leaders are involved in a confrontation so intense that it may result in a fall from power for one of them.
When the president of Serbia, Slobodan Milosevic, announced last week that he was ending all political and economic support for his Serbian allies in Bosnia, he effectively severed his ties with the Bosnian Serb leader, Radovan Karadzic.


Astros' Bagwell, Major Leagues' R.B.I. Leader, Suffers Broken Hand
Astros 3, Padres 1
Jeff Bagwell broke a bone in his left hand last night but Steve Finley homered and Darryl Kile pitched six strong innings to help Houston defeat San Diego, 3-1, last night at the Astrodome.
The Astros moved to a half-game back of the Reds in the National League Central race with both teams playing again today in the final day's action before the threatened strike.
Bagwell, the major league r.b.i. leader with 116, was removed in the fifth inning after being hit on the left hand by a pitch from Andy Benes in the third inning.
He was taken to a hospital for X-rays, which revealed a fracture in the fourth metacarpal of his left hand.
Bagwell's hand was placed in a splint, and he is expected to need three to five weeks to recover.


Now It's Official: Brown Is No. 1
Even at about $18 a minute, it will be more than worth it for Dave Brown to call his mom in New Jersey and tell her he is the new quarterback of the New York Giants.
He makes $1 million a year -- he can afford it.
It just might be a quick conversation.
"Mom, dad, I did it. Click," Brown joked.
Of course, mom might want a little more information than that.
And now he has done it.
One day after Coach Dan Reeves said that if Brown played well this weekend against the San Diego Chargers here the job was probably Brown's, Reeves today officially declared the former Duke University star the winner of the hyped quarterback duel with Kent Graham.


2 Bills in Congress Backed By Association of Retirees
The American Association of Retired Persons today urged its 33 million members to support the health care bills offered by the Democratic leaders of Congress, Representative Richard A. Gephardt and Senator George J. Mitchell, but did not express a preference for one bill over the other.
The association's action, coupled with its promise to lobby and advertise for the legislation, was a big boost for the Gephardt and Mitchell bills -- and for President Clinton, who has endorsed them.


Bridge
The freak hand shown in the diagram helped Bert Polii of Indonesia and George Soo of the Philippines, sitting East and West, to win the Open Pair Championship at the Far East Championships, in Wellington, New Zealand, in May.
They could have surprised North considerably by bidding and making six hearts, but as it turned out they did much better.
Soo passed as dealer with his 10-card suit, a tactic that is sometimes successful and was here.
He followed by jumping to four hearts, and North doubled.
South did well to retreat, since four hearts doubled would have been worth 790, but he did not realize that he had reached the par contract with four spades.
That was headed for a two-trick defeat, and he should have passed when doubled: his partner knew that the four-spade bid must be based on a four-card suit, and he could retreat if he saw fit.


Big Firms Gain Bond Work Set For Minorities
In recent years, many Government agencies have decreed that some of the bondsthat they issue must be sold by minority-owned brokerage firms.
As a result, about 300 such firms have been established, and they have taken a healthy share of the $2 billion in fees paid annually to brokers for selling public securities.
Now, Wall Street firms, among them Merrill Lynch and Bear Stearns, and regional brokerages are finding ways to capture some of this business for themselves.
They are buying stakes in minority-owned firms, enabling them to profit from these set-aside programs too.


TNT Freightways Corp.(TNTF,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to July 2


With End in Sight, Key and Yanks Take a Beating
There was a strange and surreal feeling in the crowded Yankee clubhouse before last night's game.
Was someone moving?
Did someone get traded?
Boxes were piled throughout the room, and players acted as if yesterday was the second-to-last day of the season.
The feeling persisted as the going, going, gone Yankees ambled on the field for what could be their final night game this season.
Was that really Jimmy Key?
Or was someone else wearing his uniform?
Hits and runs were piling up for the Baltimore Orioles, and Key wasn't performing like the reliable ace of the New York staff.


LSB Industries Inc.(LSB,A) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Herman Goldfarb; Theatrical Lawyer, 85
Herman Goldfarb, a theatrical lawyer and artists' manager, died on Monday at the Royal Manor Nursing Home in West Palm Beach, Fla.
He was 85.
The cause was congestive heart failure, his family said.


Fake history casts a spell on ticky tacky. House Proud, Page C10.


Novo Nordisk (NVO,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


A Republican Challenger Heads Uphill, Using the Moderate Lane
When he was a junior at Hobart College, Richard M. Rosenbaum fondly recalls, he defeated a heavily favored adversary to claim the school's heavyweight boxing title.
The story, filled with dramatic descriptions of body punches and knock downs, has become more than glory-days banter for Mr.
Rosenbaum.
It is a motivational parable about tenacity, the trait he values most as he battles for the Republican nomination for governor.


People
*
James W. McEwen, associate publisher and advertising director at Family Circle magazine, New York, was promoted to senior vice president and publisher, succeeding Wenda Harris Millard, who left to become president and group publisher at SRDS Inc., New York. *
Susan Gold was named to the new position of senior vice president of advertising and marketing at Weider Publications Inc., New York.
She was previously vice president and advertising director at Us magazine, New York.


INSIDE
Starr Outlines Inquiry
The new Whitewater prosecutor said he would retain many of his predecessor's staff lawyers but hinted at revisiting his findings.
Page B10.
Rabin and Arafat Meet
Israel's Prime Minister met the P.L.O. chairman in Gaza and pledged to expand self-rule.
Page A11.
U.N.
Warns Bosnian Muslims
The United Nations warned the Bosnian Army, that it, too, could face a NATO air raid in Sarajevo.
Page A10.
A Rwandan Family's Odyssey
Longing to go home, a Rwandan recounts his family's arduous journey from a comfortable house in the capital to a grim refugee camp.
Page A3.


Cable TV Ad Bureau Chooses a President
Joseph W. Ostrow, executive vice president and worldwide media director at Foote, Cone &amp; Belding in New York, said yesterday that he would leave the agency after seven years to become president and chief executive of the Cabletelevision Advertising Bureau in New York.
"It's time for a change," Mr.
Ostrow said, adding, "For me, cable is where the action is."


The Pop Life
On-Line Tickets
For concertgoers in the New York area who want to buy advance tickets to shows, there may be a new alternative to Ticketmaster.
For two weeks, Sonicnet, a New York City-based on-line computer service, has been offering tickets to two Ticketmaster-affiliated clubs, Irving Plaza and the Knitting Factory, at face value, with no service charge.
Sonicnet's 500-plus subscribers pay $10 a month for many services, including this opportunity to purchase and receive concert tickets via their home computers.
Sonicnet is in the process of negotiating similar deals with two larger Ticketmaster-affiliated clubs, the Academy and Roseland, said Tim Nye, who runs the service.


Grand Central Inferno
To the Editor:
To those of us who commute daily through New York's Grand Central Terminal, it did not come as a surprise that former Mayor John V. Lindsay collapsed from the heat (news article, July 29).
During the summer months, afternoon temperatures on some tracks approach 120 degrees (most lower level track temperatures exceed 100 degrees).


Kin Feuding Over Girl Hurt in Father's Suicide
As a critically injured Belarussian girl lies sedated in Bellevue Hospital Center, her feuding mother and grandmother are each on their way to claim her, setting the battleground for a tangled custody dispute.
Lidiya Kitayev's paternal grandmother is to arrive this afternoon at Kennedy International Airport.
Her mother is to arrive tomorrow.
Both claim parental rights to raise the girl who fell four stories in her father's suicide leap from a homeless shelter in Manhattan last week.


Columbia Gas System Inc.(CG,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Please, Not Another Word in Praise of (Ugh!) Sleepaway Camp
To the Editor:
I am still relieved, 38 years later, not to be away at Indian Head Camp in the Poconos.
Unlike Frank Rich's sentimental view of his camp memories (column, July 24) and unlike the exhibition at the Jewish Museum in New York, I hated the five summers my parents made me and my brother (who says he loved camp) board the bus for the trip from our house in West Hempstead, L.I., to the bucolic acres of purgatory on the lake.


Ignore Bid, Cyanamid Advises
Setting the stage for a proxy battle, the American Cyanamid Company urged shareholders yesterday to ignore a $95-a-share takeover bid from the American Home Products Corporation until American Cyanamid's board takes a formal stand on the hostile offer.
Under rules of the Securities and Exchange Commission, the board must respond by Aug. 24, or 10 business days from yesterday, whenAmerican Home Products sent the offer to shareholders of American Cyanamid.


World of Opportunities For Tirelessly Retired
ORMAN W. KETCHAM put on a wig, stuck two enormous "beaver" teeth between his lips, went out on stage and danced his version of the Charleston.
His recent performance was as much a surprise to him as it was to the audience, many of whom summed it up with their favorite word -- awesome.
Mr.
Ketcham, 75, is a retired judge of the Juvenile and Superior courts of the District of Columbia.
The audience in the big rustic cabin on the scenic shore of Lake Vanare in upstate New York consisted of 82 critically ill and severely handicapped children between ages 6 and 16.
They were spending eight days at the Double "H" Hole in the Woods Ranch, founded last year by Paul Newman, the actor, and Charles R. Wood, a philanthropist, in Lake Luzerne, N.Y.


Short-Term Treasury Issues Rise
Prices of short-term Treasury securities rose yesterday, while the long bond remained unchanged, as investors turned their attention to the final leg of the Government's quarterly refinancing.
The market also braced for a batch of important economic data, which many analysts suspect will be magnified because it is coming ahead of the meeting on Tuesday of the Federal Open Market Committee, the Federal Reserve's policy-making body, which will decide when another increase in interest rates will come.


Inland Region of Brazil Grows Like Few Others
Inside a factory complex that sprawls over nearly a square mile here, assembly lines are running three shifts a day, propelling Fiat Automoveis S.A. past Ford and General Motors to rank as Brazil's second-largest car maker.
Smaller only than Volkswagen, Fiat presents the flashy face of a lesser-known region of Brazil that is quietly enjoying the highest industrial growth rate in South America.


C-Mac Industries reports earnings for Qtr to July 2


POP
Richie Havens on Woodstock And the Changing Times Since  Alice Tully Hall
Among those performers who appeared at the Woodstock Music and Art Fair in 1969, none have traded more tirelessly on the cachet of having appeared at that tribal gathering than the folk-rock singer Richie Havens.
And appearing with five backup musicians on Tuesday evening, the singer, who wore a white ceremonial robe during the first half of the concert, acted like a countercultural soothsayer caught in a time warp.


Claire's Stores Inc.(CLE,N) reports earnings for Qtr to July 30


From Kitchens to Bedrooms, Lighting Designers to the Rescue
MOST homeowners have little difficulty choosing lamps for the living room and bedroom.
The problems tend to come with the more demanding settings or displays: the kitchen, the bathroom, art collections, even backyard birch trees.
While an architect or an interior designer can often do the job, an alternative is a lighting designer, trained in the esthetics, technology and conservation of lighting.


A Loner, a Marriage and an Estate
Although part of a prominent Greek-American family active in publishing and politics in New York City, Andrew George Vlasto was known for his aloofness.
To relatives and friends, he was a remote man who shunned the spotlight in his younger days and in retirement lived frugally on a nest egg nurtured as an editor and businessman.
Although seemingly self-reliant in his 80's, Mr.
Vlasto in recent years rarely ventured from his Chelsea neighborhood, and his relatives considered him a permanent bachelor.
But last August, at age 85, Mr.
Vlasto, without the knowledge of his family or friends, married a woman 57 years his junior.
Three months later, he died after being admitted to Bellevue Hospital suffering, according to hospital records, from an overdose of opiates and sedatives.


Teck Corp.(TEK.A) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Sports of The Times; Dream Team Or Ugly Americans
THEY were pushed around, run ragged, shot full of holes, disdainfully dunked on, blown out, laughed at and repeatedly cursed.
Andrew Gaze of Australia said the benefit of such a contest against the United States was that "you get to learn from these people."
College fraternity pledges get hazed.
Marines get whipped into shape at boot camp.
Aspiring international basketball medalists get flogged by the Dream Team.


Nynex Raises the Unlisted Phone Window a Bit
Beginning around the end of this month, unlisted telephone numbers in the Bronx and Westchester will be divided into two categories: really and sort of.
In a small breach of the wall of privacy built around more than two million residential customers in New York State, the phone company will offer callers a chance to leave taped messages for some of those reclusive souls.
Under a first-of-a-kind pilot program, people who call directory assistance and ask for a phone number that turns out to be unlisted will hear a recorded voice that gives them a new option: to leave a message of up to one minute.


Big Firms Gain Bond Work Set For Minorities
In recent years, many Government agencies have decreed that some of the bondsthat they issue must be sold by minority-owned brokerage firms.
As a result, about 300 such firms have been established, and they have taken a healthy share of the $2 billion in fees paid annually to brokers for selling public securities.
Now, Wall Street firms, among them Merrill Lynch and Bear Stearns, and regional brokerages are finding ways to capture some of this business for themselves.
They are buying stakes in minority-owned firms, enabling them to profit from these set-aside programs too.


CHRONICLE
JACKIE MASON thinks so, and filed a $25 million lawsuit this week in New York State Supreme Court against five organizations that select the Tony nominees.
He charged that their failure to consider him this year for his one-man Broadway show, "Jackie Mason: Politically Incorrect," constitutes discrimination.
HARVEY SABINSON executive director of the League of American Theaters and Producers, which administers the Tonys along with the American Theater Wing, said he could not comment directly on the suit yesterday because he was not aware of it.


Alabama High School Fire Was Arson, Officials Say
A state and Federal investigative task force concluded today that the fire early Saturday that destroyed the high school in this racially torn town was arson.
Officials of the Alabama State Fire Marshal's office and the Federal Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms had been studying the rubble of the 57-year-old brick and wood Randolph County High School for three days.
Investigators said today that they had no suspects, but added that leads were likely to take them to other cities and other states.
That remark suggested that investigators believe the culprits may have come from outside Wedowee, but officials declined to comment further.


Transactions
Baseball  American League
KANSAS CITY ROYALS -- Released Dan Rohrmeier, outfielder, from Memphis of the Southern League.
Basketball  Continental Basketball Association
RAPID CITY THRILLERS -- Traded the rights to Jerrod Mustaf, forward, to the Quad City Thunder for a third-round draft pick.
Football  National Football League
CINCINNATI BENGALS -- Waived Donnell Johnson and Chuck Bradley, offensive linemen; Jake Kelchner, quarterback; Ryan Benjamin, running back; Elbert Turner, wide receiver, and Jey Phillips, defensive back.
CLEVELAND BROWNS -- Signed Doug Dawson, guard.
NEW ENGLAND PATRIOTS -- Obtained LeRoy Thompson, running back, from the Pittsburgh Steelers for future considerations.
Relinquished the rights to Leonard Russell, running back.
Arena Football League
Steele, lineman. Signed Darrin Kenney, lineman.
ARIZONA RATTLERS -- Waived Darin Mrachek, lineman.
CHARLOTTE RAGE -- Signed Darryl Gooden, fullback-linebacker.
CLEVELAND THUNDERBOLTS -- Signed Dale Williams, lineman.
Placed Bob Cox, lineman, on injured reserve.
Hockey  National Hockey League
DALLAS STARS -- Received Peter Zezel, center, and Grant Marshall, right wing, from the Toronto Maple Leafs as compensation for signing Mike Craig, right wing.
PITTSBURGH PENGUINS -- Signed Joe Dziedzic, left wing.
VANCOUVER CANUCKS -- Announced that Pat Quinn, president, general manager and coach, is stepping down as coach.
Named Rick Ley coach.
American Hockey League
HERSHEY BEARS -- Named Mike Stothers assistant coach. International Hockey League
CHICAGO WOLVES -- Signed Jeff Rohlicek, center, and Tim Breslin, left wing.


U.S. Lets Cubans From Hijacking Stay, Detaining One
The United States granted entry today to 25 Cubans who fled their island on a stolen Cuban boat, but a 26th refugee was detained pending further investigation.
In what has erupted into an angry dispute, Cuban officials insisted on Tuesday that all 26 should be returned, asserting that a Cuban navy lieutenant was killed when the boat was hijacked on Monday.


Saberhagen Dials Right Numbers For Mets
Bret Saberhagen pulled John Franco aside this afternoon and double-checked Franco's current saves total.
"Twenty-nine?" Saberhagen asked.
"Yes, 29," said Franco.
That was all Saberhagen needed to hear.
About to take the mound for what could be his final start of this season, Saberhagen set himself two goals this evening.
He wanted to earn his 14th victory.
And he wanted to hand the ball to Franco for his 30th save.


Interco Inc.(ISS,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Haiti's New Militia Drills With Sticks
The rifles, relics from old wars, had rust in the barrels.
Some soldiers carried sticks on their shoulders, and some did not have anything to wage battle with except their imaginations.
Ill-equipped and ragtag, the newly formed Haitian civilian militia drilled, marched and generally showed off today for Lieut.
Gen.
Raoul Cedras, the Haitian military leader, chanting that they would eat the "blancs," or "whites," if the American military invaded to reinstate the exiled President, the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
Some brokerage firms have found ways to capture some of the business that Government agencies had intended to be for firms owned by members of minority groups.  [ Page A1. ]
American Cyanamid urged its stockholders to ignore the $95-a-share takeover bid by American Home Products until American Cyanamid's board takes a formal stand on the hostile offer.  [ D1. ]


THEATER
Laughing in the Face of Death (And the Silly Ways It Can Come)  Puerto Rican Traveling Theater
The Puerto Rican Traveling Theater lives up to its name, taking its annual outdoor show to 28 places in all five boroughs of New York City and three New Jersey cities, in Spanish some days, in English on others, through Aug. 28. (Information: 212-354-1293.)


Rapid Rise of AIDS In Asia Aggravating Risk of Tuberculosis
The World Health Organization warned today that the rapid spread of AIDS in Asia threatened to unleash an even bigger epidemic of tuberculosis on the most populous continent.
"The H.I.V. epidemic is a nightmare come true for TB control," Dr.
Arata Kochi, tuberculosis program manager for W.H.O., said at a news conference today at the Tenth International Conference on AIDS.
He said the collision of the two diseases would "bring about a co-epidemic that will surpass what is now taking place in Africa and other parts of the world."


Familiar Scene For Anderson
A year ago, Kenny Anderson used the New York All-Star Basketball Classic as his first serious competition since fracturing his left wrist against John Starks and the Knicks in March 1993.
This year, the Nets' All-Star point guard hopes to be playing in the same contest, better known as the Wheelchair Game, in his first competitive action since having surgery on the wrist nine weeks ago.


Fabri-Centers of America Inc.(FCA,N) reports earnings for 13wks to July 30


Clinton Seeks Immunity in Suit by Woman
Lawyers for President Clinton asked a Federal judge in Arkansas today to throw out a sexual harassment lawsuit against the President.
They asserted that the Constitution gives him immunity while in office from lawsuits relating to private matters.
The request to dismiss the suit was filed in Federal District Court for the Eastern District of Arkansas in a brief signed by Robert S. Bennett, Mr.
Clinton's lawyer.
The motion will be considered by Judge Susan Webber Wright.


Grupo Tribasa S.A. de C.V.  (GTR,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Health Care Developments
YESTERDAY
President Clinton declared that he would accept nothing less than the guarantee of universal coverage in legislation proposed by the Senate majority leader, George J. Mitchell of Maine.
Mr.
Clinton got important support from the American Association of Retired Persons, which said it would accept either the Mitchell bill or a measure proposed by House Democratic leaders.
CONGRESS
Senate.
It continued debating the Mitchell bill.
Senator John H. Chafee, the Rhode Island Republican who leads a bipartisan Senate group seeking a compromise, criticized several provisions but praised Mr.
Mitchell's handling of the employer-payment issue.
The Senate, on a largely party-line vote, rejected a resolution by Senator Jesse Helms, a North Carolina Republican, that called for deferring action until next year.
House.
A coalition of Republicans and conservative Democrats barely managed to meet a deadline to submit their alternative to the Democratic leaders' bill.
WHITE HOUSE
Mr.
Clinton said in an interview that Republicans were disingenuous in complaining about the bureaucracy of Mr.
Mitchell's bill.
The President said they were ready to "fight until the last dog dies" to block what he called the surest way to reduce bureaucracy, a requirement that employers provide health insurance for their workers.
LOBBYISTS
"If either bill is defeated, health care reform will be dead for years to come," said Eugene I. Lehrmann, president of the 33-million-member American Association of Retired Persons, in endorsing the Mitchell bill and the bill put forward by Representative Richard A. Gephardt of Missouri, the House majority leader.


CLASSICAL MUSIC
A New York Debut With Out-of-the-Way Works  Frick Collection
Collegium Atlantis offered an enterprising program of Baroque music in its New York debut on Tuesday evening: nine works by eight composers, none of whom, remarkably, were J. S. Bach or Vivaldi.
True, one was Handel, and he appeared twice.
But the others were Purcell, Geminiani, Groneman, Bohm, C. P. E. Bach, Veracini and Telemann.
The out-of-the-way material yielded special delights: a characterful Flute Sonata in E minor by Johannes Fredrikus Groneman, with its bumblebee-flight finale, and Francesco Maria Veracini's distinctly unacademic Sonata Accademica No. 12 for violin, named after the gatherings at which it might have been performed.


Classical Music
An Evening of Fireworks, Mozart, Verdi and Tchaikovsky  Great Lawn Central Park
This, obviously, was the spectacular evening New Yorkers had been waiting for, on Monday: cool, clear and serene.
Some 140,000 people turned out for a New York Philharmonic concert and a fireworks display, almost double the crowd of the week before.


Cobra Industries Inc.(COI,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


A Movement In the Labor Negotiations: Out the Door
Negotiators for baseball's club owners and players have not reached an impasse, one of them said yesterday, but their talks clearly are stalemated and the players will walk out after they play the 10 games that are on the schedule for today and tonight.
Practically speaking, the strike already has started for the players on the eight teams that aren't scheduled.
Technically, the game's eighth work stoppage in the last 23 seasons will not be official until tomorrow's night's schedule of 14 games is wiped out.
But as Donald Fehr, the players' labor leader, said yesterday, even if a settlement to the labor dispute somehow developed overnight, many players already would have left game sites.


Pro Bono Accounts
*
Women in Communications, Washington, to Bozell New York, as the first agency to handle advertising for its Stop Sexual Harassment campaign.
Capital Cities/ABC and Hearst Magazines are sponsoring the campaign, which is scheduled to begin in January.


It Seems So Long Ago For Daly at the P.G.A.
It has all happened in the span of four years for John Daly.
Four years from obscurity to celebrity, from drunkenness to sobriety, from middle class to enormous wealth.
Once an oddity who hit the ball farther than anyone in golf -- and who hit the bars as hard as anyone in any sport -- John Daly is now clean, sober and the biggest draw in golf.
And it all began at the 1991 P.G.A.
Championship, when he got into the field as a last-minute replacement for Nick Price.
The story is familiar by now, inscribed in golf lore: he was the ninth alternate who drove all night from Memphis into Carmel, Ind., and teed it up at Crooked Stick Golf Club without a practice round.
He was the long-haired, long-hitting kid, just happy to be there, who overpowered the golf course and the field and won the P.G.A.


Arafat and Rabin Agree to Stepped-Up Talks
Trying to allay Palestinian concerns over Israel's reconciliation with Jordan, Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin met today with Yasir Arafat, the chairman of the P.L.O., and announced stepped-up talks to expand Palestinian self-rule and hold elections in the West Bank and Gaza Strip.
In a rare joint news conference after their 90-minute meeting at an Israeli base on the northern edge of the Gaza Strip, both leaders tried to project a spirit of cooperation, shaking hands and pledging to push ahead with their self-rule accord.
It was their first meeting on home territory since Mr.
Arafat arrived in Gaza in July.
Israeli-P.L.O.
Ties Strained
Relations between Israel and the Palestine Liberation Organization had been strained since Mr.
Rabin and King Hussein of Jordan signed a declaration in Washington on July 25 that ended the state of war between their countries and recognized Jordan's role as custodian of Muslim shrines in Jerusalem.


Festival Seizes First Marijuana
Surrounded by miles of eight-foot-high chain-link fence and guarded by hundreds of security officers, the 840-acre farm that will play host to Woodstock '94 here is supposed to be as impenetrable as a vault.
But two days before the start of the three-day festival, the concert's top security official said today that there had been a "handful" of breaches.
Robert C. G. Disney, director of security for Woodstock '94, said guards had discovered a "very, very small" stash of marijuana that someone had hidden behind a tree to circumvent the checkpoints through which concertgoers will pass on the way into the festival.


Brascan Ltd. (BRS.A,A) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Haiti's Thugs May Listen to Nothing but Force
To the Editor:
Since 1968 I have traveled to Haiti many times as a volunteer surgeon.
On my visit in February 1991, two weeks after President Jean-Bertrand Aristide's election, it was obvious that something good had happened!
The streets were clean (relative to the past and present), people seemed to be filled with hope and optimism, and smiles abounded everywhere.
During the next few months people began to return from the United States to homes in Haiti.
Many opened businesses.
Government programs for medical care, education and land reform were begun.
President Aristide began restructuring Government finance, beginning with his own refusal to accept the presidential salary of $10,000 a month.


Specter of Segregation Returns; Montclair Schools Are Troubled by Racial Imbalance Among Classrooms
If ever a town labored for integration, it is Montclair.
Since a 1968 court desegregation order, this suburban enclave has struggled mightily for racial balance in its schools and to keep its neighborhoods stable.
The effort had seemed successful.
After a painful interlude of forced busing, the district created a magnet-school program that averted white flight and induced parents to send their children to school across town.
Montclair became integration Eden, a model for other districts and a haven for young families seeking a solid education in a multi-ethnic town.


Haiti's Thugs May Listen to Nothing but Force; Lean on Dominicans
To the Editor:
We unite with the views on Haiti of Representative Ronald V. Dellums (Op-Ed, July 24), who counsels, not invasion, but sealing Haiti's border with the Dominican Republic.
As members of the Peace Committee of Philadelphia Yearly Meeting of the Religious Society of Friends, we are concerned about the military trend the United States Government has taken in the tragedy in Haiti.


India Presses Bombing Case Against Pakistan
Since the arrest last week of a suspect in the bombings that killed 260 in Bombay in March 1993, the Indian Government has repeatedly underscored its contention that it can prove the 13 bomb blasts were planned by Pakistan.
But India's hopes of using the suspect, an Indian Muslim named Yakub Memon, to pin responsibility for the blasts on Pakistan have shown signs of foundering amid doubts that the Government is telling the full truth.


Derlan Industries reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Woodstock '94: Peace, Dreams and Money
Dr.
Robert Katten missed the original Woodstock festival.
But he is attending the second one, in a rented R.V.
He's keeping an eye on his investment -- $10,000 in the company with the pizza concession.
The break-even point: 60,000 pies.
Dolores O'Riordan had never heard of Woodstock.
Then someone asked her to sing at the 25th-anniversary concert this weekend in Saugerties, N.Y.
She decided to go, figuring that with so many people in one place, "it'll be a great vibe."


Allied Signal Unit Selects McCann
The Allied Signal Aerospace Company has consolidated its account, with billings estimated at $3 million to $4 million, at McCann-Erickson Los Angeles.
The account was previously divided among the Avion Group in Kansas City, Mo., Jack Schnyder Advertising in Los Angeles and J. Walter Thompson Los Angeles.


AT WORK WITH Ron Delsener; Rock's Mr. In Between
WHILE members of the English rock band Depeche Mode pounded their synthesizers for 10,000 fans at the Jones Beach Marine Theater in Wantagh, L.I., one night in June, a solemn meeting was taking place backstage.
"We can't mess up," Ron Delsener told his assembled employees.
"There's too much at stake."
In the 30 years Mr.
Delsener has promoted concerts in the New York area, something big always seems to be at stake.
On this night, it was a million-dollar sponsorship for his Jones Beach concert series.


In the Mexican Jungle, the Left Issues a Threat


L.A. Gear Account Is Placed in Review
L.A.
Gear Inc. has again placed its account, with billings estimated at $20 million, in review.
The account has been handled by Ketchum Advertising Los Angeles and Ground Zero in Venice, Calif., for the last few months, after L.A.
Gear parted with Ogilvy &amp; Mather New York.
"A company our size needs the partnership of an agency," John Wilson, vice president of worldwide marketing at L.A.
Gear in Santa Monica, Calif., said on Tuesday in confirming reports of the review this week in Advertising Age and Adweek.


Miller Has Developed An International Flair
Reggie Miller loves these rules.
Bring in the 3-point line to international range when the National Basketball Association season begins, he says.
That will solve the league's scoring drought, once and for all, and for him, every night will be Game 5, Madison Square Garden, Indiana against the Knicks.
Every night will be dedicated to his biggest fan, Spike Lee.


National Re Corp.(NRE,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Air Canada reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Morningstar Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Mark Kauffman; Photographer, 71
Mark Kauffman, an award-winning photographer for Life magazine, died on Friday at his home in Pismo Beach, Calif.
He was 71.
The cause was liver cancer, said his daughter Linda.


House Proud
TWO years ago, when Richard and Carole Rifkind bought a 1970's Cape Cod-style house in Amagansett, L.I., they chose it for its location -- a five-minute walk to the bus, market and beach -- and not for its design.
The house, to be perfectly blunt, was ugly.
"It had no architecture," said Mrs.
Rifkind, an architectural historian and the author of "A Field Guide to American Architecture" (New American Library, 1980).
The house had tiny windows and tiny, dark rooms.
The front entrance was little more than that: two steps, one concrete, the other brick.
No overhang.
No stoop.


Pataki Limits Tax Release To Five Years
Despite Senator George E. Pataki's repeated pledges to make "total disclosure" of his tax returns, his campaign announced today that it would release his returns for only the last five years.
That limited disclosure, which is scheduled for Friday, would prevent any examination of whether the Republican gubernatorial candidate paid appropriate taxes on several lucrative real-estate sales in the mid-1980's.


Canam Manac Group reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Carson Pirie Scott &amp; Co. reports earnings for Qtr to July 30


Following the Beat of a Lot Of Different Drummers
The Concussion Ensemble, which performed on Monday night at Brownie's in the East Village, is a rock group that has been turned inside out.
The Boston ensemble uses the instruments that a standard rock-and-roll band does -- guitar, bass and drums -- but it has four percussionists instead of one.
In its music, the drums lead and the guitars follow.
On Monday, the Concussion Ensemble's drummers steered clear of complicated time signatures.
Instead, they relied on the sheer force of a simple rock rhythm beaten out of three drum kits simultaneously.
Larry Dersch, Terry Donahue and Brian Gillespie, the carpal-tunnel-syndrome candidates who did the drumming, tirelessly raised and lowered their arms with machinelike precision, occasionally breaking down to perform different parts of a solo that would normally be played on one drum set.
Ken Winokur, the fourth percussionist, added to the already full sound by beating on an array of scrap metal, including a bedpan, a parking sign and a coil spring.
It all would have seemed mindless and monotonous if not for the dueling guitars of Mike Brown and Rich Gilbert.
Their squealing and pealing, riffing and rocking propelled the music.


Police Say Wiretap Log Is Lost, But Inquiries Are Unaffected
New York City police officials said yesterday that a log of police wiretaps had been stolen or misplaced at Police Headquarters, but they said that no investigations had been compromised.
Officials learned on Monday that the log was missing from a cabinet secured with a combination lock in the communications division on the ninth floor.
Police officials are questioning two civilian clerks who had access to the document.


Haiti's Thugs May Listen to Nothing but Force; Wilson's Invasion Folly
To the Editor:
Re "Remembering the Past; Repeating it Anyway" (The Week in Review, July 24): Is it really necessary to sugarcoat Woodrow Wilson's invasion of Haiti in 1915?
When I was a graduate student at the Woodrow Wilson School of Government at the University of Virginia, Wilson's alma mater, I had the opportunity to study Wilson's career in depth.
Wilson rose to power in New Jersey, but this son of my native Virginia was technically the first Southern Democrat in the White House after the Civil War and carried all the prejudices of Southern Democrats in his day.


New Head Of L.I.R.R. Is Selected
Thomas F. Prendergast, a senior vice president of the New York City Transit Authority, is to be named the new president of the Long Island Rail Road, officials of the Metropolitan Transportation Authority said today.
Mr.
Prendergast, 42, who was in charge of emergency planning when Long Island Rail Road workers went on a two-day strike in June, is regarded among many he has worked with as a skilled manager who avoids disputes, works well with unions and thrives under pressure.


Big Dreams Grow Under a 'Little Top'
THE multicolored, flag-festooned tent, arguably the world's smallest Big Top, dominates a wide, undulating Vermont field where dairy cows were once put out to pasture.
Inside the tent one day last month, Michael Warshaw, 15, from Ho-Ho-Kus, N.J., was lying flat on his back on a trampoline, having just failed to execute a back flip.
Gennadi Totukhov, a former trapeze star from Russia, leaned over him, nose to nose.
"No good!" Mr.
Totukhov bellowed.
"Go home!" There was a moment of silence, and then Michael's face opened into a wide, metallic grin, his retainer catching the light.
Mr.
Totukhov laughed too, in a low, melodious chortle.
In a moment, Michael bounced up to try again.


New Drugs Said to Show Promise in Fight Against the AIDS Virus
A new class of drugs is showing some early promise in fighting the virus that causes AIDS, scientists said here today.
But the drugs fall prey to the same problems that have prevented the existing drugs from being fully effective against the deadly disease.
The new compounds, protease inhibitors, are expected to make up the next group of drugs in the arsenal against AIDS.
There are now about 6 such drugs being tested on patients, and 20 or so others in earlier stages of development.


School Desegregation Has, in Fact, Succeeded
To the Editor:
Re "An Impatient Advocate Stirs Up the Education Department's Rights Office" (Education page, Aug. 3): Your description of the two most recent Supreme Court decisions on school desegregation is wrong.
In those cases, the Court squarely held that Federal courts (not state courts, as you suggest) should continue to be involved in desegregating public schools until all vestiges of segregation have been eliminated.
The school board's good faith, which you suggest is the only relevant question, is relevant but not conclusive.
The critical question is whether or not the board has eliminated all of the vestiges of past segregation.


Argonaut Funds' Top Trader Quits, Clouding Their Future
Argonaut Management, one of the biggest and most prominent hedge-fund companies started in the last year, said yesterday that its No. 2 partner and head trader, M. Barry Bausano, had resigned.
The resignation, which took effect on Monday, has raised questions among some of the firm's investors about its ability to continue, although its president, David Gerstenhaber, asserted yesterday that Argonaut would definitely remain in business.


SENATE COMMITTEE RECEIVES APOLOGY FROM SPY AGENCY
Forced to testify under oath, the men who run the nation's most secret intelligence service publicly apologized today for burying the $347 million budget for their new headquarters under a cloak of classification.
"We have been negligent, clearly negligent, for not showing the budget breakout for this project," Roger Marsh, project manager for the new headquarters of the National Reconnaissance Office, told the Senate Intelligence Committee.


Tainted Gifts to Mr. Espy
It is getting harder and harder to pick up a newspaper without finding fresh evidence that some public officials never learn.
The latest example of the failure of senior government employees to avoid even the appearance of conflict of interest is the reported misbehavior of Mike Espy, President Clinton's Secretary of Agriculture.
Mr.
Espy runs a department that has long been cozy with the food producers and farmers it is supposed to regulate.
President Clinton promised to end these snug relationships throughout the executive branch, but Mr.
Espy appears not to have heard him.
Instead, according to The Wall Street Journal, The Washington Post and The New York Times, Mr.
Espy accepted small favors from companies his department oversees while ignoring abuses in the poultry industry.
Among his patrons is Tyson Foods, the big Arkansas chicken producer with strong personal and political ties to Mr. and Mrs.
Clinton.


Sbarro Inc.(SBA,A) reports earnings for Qtr to July 17


Banister Foundation (BAN,A) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


A 'Mad Switch' Led Teen-Ager to Kill Child, Psychiatrist Testifies
In the mind of Eric Smith, the 14-year-old standing trial in the murder of a 4-year-old boy last August in Savona, the impulse that drove him to hurt the child had a name.
It was called "the mad switch," according to Dr.
Stephen Herman, a psychiatrist for the defense who has been testifying for the last two days at the boy's trial.
The defendant, he said, told him about "the mad switch" in a talk they had in preparation for the trial.


Corrections
An entry in the Business Digest yesterday reversed the names of two companies in some copies.
The American Home Products Corporation is offering $8.5 billion for the American Cyanamid Company.


Argentine Chief, Noting Bombing Report, May Expel Iran Envoy
President Carlos Saul Menem said today that the Iranian Ambassador to Buenos Aires should be expelled in response to a preliminary report that implicates four former Iranian diplomats in the deadly bombing of a Jewish community center here last month.
Late Tuesday night, Judge Juan Jose Galeano, who has been investigating the bombing, issued an international arrest warrant for the four Iranians, suggesting but providing no detailed proof that they were directly involved in the attack, which killed about 100 people.


Jenny Craig (JC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Rockefeller Corn
THERE'S a wonderfully incongruous patch of corn ripening in Rockefeller Center this month, along with a lot of other vegetables and flowers, in honor of the city's unsung heroes -- those people who turn vacant lots full of junked cars into green oases.
The exhibition, in the Channel Gardens off Fifth Avenue between 49th and 50th Streets, is stuffed with ripening eggplants and fat cabbages, spicy basil and cilantro.
Signs and colorful backdrops capture the basic spirit, as well as the gardening techniques of Bronx Green-Up, the community gardening arm of the New York Botanical Garden.
In seven years, the program, directed by Terry Keller, has helped create 200 gardens.


In Mets' Locker Room, the Decor Was Strictly Business
If any of the Mets players had any doubt that baseball is about business -- not games -- these days, they needed only to look around their clubhouse at Veterans Stadium this afternoon to be disabused of that notion.
Before the Mets' 6-2 victory against the Phillies tonight, the suits were abundant in the locker room -- from General Manager Joe McIlvaine, who addressed the club in a closed-door meeting, to his assistant Ed Lynch, to Mike Ryan, the vice president in charge of broadcasting, and even David Howard, the club's general counsel.
Gerry Hunsicker, the assistant vice president of baseball operations, did not wear a tie or a jacket, but he was present as well.


Woodstock Changed My Life Forever
To the Editor:
Re "The Woodstock Notion" by Neal Karlen (Op-Ed, Aug. 5):
Even journalists cannot write away what half a million people have in their hearts.
It was a time and a place called Woodstock -- a glimpse into the Garden of Eden that those who weren't there can never know.
Mr.
Karlen's images of promoters plotting to clear the hippie gate crashers from Max Yasgur's field, of Sullivan County residents horrified by the threat of an impending dysentery outbreak, seem detached from the event that was Woodstock.


Rogers Cantel Mobile Communications Inc.(RCMIF,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


American Publishing (AMPC,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


COMPANY BRIEFS
ARMCO INC., Pittsburgh, has signed a definitive agreement to sell its insurance businesses for about $85 million to Vik Brothers Insurance Inc., Raleigh, N.C.
ELSAG BAILEY PROCESS AUTOMATION N.V., Amsterdam, has completed the acquisition of Fischer &amp; Porter Co., Warminster, Pa., a retailer of process control instruments, for $157 million.


Bottom of 9th For Baseball
Unless owners and players reach an 11th-hour labor agreement, the baseball season will come to a halt after the 10 games that are scheduled today.
Don Mattingly, the Yankee captain, wondered if today's game might be the last of his career.
Page B13.
Pleading for Players
Donald Fehr, the union leader, has a dour public image that belies a sense of humor and unflinching dedication.
Page B13.
What About the Fans?
The looming strike is all about millionaires.
And economists say those millionaires ought to think about the hot-dog vendors and the 10-year-old fans.
Economic Scene, page D1.
Advertisers Won't Suffer
The biggest loser in a strike? Baseball, and not the advertisers. Advertising, page D1.


Corrections
A company symbol in Business Day on Tuesday, with a brief report in the Company News column about a transaction by the Host Marriott Corporation, was published in error.
The symbol was that of Marriott International Inc., a separate company.


Sensormatic Electronics Corp.(SRM,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Does This Mean Abortion?; Vatican and U.S. Battle Over Document for Population Talks
Less than a month before the countries of the world assemble in Cairo to discuss how the planet can avert catastrophic overpopulation, the United States and the Vatican have emerged as the poles of a bitter debate over one central theme: should abortion, in any form, by any name and for any purpose, be legitimized in the lexicon of international relations?
At issue is a document drawn up at a preparatory meeting held in New York in April under United Nations auspices.
Yet the arguments of both sides might almost be drawn from different texts as the United States and the Vatican wage a diplomatic war of selective quotations from the same pages to support opposite views.


Economic Scene; As Baseball Strike Looms, Many Bystanders Are Out
The looming baseball strike is all about millionaires fighting millionaires for the last Learjet on the lot.
Isn't it about time they thought about the others involved -- the hot-dog vendors, the parking attendants, the 10-year-olds who would rather watch the Yankees than Beavis and Butt-head?
Wait; don't touch that dial.
Such sentiments may be commonplace.
This time, though, they are echoed by economists generally known for their distance from the fray and faith in contracts signed by consenting adults.
"There is a good argument here for a forced resolution," confirms Lawrence White of New York University's Stern School of Business.


Filly Returns Trainer To the Winner's Circle
Leroy Jolley, who used to visit the winner's circle regularly with his champion filly Meadow Star, was finally back there today with another filly who seemed to be streaking along the road to racing success.
Seeking Regina, a 2-year-old daughter of Seeking the Gold, in only the third race in her career, made it a major one.
She raced past a pack of other juveniles turning into the homestretch, seized the lead and widened it to four lengths over Changing Ways to win the 79th running of the Adirondack Stakes.


Judge Rules That The Citadel May Shave Woman's Head
Describing an environment in which the bumper sticker "Shave Shannon's Head" and a T-shirt "1,952 Bulldogs and 1 Bitch" have become rallying cries for keeping women out of The Citadel, lawyers for the college's first female cadet asked again today that Shannon Faulkner's long brown hair not be shaved.
But Federal District Judge C. Weston Houck, who ruled last week that college barbers could proceed with the one-eighth-inch clip, said he saw no reason now to change his mind about the haircut, which is required for all cadets.


Fleeing Militants, A Bengali Writer Arrives in Sweden
Taslima Nasrin, a feminist writer who faces death threats from Islamic militants in Bangladesh, fled to Sweden and quickly went into hiding.
Ms.
Nasrin, whose case has drawn comparisons with that of Salman Rushdie, spent two months as a fugitive in her own country before appearing in a courtroom last week to face charges of defaming Islam.


CHRONICLE
ANNA STRASBERG, the head of the Strasberg Institute, the school founded by her late husband, Lee Strasberg, found herself without an actress for a major role in a reading earlier this week at the institute's Los Angeles branch.
"I haven't directed anything since 'Macbeth' five years ago, so I decided to do 'Redemption' a play by Tolstoy," she said.
"We were having a reading, but I had not yet cast Masha, the gypsy for whom the main character leaves his wife."


Mitchell Deletes Cap on Medical Residents
At the insistence of Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan of New York, Senator George J. Mitchell of Maine, the majority leader, has revised his health care bill to eliminate a provision that would have limited the number of medical residents nationwide.
Mr.
Moynihan has vowed to defeat a similar effort to limit the number of medical specialists.


FEDERATED DEPARTMENT STORES INC. (FD,N)
Federated Department Stores Inc., which has reached an agreement to merge with R. H. Macy &amp; Company, reported unexpectedly strong operating profits for its second quarter.
Excluding one-time charges for its acquisition of the Joseph Horne Company, Federated, the parent of chains like Bloomingdale's, Rich's and Burdines, reported an increase of 125 percent in earnings for the quarter that ended on July 30.


Sports of The Times; Two Sides, Both Steadfast, and One Key Issue, With Nowhere to Go
THERE is precious little good to report about baseball on this, the eve of the third in-season strike since 1980.
The only good news to cling to is that there is one identifiable stumbling block, unlike 1985.
That year, a multitude of issues drove the players and owners to distraction during negotiations as they followed the bouncing ball from television revenues to salary arbitration to a salary cap to free agency improvements.


Taking the Pulse of the Home Front


Another New Driver for Allison
BOBBY ALLISON is switching drivers -- again.
The Nascar Winston Cup car owner announced Tuesday that DERRIKE COPE will take over for TIM STEELE at this weekend's race at Watkins Glen, N.Y.
The move came after Steele failed to qualify for the inaugural Brickyard 400.
Cope, 35, becomes the third driver for Allison this year, following Steele and CHUCK BOWN, and eighth in the five-year history of the team, which has never won a Winston Cup race.
He said Steele had agreed to leave the team by "mutual consent" to make way for Cope in Sunday's Bud at the Glen. (AP)


Mexican Rebels Warn of Retaliation if Vote Is Fixed
Calling the long-ruling Institutional Revolutionary Party "the common enemy of us all," members of the rebel Zapatista National Liberation Army and representatives of a broad spectrum of leftist groups have threatened to shut Mexico down if they perceive the presidential election, now 11 days away, to be fraudulent.
"I can say clearly that if there is fraud, Mexico will have a period of civil resistance and we will head that resistance," said Jose Alvarez Icaza, a vice president of the National Democratic Convention, a four-day gathering that drew more than 4,000 delegates from leftist groups throughout the country.
"We had great success here and now we have the structure from which to direct that resistance."


Foreman-Moorer Bout Is Canceled
GEORGE FOREMAN's scheduled fight with MICHAEL MOORER for the World Boxing Association and International Boxing Federation heavyweight championships is off because the W.B.A. refused to sanction the fight, the promoter DAN DUVA said yesterday.
Duva said the W.B.A. would strip MICHAEL MOORER of his title even if he fought the 45-year-old Foreman only for the I.B.F. title.


General Nutrition Cos.  (GNCI,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to July 23


Trial of Coup Plotters Against Gorbachev Takes an Odd Turn
The long, often-postponed trial of the men who tried to overthrow Mikhail S. Gorbachev has taken a strange twist in its final days with the state prosecutor asserting that Mr.
Gorbachev may have encouraged the plotters by not opposing them strongly enough.
In his closing argument on Tuesday the prosecutor, Arkady Danilov, asked the judges of the Supreme Court to acquit the only remaining defendant, Gen.
Valentin I. Varennikov, the former commander of Soviet ground forces who had supported the abortive coup in August 1991.


Mattingly Ponders His Future
Don Mattingly was obviously pondering the future by bringing his two oldest sons to Yankee Stadium and letting them traipse around the outfield.
It was a rare sighting of any children four hours before a game, and Mattingly surely wanted Preston and Taylor to get what could be their last glimpse of the renowned diamond in the Bronx this year.
Was it also their last glimpse of the park with their father at first base?
Two days ago, three Mattinglys were standing beside the dugout.
But, after the Yankees oppose the Blue Jays today, there probably will not be any Mattinglys at the Stadium because of the impending players strike that is set to begin after tonight's games.
The family will return to Evansville, Ind., and Mattingly wondered yesterday if he might be approaching his final game as a Yankee.


Ukraine's Leader Issues Decrees to Expand Hold on Parliament
In his third week in office, President Leonid D. Kuchma has taken his first step toward fulfilling his campaign promise of economic reform by extending his own authority and tightening credits to the state sector.
In an effort to break through bureaucratic gridlock and parliamentary obstacles, Mr.
Kuchma has issued decrees in the last few days to take effective control over the parliamentary-appointed Government and independently elected regional heads.


RESULTS PLUS
TRACK AND FIELD  O'Sullivan Outruns Opponents at Helsinki  Sonia O'Sullivan, a former Villanova runner from Ireland, won the women's 3,000 meters yesterday at the European championships in Helsinki, Finland.
O'Sullivan, who last month set a world's best in the 2,000 meters and a European record in the 3,000, used a strong kick to win her first European title in 8 minutes 31.84 seconds.
Yvonne Murray, the defending champion from Britain, was second in 8:36.48.
Gabriela Szabo of Romania set a European junior record of 8:40.08 for third.
Lyubov Gurina of Russia, 37 years old, became the oldest female gold medalist ever in the European championships by winning the women's 800 meters.
Gurina beat Natalya Dukhnova of Belarus in a photo finish, both clocking 1:58.55. (AP) CYCLING  Italian Widens Lead in Tour of Britain  Maurizion Fondriest of Italy extended his lead in the Tour of Britain yesterday by winning the time trial in the third stage.
Fondriest covered the 7.8 miles against the clock in 14 minutes 58.6 seconds -- 19 seconds ahead of Vyacheslav Ekimov of Russia.
Ekimov remained in second place over all, but fell from 5 seconds to 24 seconds behind Fondriest.
Olaf Ludwig of Germany moved to third, and Sean Yates of Britain climbed to fourth. (AP)


Farm Credit System reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


New Advice on How to Raise Little Boys to Be Good Men
"THE Little Rascals," the new movie version of the short films, resurrects a 60-year-old idea with its depiction of a world in which all the boys belong to the "He-Man Womun Haters Club."
Are any American boys still this unenlightened?


Essay; Thumb On the Scales
If the opening Whitewater hearings proved anything, it is the abiding and sometimes intrusive interest the Clinton White House takes in the administration of justice.
Early last year, the Clintons ordered Attorney General Janet Reno to take the unprecedented step of firing all U.S.
Attorneys across the country and replacing them immediately with deserving Democrats.


Richfood Holdings (RCHF,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to July 23


Anacomp Inc.(AAC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Corrections
An obituary on Saturday about Dr.
Luigi Z. Pollara, provost emeritus of the Stevens Institute of Technology in Hoboken, N.J., omitted one surviving sister and misidentified another.
The omitted sister is Violetta DuPont of Watchung, N.J.; the other survivor is Iris Faulconer Zenobi, not Iris Walker.


LDDS Communications Inc.(LDDS,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Castro's Revolution
THERE seems to be a law of human nature: if people can sleep on it, they will want to fold it.
Bernard Castro, a Manhattan furniture manufacturer, recognized that in 1945 when he invented the now familiar tri-fold sofa-bed mechanism.


No Headline
It could be both a continuation of the spirit of Woodstock and a co-optation or a commercialization or a commodification of that spirit. -- ALLEN GINSBERG, the poet, on Woodstock '94.  [ A1:4. ]


Corrections
An obituary on July 15 about Maurice G. Hardy, former chairman and chief executive of the Pall Corporation, misstated the year he became president of the company, a manufacturer of filters.
It was 1985, not 1962.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-13 LEFTISTS WARN MEXICAN PARTY  Denouncing the ruling party as an enemy, rebels and leftist parties warned that they would shut Mexico down if they saw any sign of fraud in the presidential vote on Aug. 21.
A8  WRITER FLEES BANGLADESH  A feminist writer who faces a death threat from Islamic militants in Bangladesh fled to Sweden.
The writer, Taslima Nasrin, was granted bail in her country last week on charges of defaming Islam.
A7  U.N.
ADMONISHES BOSNIAN FORCES  For the first time, the United Nations commander in Bosnia warned forces of the Bosnian Government that they, too, could face NATO air strikes for violating a weapons exclusion zone around Sarajevo.
A10  Serbia's leader is struggling to unseat the top Bosnian Serb.
A10  A RWANDAN FAMILY ON THE RUN  From the Rwandan capital to Gitarama to a French safe zone, a Hutu family has been on the run for three months from ethnic violence and a civil war.
Three months ago, they had a three-bedroom house; now they live under a plastic sheet.
A3  ARAFAT AND RABIN MEET IN GAZA  Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin met with Yasir Arafat, the chairman of the P.L.O. and announced stepped-up talks to expand self-rule in the West Bank and Gaza Strip.
A11  ARGENTINE SEEKS TO EXPEL IRANIAN  Argentina's President said that the Iranian Ambassador should be expelled.
He was responding to a report implicating four former Iranian diplomats in the bombing of a Jewish community center.
A9  DUELING, CHAPTER AND VERSE  News analysis: Less than a month before an overpopulation conference in Cairo, the United States and the Vatican have emerged as the poles of a bitter debate over one central theme: abortion.
It is a war of competing quotations.
A10  HOMELESS IN AFGHANISTAN  Jalalabad Journal: In a sprawl of tents spread over a lunar landscape, 118,000 Afghan refugees swelter listlessly near Jalalabad.
Like millions of other Afghans, they were made homeless by a civil war that now draws little attention.
A4  Chanting against the U.S., militiamen drilled in Haiti's capital.
A8  The trial of accused plotters of a Soviet coup took an odd twist.
A13  India has trouble proving that Pakistan planned deadly explosions.
A6 National A14-21, B10 CLINTON STATES BOTTOM LINE  President Clinton said he could not accept less of a guarantee of universal coverage than that offered in the Mitchell bill now in the Senate.
A1  The A.A.R.P. endorsed both House and Senate health bills.
A20  SPY AGENCY MAKES APOLOGY  Testifying in public, officials from the top-secret spy satellite agency apologized for concealing the budget for their new headquarters.
A1  PANETTA GRABS THE WHEEL  White House Memo: Leon Panetta's first exercise of power suggests that even the grand title of chief of staff understates his job.
A1  A BROKERAGE END-RUN  Some Wall Street and regional brokerage firms have found ways to capture some of the business that Government agencies had intended to be for firms owned by members of minority groups.
A1  CUBAN HIJACKERS ENTER U.S.
The United States granted entry to 25 Cubans who arrived in a stolen Cuban Government boat but held the 26th for questioning.
A14  ARSON IN ALABAMA SCHOOL FIRE  A Federal inquiry pointed to arson in the burning of an Alabama high school where a prom was canceled to thwart interracial dating.
A14  NEW AIDS DRUGS ARE PROMISING  A new class of drugs shows some promise in fighting the virus that causes AIDS, but they share some problems found in other drugs.
A16  STARR OUTLINES INQUIRY  The new Whitewater prosecutor said he would retain many of his predecessor's staff lawyers but hinted at revisiting his findings.
B10  CLINTON CLAIMS IMMUNITY IN SUIT  Lawyers for President Clinton, citing Constitutional immunity, asked a judge to throw out the sexual harassment lawsuit that names him.
B10  A judge said The Citadel could shave Shannon Faulkner's head.
A14 Metro Digest B1 THE MEANING OF WOODSTOCK  What does it mean, this ballyhooed marking of another pop-cultural milestone, a celebration condemned as a sellout, a counterculture theme park with too many rules?
A1  ROSENBAUM'S UPHILL BATTLE  Richard M. Rosenbaum acknowledges he faces an uphill fight in his battle against a better-organized, well-financed rival in the Republican primary for governor.
A1  INFORMATION, PLEASE  Later this month, the phone company in the Bronx and Westchester will offer callers a chance to leave taped messages for reclusive souls with unlisted numbers.
A1  Business Digest D1  Home Section C1-11  Putting sofa beds to the catnap test.
C1  World of opportunities for tirelessly retired.
C1  At work with Ron Delsener: Rock's Mr.
In Between.
C1  Parent &amp; Child C4  House Proud C10  Arts/Entertainment C13-20  Young black film makers.
C13  A director's life.
C13  Music: A Messiaen rarity.
C13  Concussion Ensemble.
C14  The Pop Life C16  Books: David Halbertsam's "October 1964." C18  Sports B12-19  Obituaries D20  Buff Donelli, former football coach and a one-time soccer star.
Thomas Laverne, former New York State Senator.
Editorials/Op-Ed A22-23  Editorials  Tainted gifts to Mr.
Espy.
Cuba policy lost at sea.
Speed the train to the plane.
Letters  William Safire: Thumb on the scales.
Nicholas Dawidoff: What national pastime?
Eric Gillet and Alison Des Forges: The next Rwanda.
Bridge C15 Chronicle B8 Crossword C14


Speed the Train to the Plane
There are better ideas for connecting midtown Manhattan with La Guardia and Kennedy Airports than the Port Authority's plan.
Some of the others would be cheaper, some more convenient, but all want for money.
The Port Authority of New York and New Jersey, owner-operator of both airports as well as Newark's, has money -- from a $3 charge that all departing passengers pay.
It has a plan -- not perfect, but workable.
Moreover, the airports and the city have a desperate need -- for relief from congestion that pollutes the air and slows taxi and limousine connections to a nerve-racking crawl.


Rogers Communications Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Birmingham Steel Corp.(BIR,N) reports earnings for Year to June 30


Pleading the Ballplayers' Cause
In a conversation with Donald Fehr, any topic is fair game, whether it is the Cuban missile crisis or theories on how the universe is put together.
Such subjects often spice up the discourse when Fehr finds the conversation focusing too much on himself, as it does more and more as his union, at loggerheads with management over a proposed salary cap, prepares to strike after tonight's games.


Marketers Finding Other Games to Play
If a baseball strike begins tomorrow, the biggest loser is likely to be the sport itself rather than the advertisers that sponsor the play-by-play broadcasts and sell their products through promotions with baseball themes.
To be sure, companies that spend advertising dollars to be affiliated with baseball would be dismayed at having their elaborate plans disrupted by the long-threatened strike, whether they are local auto dealers with budgets of tens of thousands of dollars or national brewers with budgets of tens of millions of dollars.


G.O.P. Letter on Crime Vote Hints at a Threat
On the eve of a crucial procedural vote on President Clinton's crime bill, a national Republican official today made what some House Republicans considered an implied threat to deny them party support in their re-election campaigns if they vote to move the bill to the floor.
The perceived threat came in a letter from David A. Norcross, general counsel to the Republican National Committee, that was hand-delivered to the 38 House Republicans who voted earlier this year for a ban on assault weapons.


Greenspan Says the Fed Uses Anecdotal Guides
The head of the nation's central bank told a Congressional panel today that changes in the American economy had made it impossible for the Federal Reserve to follow any one computer model or economic indicator in setting short-term interest rates.
As a result, the Fed tries to gauge the economy's strength and forecast inflation by relying on a broad range of models and statistics and by paying attention to anecdotal evidence from trade groups and advisory councils of prominent business executives, said Alan Greenspan, the chairman of the Federal Reserve.


Cubans, and Cuba Policy, Lost at Sea
American officials joined in the deserved condemnation when 32 Cubans who were attempting to escape their homeland drowned on July 13 after their ancient tugboat was bashed by a Cuban patrol boat.
In Havana, this was followed by the hijacking of three passenger ferries by other Cubans attempting to flee, and by sporadic riots in which demonstrators shouted "Down with Fidel!"
Last weekend a furious Fidel Castro tried to reverse course, declaring he would stop putting obstacles "in the way of people who want to leave the country." It was easy to inveigh against Mr.
Castro's restrictive immigration policy as long as he conveniently kept his unhappy citizens at home.
Now he may be calling Washington's bluff, though at this point his intentions are far from clear.
But his words prompted an instant denunciation by the


Jalalabad Journal; Forgotten by World, Afghans Plunge Into Misery
The Sar Shahi camp for people displaced by the war, a vast checkerboard of tents extending as far as the eye can see, sits on a barren plateau of rocks and gravel and fries in the sweltering Afghan sun like a skillet on a stove.
There is no natural source of water within an hour's walk and scarcely a tree to cast a sliver of shade.
The temperature hits 105 or 106 degrees these summer days, so hot that people just stay in their tents, almost too listless to swat away the flies.


Cinemark USA Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


On a Transition of Era, Played Out in Baseball
October 1964  By David Halberstam  Illustrated. 380 pages. Villard Books. $24.
Why has David Halberstam picked "October 1964" as the title for his latest baseball book, his previous one having been the best-selling "Summer of '49"?
Of course his new book is not about just October; it covers the entire 1964 season, along with its background.
But he couldn't very well title a baseball book simply "1964." Including the month of the World Series imparted the needed baseball flavor, especially with the dust-jacket art showing Mickey Mantle at bat against Bob Gibson.
But still, why 1964?
Casual baseball fans may remember that year as the season of the Philadelphia Phillies' great collapse, when the team managed by Gene Mauch blew the National League pennant after being 6 1/2 games ahead with only 12 games left in the season.
New York Yankee fans will remember the year as the end of an era, with the team making its last appearance in the World Series until a dozen years later.
And students of the game may recall 1964 as the last year before a system of drafting new players was introduced, which of course was one of several reasons the Yankees ceased to be the dynasty they had been.


Typhoid Fever Stalks Refugees in Zaire


Events: Tours, Shows
About New York  Municipal Art Society, 457 Madison Avenue (51st Street); (212) 439-1049.
The society is sponsoring a series of guided tours this month.
On Saturday, a bus and walking tour of Harlem will be given from 1 to 5 P.M.
On Aug. 20, from 1 to 5 P.M., a bus and walking tour will visit Upper East Side churches.
Tickets are $30; members, $25.
Reservations from (212) 935-3960.


Fire Is the Foe and It's on the March in Spain


Caldor Corp.(CLD,N) reports earnings for Qtr to July 30


P.&amp; G. Posts Improved Net In 4th Quarter
The Procter &amp; Gamble Company, recovering from an embarrassing third-quarter charge of $102 million after taxes for losses on two interest-rate swaps, reported yesterday that it had better-than-expected earnings for its fiscal fourth quarter.
On April 12 the giant consumer products company announced that it would take a charge of 15 cents a share to cover the losses, saying it was "badly burned" in the complex market on derivatives, which are typically used to limit exposure to sharp market fluctuations.


A Messiaen Rarity Pays Homage To Utah's Topography and Birds
Reinbert de Leeuw's inspiring first summer as director of the Tanglewood Festival of Contemporary Music reached a pinnacle on Sunday night with the geological, astronomical and ornithological splendors of Messiaen's "Des Canyons aux Etoiles" This 12-part epic poem for small orchestra is not heard as often as the same composer's "Turangalila Symphony," but it certainly ought to be.
I can think of no other work from the latter half of this century that affords such an excess of sheer beauty.
It leaves its audiences in a state of exhilaration and touches more than once on the sublime.
"Des Canyons aux Etoiles" ("From the Canyons to the Stars") was commissioned by Alice Tully 20 years ago for the American Bicentennial.
Following his own infallible whimsies, Messiaen chose to pay homage to the canyons and birds of Utah.
Although the state responded gratefully by naming one of its peaks Mount Messiaen, the work is less a portrait of a particular landscape than of the richness of the mind contemplating it.
Against the austerity of the canyons, Messiaen unleashed an orgy of exotic instrumentation: trumpeters play with wa-wa mutes and mouthpieces alone, the solo pianist draws resonances from silently depressed clusters, the percussionists wield a sand drum and a very prominent wind machine.


Federal Industries reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Fortis Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Times Co. Appointment
The New York Times Company said yesterday that it had named Jacqueline M. Leo director of magazine and media development.
She will be responsible for developing new products across the company's lines of business, which include magazines, newspapers, broadcasting and information services.
Ms.
Leo had been editorial director of the Times Company's Women's Magazines Group, but that division was sold recently to Gruner &amp; Jahr USA Publishing.
Ms.
Leo joined the Times Company in 1987 as editor in chief of Child.
In 1988, she was appointed editor in chief of Family Circle magazine, before being named editorial director of the magazine group in March.


Young Black Film Makers Face the Aftermath of Success
After Spike Lee's first commercial film, "She's Gotta Have It," surprised Hollywood by becoming a hit in 1986, a diverse group of black film makers with black stories to tell took center stage, among them Robert Townsend, Keenan Ivory Wayans, Leslie Harris, Julie Dash, Mario Van Peebles, and the brothers Allen and Albert Hughes.
Their first features, often low-budget independent films, represented fresh voices and new politics after a spate of star vehicles for comedians like Richard Pryor and Eddie Murphy and, before that, the 1970's blaxploitation films like "Superfly," which were frequently made by whites.
Now, eight years later, Mr.
Lee is making his eighth film, "Clockers," an adaptation of the Richard Price novel about the street-level drug culture.
Some other black film makers, who went to Hollywood through the doors that Mr.
Lee was instrumental in opening, have also been busy.
John Singleton has wrapped up production of his third film, "Higher Learning," about a semester in the lives of a group of college students.
Matty Rich is teaming up with Quincy Jones for what is also his third film project, about America's first black organized-crime group.
With three commercial films to their credit, the brothers Reginald and Warrington Hudlin are working on a series for HBO called "Cosmic Slop," which they describe as a multicultural "Twilight Zone."


Miscellany
*
Ketchum Public Relations Worldwide, New York, opened an office in London.
Jerry Olszewski, managing director for Europe in Ketchum's office in Munich, Germany, was named to the additional responsibility of heading the office. *
Edelman Public Relations Worldwide, New York, formed an affiliation with Vietnam Investment Review, Hanoi and Ho Chi Minh City, in cooperation with the Vietnam State Committee for Cooperation and Investment.


Holmes, the Expert on Retirement
Looking forward to his third -- and, he promises, last -- retirement, LARRY HOLMES plans to enjoy some of life's simple pleasures.
And, when he has the time, he plans to give boxing's powers-that-be some most unpleasurable moments.
After winning a unanimous 10-round decision over JESSE FERGUSON on Tuesday night, the 44-year-old former world heavyweight champion said he would like to fight fellow old-timer GEORGE FOREMAN before retiring for good at the end of the year.


Caring Is Served With Every Meal


An Audience's Hisses and Boos Are as Wonderful as the Applause
When Deborah Warner walked on stage for the opening-night curtain call of her production of "Don Giovanni" at the new Glyndebourne opera house, she was greeted by a chorus of boos.
Because of the quality of the acoustics in the $50 million theater, the boos, from a small section of the most expensive seats, achieved an audibility in excess of their quantity.
Gilles Cachemaille, who played the title role, said sotto voce to the director: "I couldn't bear to be in a production of 'Don Giovanni' that wasn't booed. I would think it had broken no new ground."
Miss Warner, who is as confident in person as she is audacious in the theater, indicated later that she was not fazed by the reaction.
She defended the right of an audience to respond vocally, adding that there were also cheers on that opening night in July, as there were at subsequent performances.
The opera continues in repertory through August.


Building on Whitewater Investigation
The new independent prosecutor in the Whitewater case said today that he hoped to build on the seven months of work already completed by his predecessor but that he would draw his own conclusions about each aspect of the investigation.
The statement by the new prosecutor, Kenneth W. Starr, strongly suggested that he planned at least to re-examine questions about contacts between White House and Treasury Department officials and other matters on which his predecessor, Robert B. Fiske Jr., had said he found no evidence of wrongdoing.


Zezel Is Part of Compensation to Stars
The Dallas Stars have received center PETER ZEZEL and right wing GRANT MARSHALL from the Toronto Maple Leafs as compensation for the Leafs' signing of MIKE CRAIG, a free-agent right wing.
The arbitrator, GEORGE NICOLAU, announced the decision yesterday.


White House Memo; First Things (the Elections) Come First for Chief of Staff
Leon E. Panetta holds the rank of White House chief of staff.
As his very first change of staff suggests, even that grand title understates the job.
Mr.
Panetta has yet to reveal a long-rumored reshuffling of the White House or even hire his own aides.
But on Tuesday he reshuffled outside the White House, tapping a fellow Californian, former Representative Tony L. Coelho, to in effect run the Democratic Party through the November elections.
In part, his move reflects an understanding that President Clinton's agenda is a dead letter if Democrats lose many seats in Congress, as a number of experts predict.


Corrections
A front-page article on Aug. 8 about investments by mutual funds misstated the prices paid by the American Heritage Fund in two transactions.
The fund paid $3.30 for each unit of Work Recovery Inc., consisting of two shares of common stock and warrants to buy additional shares; $3.30 was not the price for a single share.
The fund also paid 31.5 cents for each of its shares of Gerant Industries, not 25 cents.
In addition, the article omitted the status of the fund's holdings in Gerant.
It sold the Gerant shares last year for 15 cents to 28 cents a share.


U.N. Issues First Warning to Bosnia Army to Halt Arms Violations
The United Nations military commander in Bosnia has warned the Bosnian Government that its forces face possible NATO air strikes in response to flagrant violations of a weapons exclusion zone around Sarajevo, United Nations and Bosnian officials said today.
Such warnings have been delivered on several occasions to the Bosnian Serb forces ringing the city, and on Friday NATO carried out an air strike against a Serbian target within the zone, the first since the zone was imposed in February.
But the warning announced today, while also putting the Bosnian Serbs on notice, was the first to explicitly threaten the Bosnian Government.


Buff Donelli, College Football Coach, Dies at 87
Buff Donelli, a one-time soccer star for the United States national team who coached Columbia to its only Ivy League football title, died on Tuesday at the Florida Medical Center in Fort Lauderdale.
He was 87.
The cause of death was complications from aplastic anemia, a blood disorder, his family said.


Judge Is Assailed in Waldbaum Fire Case
A Brooklyn judge, off the bench and on the witness stand, came under fire yesterday for his actions as a prosecutor investigating a deadly blaze at a Waldbaum's supermarket in 1978.
In contentious cross-examination yesterday, the defense lawyer in the case, in which a man is being retried on arson and murder charges, sought to call into question the integrity of the judge, Michael Gary.


Scotsman Industries(SCT,N) reports earnings for Qtr to July 3


METRO DIGEST
WOODSTOCK '94: THE QUEST FOR MEANING So what does it mean, this much-ballyhooed marking of a pop-cultural milestone, served up as a celebration but condemned as a sell-out, a counterculture theme park with too many rules?
"I don't think there is any single answer," said Allen Ginsberg, the poet.
"It could be both a continuation of the spirit of Woodstock and a co-optation or a commercialization or a commodification of that spirit." Then again, Woodstock '94 could be just one very long concert.
A1.
The security at Woodstock '94 is supposed to be impenetrable, but there have been breaches.
B6.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  *
Federal Home Loan Bank is selling $50 million of notes due in 1997 at 100 to yield 6.89 percent through Citicorp Securities Markets Inc.
*
Laroche Industries Inc., Atlanta, is selling $100 million of senior subordinated notes due in 2004 at 100 to yield 13 percent through Chase Securities.
The notes, rated B-3 by Moody's Investors Service and B by the Standard &amp; Poor's Corporation, are redeemable at various dates.


Thomas Laverne, 88, Legislator Who Led Key Panels in Albany
Thomas Laverne, a former New York State Senator from Monroe County who was an influential committee chairman, died on Monday at St.
Mary's Hospital in Rochester.
He was 88 and lived in Rochester.
The cause of death was cancer, his family said.
Mr.
Laverne was a "Rockefeller Republican" who spoke his mind even when he and Gov.
Nelson A. Rockefeller differed on an issue, like Mr.
Rockefeller's proposal for no-fault automobile insurance.
Mr.
Laverne served in the Senate in Albany from 1961 until 1972, when he was narrowly defeated by a more conservative contender in the Republican primary.


CLINTON DECLARES A MINIMUM DEMAND ON UNIVERSAL CARE
President Clinton said today that he could not accept health care legislation with less of a guarantee of universal coverage than Senator George J. Mitchell's bill, which would require employers to pay half the cost of their workers' health insurance if other measures did not reach 95 percent of Americans by 2000.
The majority leader's bill has been criticized by some liberals as moving too slowly toward universal coverage from the current level of 85 percent.
But the President said in a telephone interview that he accepted the bill's premise that "if you can get 95 percent by the year 2000, that's evidence you can get to universal coverage without a mandate" requiring employers to pay.


Corrections
Because of a production error, an article in Business Day yesterday about the planned merger of Terra Industries and Agricultural Minerals and Chemicals Inc. was omitted from some copies, and a duplicate article about a marketing alliance between the Lotus Development Corporation and the Intel Corporation appeared in its place.
Readers wishing copies of the omitted article may write to Production Quality Control, The New York Times, 229 West 43d Street, New York, N.Y. 10036.


COMCAST CORP. (CMCSA)
The Comcast Corporation, a cable television operator that has agreed to take over the home shopping network QVC Inc., reported a smaller quarterly loss yesterday, but said Federal regulation of cable rates was continuing to reduce its earnings.
Comcast, based in Philadelphia, said it lost $12.9 million, or 5 cents a share, in its second quarter, compared with a loss of $17.1 million, or 8 cents a share, in the corresponding period a year ago.
Revenues were slightly higher, at $341 million.


L.I.R.R. Case Again Raises Sanity Issue
Saying Colin Ferguson has become so delusional he can no longer assist in his own defense, lawyers for the man accused of killing six people on a Long Island Rail Road train asked a judge today to reconsider his competence to stand trial.
The lawyers, Ronald L. Kuby and William M. Kunstler, said Mr.
Ferguson "has grown more delusional, paranoid and obsessive" by the day, telling them of messages he receives "directly from God" and of conspiracies to destroy him by those who oppose God.
He has also refused to meet with a psychiatrist chosen by his own lawyers, and begun to claim that he was not involved in the shooting on the train, the lawyers said.


Hill, Holliday Gets A Humana Account
Humana Inc. of Louisville, Ky., said yesterday that it had named Hill, Holliday Direct in Boston to handle multimedia direct marketing for the Humana Gold Plus Plan account, which had been at Rapp Collins in Chicago for the last three years.
Billings were estimated at $12 million to $15 million.
Hill, Holliday Direct was awarded the account of the health maintenance organization after a four-month review that began with 25 agencies and was narrowed to Hill, Holliday Direct; Rapp Collins, and four other undisclosed finalists.


Building on the Bare, Bare Bones
There is much to see and consider in the surof Joan Snyder's career at the Parrish Art Museum here, but in the end not enough of it is genuinely interesting as painting.
This exhibition, which has been organized by the Rose Art Museum at Brandeis University, reviews a quarter-century's worth of Ms.
Snyder's sometimes beautiful, but often grating work, starting with the lustrous idiosyncratic stain paintings with which she made her name in the late 1960's.
Ms.
Snyder's paintings are at home at many points on the map of recent art.
They might be described as feminist, post-Minimalist, last-gasp Color Field or proto-Neo-Expressionist, which is to say that they raise many issues, past and present, and often in a wonderfully forthright manner.
Historically, she is one of several painters, including Mary Heilmann, Jennifer Bartlett and Harriet Korman, who in the late 1960's and early 70's tried to bring painting closer to the strategies of Process Art, by laying bare the bones of mark-making in a number of seductively simple works on unprimed canvas.


Today's Man Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to July 30


Corrections
An article in Business Day on Tuesday, about the Food and Drug Administration's approval of a product of Molecular Biosystems Inc., misidentified the exchange on which the company's shares trade.
It is the New York Stock Exchange, not Nasdaq.


Peter Cushing, Actor, Dies at 81; Known for Playing Frankenstein
Peter Cushing, a British actor who chilled a generation of filmgoers as the evil Baron Frankenstein, died yesterday in a hospice in Canterbury, England.
He was 81.
The cause was cancer, The Associated Press reported.


Optimism Reigns Despite $40 Million Loss
The 1994 Goodwill Games lost nearly $40 million, yet the event's president said yesterday that the deficit hasn't diminished thoughts of expanding the competition.
"We're not going to try to pull our wings in and get conservative," JACK KELLY said yesterday in a conference call from St.
Petersburg, Russia.
The games, which ended Sunday in St.
Petersburg, were $13 million in the red before the opening day.
The television ratings, which Kelly said were "in the 1.3.-1.4 range," were less than one half of what was guaranteed to United States advertisers, adding another $26 million to the loss, Kelly said. (AP)


Executive Changes
AMES DEPARTMENT STORES INC., Rocky Hill, Conn., appointed Denis T. Lemire executive vice president of merchandising.
CHEVRON USA PRODUCTS CO., San Francisco, named David O'Reilly president, succeeding David Hoyer, who is retiring at the end of the month.


Unhealed Wounds of Crown Heights Bared Again
From the first night of street violence three years ago to the word of a new indictment today, Crown Heights has lodged in New York City's political craw as the case that will not go away.
The murder of Yankel Rosenbaum, the acquittal of the youth accused of killing him and the public disorder and failures of government that Crown Heights came to symbolize, dogged Mayor David N. Dinkins and might have helped to elect Rudolph W. Giuliani.
It brought grief to the once-golden District Attorney of Brooklyn, Charles J. Hynes, who is now running for state attorney general.


Restaurants
Can't make it to the shore this summer? Here's a stand-in for the seafood, at least.
August is a wicked month in Manhattan.
Everybody who can has gone to the country, and the rest of us slouch around the city feeling grumpy.
Some people console themselves by talking about how much less traffic there is this time of year and taking picnics to the park.
But it is hard to look at the rivers without wishing for an ocean breeze and thinking about shore dinners.
Along the coast, people go to the beach; in the city, people ask, "Where can I get a good piece of fish?"


CHRONICLE
WILLIAM J. BRATTON, the Police Commissioner, isn't the only one in the family concerned about the department.
His wife, CHERYL FIANDACA, a lawyer, helped lead a workshop for policewomen yesterday on image building and techniques for dealing with superiors, peers and the public.
Some 100 policewomen, and a few policemen and civilian members of the department, took part in seminars at the Fashion Institute of Technology.
They were conducted by Ms.
Fiandaca and SONYA HAMLIN, a communications consultant and author of a book called "How to Talk So People Listen."
Ms.
Fiandaca, who will be teaching about the problems of policing this fall at the John Jay College of Criminal Justice, said that commanding respect and dealing with misperceptions were two of the most important topics in the seminars.


No Headline
"If I was a player, I'd be here tomorrow to play, not strike. I mean, I play baseball for nothing, for the game. All baseball players have to play for the game." CARMELO VAZQUEZ, 13, watching the Yankees' last game.  [ B7:2. ]


Panamerican Beverages Inc.(PB,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


At Woodstock '94, Will the Odds Let the Big Bucks Roll This Time?
A quarter-century ago, a half-million baby boomers gathered on a farm in Bethel, N.Y., to enjoy three days of sex, drugs and rock-and-roll -- and the promoters lost their shirts.
As many as 250,000 twenty-somethings are expected to be in Saugerties, N.Y., this weekend to celebrate the anniversary.
Only this time the three impresarios who staged the original Woodstock and have returned to produce Woodstock '94 seem to stand little chance of losing money and an excellent chance of making millions.
That prospect has left some news commentators grumpy.
But the promoters fiercely defend their American right to do well by doing good.


Ethnic Battles Flaring Up in Burundi, Too, Fueled by Strikes
After three days of deadly street clashes, the capital of Burundi, Rwanda's increasingly unstable neighbor, resumed a nearly normal pace today, diplomats and aid officials said.
But the unrest in the capital, Bujumbura, which has thus far revolved around a test of political will between two Tutsi factions, threatens to erupt into the kind of ethnic violence that has shaken Rwanda.


Sphere Drake Holdings Ltd.(SD,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Lowery Kicks Up a Storm In Cerebral Palsy Drive
On other fields today, baseball players were saying goodbye.
Nick Lowery was saying hello.


Foster Care Pits Children Against Bureaucracy; Mayoral Neglect
To the Editor:
Your "Adrift in Foster Care" series (front page, July 26 and 27) shows in detail how New York City children are deprived of their chance for a permanent, stable family by a city bureaucracy unable to make good long-term plans for them.
The abuse and neglect inflicted on these vulnerable children by their parents is replaced and made worse by official indifference.


METRO DIGEST
TEEN-AGER INDICTED IN CROWN HTS. DEATH
The teen-ager who was acquitted in the stabbing death of a Hasidic scholar during four days of violence in Crown Heights in 1991 has been indicted on Federal charges that he violated the scholar's civil rights, his lawyer said.
The new charges against Lemrick Nelson Jr., 18, who moved to the Atlanta area after his 1992 trial, came just days before the third anniversary of the racial unrest that tarnished the image of Mayor David N. Dinkins and came to be a major campaign issue between him and his victorious challenger, Rudolph W. Giuliani.
A1.
Crown Heights has lodged in the city's political craw and will not go away.
News analysis, B2.
A chronology of the Crown Heights case.
B2.
NEW YORK CITY CHANCELLOR SUGGESTS SCHOOLS BUDGET CUTS
Schools Chancellor Ramon C. Cortines said that he would allow the average class size in first through third grades to rise and would trim special education programs to help achieve $85 million in budget cuts demanded by City Hall.
The city's high schools and 32 community school districts would absorb $21.9 million of the reductions, cutting their budgets by roughly $24 per student, Mr.
Cortines said.
B3.
ORGANIZED CRIME INQUIRY SABOTAGED
An extensive Federal undercover operation that was intended to block the Lucchese crime family from gaining a new foothold in New Jersey was blown apart when a police officer apparently tipped off one of the ringleaders of the conspiracy, the authorities said.
The collapse of the investigation was revealed in a Federal indictment that chronicled how an array of law-enforcement agencies had massed last year to push back the incursion by the Luccheses, only to have the efforts sabotaged when the identity of an informer was revealed.
B3.
GIULIANI NAMES A NEW SANITATION CHIEF
John J. Doherty, who joined the city's Department of Sanitation as a garbage collector in 1960 and then rose through its uniformed and administrative ranks, will be the department's new Commissioner, Mayor Giuliani announced.
Mr.
Doherty takes over at a crucial time for the Department of Sanitation.
B3.
AUDIT FAULTS TRANSPORTATION AGENCY
The Metropolitan Transportation Authority overbilled the city last year by more than $1 million for policing and maintaining stations on two commuter railroad lines, according to audits released by the City Comptroller.
The audits also found that a majority of Metro-North Commuter Railroad and Long Island Rail Road stations within city limits had deteriorated and needed repairs.
B5.
REGION KING TAKES ROLE IN SLAYING CASE
The children of a man who has confessed to strangling his wife in New Jersey and has fled to Jordan were put in the care of King Hussein, the suspect's family said.
"We handed the kids over this morning and we are happy," said a sister of the suspect, Muhammad Ismail Abequa.
"We have had enough." B4.
YASGUR'S FARM WAS NEVER LIKE THIS
For months now, the promoters of Woodstock '94 have been been predicting that their commemorative festival would run with a precision unseen at its famous, disorganized predecessor.
One the first day of operation, those predictions fell a bit flat.
About 5,000 people were stranded at parking lots for up to six hours because of a series of last-minute logistical delays.
B4.
The producers of Woodstock '94 stand an excellent chance of making millions. B4.


Thermo Electron Corp.(TMO,N) reports earnings for Qtr to July 2


Investment Firm Threatens A Takeover of Hill's Stores
Dickstein &amp; Company L.P., a partnership that specializes in investing in distressed and bankrupt companies, yesterday threatened to take control of the Hill's Stores Company.
In a filing with the Securities and Exchange Commission, Dickstein said it was "actively considering" a proxy solicitation to replace four of Hill's eight directors, which would give it considerable say over the discount department store chain's activities.


Simpson Gets Good Value for Legal Fees
To the Editor:
"Meter's Ticking for Costly Simpson Defense" (news article, July 31), about the high finances of O. J. Simpson's defense, is incomplete.
Speaking purely in financial terms, the winners are indeed the vast array of lawyers and other experts added day by day to the defense team, but the real loser is not Mr.
Simpson himself.


Bosnia Vows To Press Drive Against Serbs
Bosnian Government leaders said today that they would press on with their military offensive against better-armed Bosnian Serbs north of Sarajevo despite pressure by the United Nations for them to stop advancing and put their faith in an international peace agreement.
After more than two years of almost daily setbacks, including a failed military offensive in June, advances against the Bosnian Serbs over the last week have clearly buoyed the spirits of the mostly Muslim Bosnian Army.


Centrist Group Is Seeking Consensus on Health Care
A bipartisan group of senators, more concerned about cost controls and bureaucracy than about the loudly debated topics of universal coverage or employer mandates, met for nearly three hours tonight to try to clear a path to consensus in the health care debate.
The centrist group, which calls itself the "mainstream coalition," had a major role in the Senate Finance Committee debate several weeks ago, but has been in partial eclipse ever since.


Armenia Says It Would Welcome Russian Peacekeeping Offer
Even though many former Soviet republics fear that Russia is seeking to re-establish its empire, the Armenian President said today that he would welcome several thousand Russian peacekeepers to help end the six-year-old war between Armenians and neighboring Azerbaijan.
President Levon Ter-Petrosyan, who is on an official visit to the United States to meet with President Clinton and woo American investors, insisted that Russian peacekeepers were needed to extend a three-month cease-fire that has halted a brutal war in which the Armenian-dominated enclave of Nagorno-Karabakh has battled to wrest independence from Azerbaijan.


Numac Energy (NMC,A) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Numbers Crunchers Take New View of Health Care
In explaining why they might delay debate on health care legislation, House Democratic leaders said today that the Congressional Budget Office should first analyze the fiscal effects of the various bills.
It was yet another sign of the tremendous impact that the office and its number crunchers have come to have in the health care debate.


CHRONICLE
The Medical Board of California has reprimanded doctors who prescribed huge doses of controlled and addictive drugs to treat ELIZABETH TAYLOR for pain and falsified patient files, The Associated Press reported yesterday.
The board could have attempted to suspend or revoke the doctors' licenses, but DIXON ARNETT, its executive director, said, "We decided a stipulation was better than a circus."
The board's action last month effectively settled accusations made in 1990 by the state Attorney General's office, which said that over a five-year period that began in 1983, the doctors wrote Miss Taylor 1,000 prescriptions for 28 controlled drugs.


Marquette Electronics Inc.(MARQA) reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Excerpts From Speeches by Senators on the Mitchell Health Care Proposal
Following are excerpts from statements made yesterday on the Senate floor in the third day of debate over the health care bill, as transcribed by The New York Times from a broadcast on C-Span.
STATEMENT BY SENATOR GRAMM
I can hardly believe my ears when the health care system of the United States of America is compared unfavorably to the health care systems of Canada, Great Britain and Germany.
Last year more people died in Canada waiting to get into the operating room than died on the operating table.
People all over the world under government-dominated systems are dying because health care that is readily available in America is not available in those countries.
And I want to begin my debate on this issue -- since everybody is talking about what we are going to gain by vastly expanding the role of government in health care decisions, I want to start by talking about what we stand to lose. . . .


Abroad at Home; The Hidden Horror
Even in a world with Rwanda and Bosnia, the cruelty at this place has been horrifying: an invasion by a foreign army that has killed as much as a third of the population.
The place is East Timor, the killers the Government and army of Indonesia.
East Timor is half of an island 300 miles north of Australia, so remote that Indonesia has been largely successful in hiding from the world the slaughter and repression it has carried out since occupying the territory in 1975.


Harter Joins Trail Blazers
Dick Harter, an assistant coach for Pat Riley and the Knicks the last three seasons, is leaving to accept a similar position under P. J. Carlesimo, the Portland Trail Blazers announced yesterday.
Harter, a longtime friend of Carlesimo's, is often credited with helping shape the Knicks' defense into one of the best in the league.
He is expected to help the rookie coach's transition to the National Basketball Association after 12 seasons at Seton Hall.


Fortis Chooses Avrett for U.S. Work
Fortis Inc. in New York, the United States unit of Fortis, the global insurance and consumer financial services company, said yesterday that it had selected Avrett Free &amp; Ginsberg in New York to handle its account in this country.
Billings on the account, which had been at Ciociola &amp; Company in New York for almost a year and a half, were estimated at $4 million to $4.5 million, but are expected to increase to $6 million to $10 million.


This Juvenile Not Delinquent
Was that the successor to Dehere out there winning the Saratoga Special by three lengths and making it two straight in the stakes races for 2-year-old colts?
If so, mark his name: Montreal Red, an unbeaten chestnut son of D'Accord.
An outsider when he beat the highly regarded De Niro in the Sanford Stakes on opening day at Saratoga on July 22, Montreal Red today outran four other juveniles and won his second stakes race in 21 days.


Hyman S. Barahal, L.I. Psychiatrist, 89
Dr.
Hyman S. Barahal, who practiced psychiatry on Long Island for more than 50 years, died on Aug. 2 at his home in Brightwaters, L.I.
He was 89.
He had suffered a long illness, his family said.


Doehler-Jarvis Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Simpson Goes To Hospital For Biopsy
Doctors here performed a biopsy of swollen lymph nodes under one of O. J. Simpson's arms today.
The procedure, which had been planned, was conducted at the Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, a hospital near Beverly Hills known for treating the rich and famous.
Mr.
Simpson, who has been jailed for eight weeks, charged with murdering his former wife and a friend of hers, was handcuffed about 4 A.M. and driven to the hospital by the police.
After the operation, which was performed with local anesthesia, he was returned to his cell about 7 A.M.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball American League  BOSTON RED SOX -- Signed Brian Rose, pitcher, and assigned him to Fort Myers of the Florida State League.
Assigned Andy Tomberlin, outfielder, to Pawtucket of the International League.
CLEVELAND INDIANS -- Optioned Albie Lopez, pitcher, to Charlotte of the International League.
Purchased the contracts of Russ Swan, pitcher, and Rene Gonzalez, infielder, from Charlotte.
NEW YORK YANKEES -- Activated Xavier Hernandez, pitcher, from the 15-day disabled list.
Optioned Joe Ausanio, pitcher, to Columbus of the International League.
TORONTO BLUE JAYS -- Optioned Domingo Cedeno, infielder, to Syracuse of the International League.
National League  COLORADO ROCKIES -- Optioned Lance Painter, pitcher, to Colorado Springs of the Pacific Coast League.
LOS ANGELES DODGERS -- Optioned Ismael Valdes, pitcher, to Albuquerque of the Pacific Coast League.
SAN FRANCISCO GIANTS -- Optioned William VanLandingham, pitcher, to Phoenix of the Pacific Coast League.
Basketball  National Basketball Association  ATLANTA HAWKS -- Signed Jim Les, guard, to a two-year contract.
PORTLAND TRAIL BLAZERS -- Named Dick Harter assistant coach.
Continental Basketball Association  FORT WAYNE FURY -- Traded Mike Iuzzolino, guard, and Paris McCurdy and Brian Martin, forwards, to the Shreveport Crawdads for Jerome Harmon, guard; Scott Meents and Reggie Cross, forwards; and Brad Baldridge, center.
HARTFORD HELLCATS -- Named Mark Osowski assistant coach.
RAPID CITY THRILLERS -- Traded Jerome Lane, center, to the Fort Wayne Fury for 1994 first- and third-round draft picks.
Football  National Football League  GREEN BAY PACKERS -- Waived Malcolm Showell, defensive lineman.
KANSAS CITY CHIEFS -- Signed Wesley Carroll, wide receiver.
Waived Patt Evans, tight end.
Arena Football League  ARIZONA RATTLERS -- Signed Ross Setters, lineman.
Placed Dean Jones, lineman, on injured reserve.
CHARLOTTE RAGE -- Signed Bobby Roland, wide receiver-defensive back.
CLEVELAND THUNDERBOLTS -- Placed Jon Garber, lineman, on injured reserve.
MASSACHUSETTS MARAUDERS -- Suspended Phil Loganm wide receiver-defensive back.
Activated Elliott Searcy, wide receiver-linebacker.
MILWAUKEE MUSTANGS -- Signed Winston Sandri, lineman.
Acquired Darrin Mrachek, lineman, off waivers.
Hockey  International Hockey League  CINCINNATI CYCLONES -- Named Mike Utermark ticket account representative.
DETROIT VIPERS -- Signed David Goverde, goaltender, and Steve Strunk, center.
HOUSTON AEROS -- Acquired Scott Arniel, center, from the San Diego Gulls for an undisclosed amount of money and future considerations.
Colonial Hockey League  FLINT GENERALS -- Announced an franchise affiliaton with the Milwaukee Admirals of the International League.
College
CALIFORNIA -- Named Robyne Johnson assistant track and field coach.
CENTRAL, IOWA -- Named Rick Magill men's soccer coach.
GEORGE FOX -- Announced the resignation of Pat Casey, baseball coach, to take the same position at Oregon State.
ILLINOIS STATE -- Named Robert Lindsey strength coach and Glen Largent assistant trainer.
MASSACHUSETTS-LOWELL -- Named Harold C. Sauter women's soccer and softball coach.
Announced the resignation of Tracey L. Houk, field hockey coach and men's assistant swimming coach, to take the same position at Mansfield.
PACIFIC -- Named Tony Marcopulos, Ron Verlin and Mike Terpstra men's assistant basketball coaches.
SAM HOUSTON STATE -- Named Don Hood assistant track coach.
UPPER IOWA -- Named Dustin Blythe men's and women's track coach.
TEMPLE -- Named Seamus Mc Williams women's soccer coach.
VILLANOVA -- Named Ed Bartsch men's swimming coach.


Son of 'Saturday Night Live' and 'Kids in the Hall'
"The Vacant Lot," which has its debut tonight on the cable channel Comedy Central, is the latest series to exploit the sketch-comedy genre that was defined and popularized if not originated by "Saturday Night Live" and perpetuated most recently by "The Kids in the Hall." Like "Kids," the show is named for the comedy troupe that creates and performs the material, and like both its predecessors, "Vacant Lot" expresses a youthful irreverence and a sense of glee in its assault on conventional good taste.
Also as before, the sketches maintain a spiritual alliance with rock-and-roll and with MTV-style graphics.
All of these similarities are not so surprising given that the Vacant Lot troupe -- four men in their 20's: Rob Gfroerer, Paul Greenberg, Nick McKinney and Vito Viscomi -- were discovered in Toronto by Lorne Michaels, who, of course, was behind the other two shows as well.


AN EXXON VERDICT OF $286.8 MILLION
A Federal jury in Alaska decided yesterday that the Exxon Corporation should pay $286.8 million in compensatory damages to Alaskan fishermen, about a third of what they said was due them for harm caused by the nation's worst oil tanker spill five years ago.
The verdict was delivered in the second phase of a three-phase trial that began 15 weeks ago in Federal District Court in Anchorage.
It was the product of 23 days' deliberation by the jury of nine women and three men on damage claims by more than 10,000 fishermen who work the waters of Prince William Sound, Cook Inlet and Kodiak Island.


No Runs, No Hits, No Errors: Baseball Goes on Strike
With the two sides in baseball's labor dispute far apart and rigid in their positions, major league players went on strike after last night's games, shutting down the season with the eighth work stoppage in 23 seasons.
The dispute, centering on the owners' demand to create cost control by putting a limit on player payrolls, was so severe that negotiators for the two sides didn't even bother to meet and barely spoke to each other yesterday.


Masterpieces of the Postwar Era
The Guggenheim Museum has huffed and puffed a lot in the last few years about wanting to be a world art empire, but the only kind of internationalism that will matter in the long run is the breadth and depth of its collecting.
A sense of how that collecting is going can be had in "The Tradition of the New: Postwar Masterpieces From the Guggenheim Collection." With more than 140 works filling the museum from top to bottom, it's a big show, but one with no overarching idea except to suggest the parallel tracks followed by art in America and in Europe from the late 1940's through the 70's.


Seau and Brooks: Above All Yet Worlds Apart
Off the field they couldn't be more different.
Michael Brooks is a crusty, blunt person who will always speak his mind and doesn't care what people think.
Junior Seau is the National Football League's version of Michael Jordan, a superstar who is media savvy and is careful to make sure he doesn't do or say the wrong things.
They do have one thing in common: They are two of the game's best linebackers.
And when the Giants play the Chargers on Saturday at Olympic Stadium, German fans will get to see them on the same field.


A Pro-Choice Barbara Bush


Art in Review
'New York Beauties' 'Quilts From the Empire State'
Museum of American Folk Art
2 Lincoln Square, at 65th Street
Through Sept. 11


LIBERTY MEDIA SEEN IN MADISON SQ. GARDEN TALKS
Liberty Media and Viacom Inc. are discussing a bid in which Viacom would retain a significant interest in the Madison Square Garden properties, several people familiar with the negotiations said yesterday.
Viacom, which has been trying to sell the properties after acquiring them in its takeover of Paramount Communications earlier this year, has set a deadline of Monday for final bids.
The properties include the Madison Square Garden arena, the New York Knicks and Rangers and the MSG Network.
Liberty is likely to consolidate its offer with that of John Labatt Ltd., the Canadian brewing and sports company, according to a person familiar with the talks.
The other remaining bidder is Cablevision Systems Inc., which has joined in an offer with the ITT Corporation.


Man in the News: Abner Joseph Mikva; Judge on a Return Mission to Politics
In installing Abner J. Mikva, a prominent former lawmaker who is now a Federal judge, as his new White House counsel, President Clinton has turned once again to a pillar of official Washington -- a man who said recently that he was "too old, too white, too male and too liberal" ever to be named to the Supreme Court.
Judge Mikva, a ruddy-faced 68-year-old Chicagoan, will return to the political wars through the unusual step of surrendering a lifetime appointment on the bench -- he is chief judge of the Federal Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia -- to enter service in the executive branch at an age when many men have already retired.


Making Music, Making Money
While Woodstock became a symbol of hippiedom at its anti-materialist best, the three promoters who are back to retell the tale never fit the image.
After their 1969 financial fiasco, Joel Rosenman and John Roberts kept the trademark alive and paid debts.
They also set up and later sold a recording studio in Manhattan and opened a boutique investment bank, J. R. Capital Investors.


London Journal; Rapping, and No Apologies for a Generation's Rage
Growing up in northern England, the son of Pakistani immigrants, Haq Newaz Qureshi always had the vague feeling that he had committed some kind of wrong by not being born white, by not being really English.
"All the time I'd be apologizing," said Mr.
Qureshi, who is now 31 years old.
"I'd be saying, 'Oh, I don't eat curry, I love fish and chips.' You couldn't even go by your own name because people said it was too hard to pronounce."


Stewart Information Services Corp.(STC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Grace Church Restores Two Jewels to Its Crown


Why This Writer?
To the Editor:
While many Bangladeshi Muslims support the right of Taslima Nasrin, a Muslim woman writing about Islamic values in a Muslim state, to express her views, the coverage of this issue further illuminates how American media cover Islam.
Why such interest in Ms.
Nasrin's plight in the American press, with so many other persecuted writers in the world?
Is it only the newsworthiness of the event?
Could we not say that such events are selected to represent the Islamic world as fanatical, different, irrational and other?
The issue is freedom of expression and not the "civilized" Western world pitted against "fundamentalist" Muslims.
LAMIA KARIM  New York, Aug. 2, 1994


Clinton Proposes Deadline to End Bosnia Arms Embargo
President Clinton said today that he would set a deadline of late October to ask the United Nations to lift the arms embargo on Bosnia unless Bosnian Serbs accepted a new peace plan they have rejected repeatedly.
Under intense pressure from Capitol Hill, the President said he hoped that setting a deadline would discourage Congress from supporting the unilateral lifting of the embargo and would persuade the Serbs to accept the deal, Administration officials said.


Sotheby's Holdings Inc.(BID,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


A Composer's Vision of a Perfect World
Carman Moore has labored intently since 1990 on his "Mass for the 21st Century," and when he conducted his Skymusic Ensemble and several hundred choristers, dancers and soloists in its world premiere on Wednesday evening, Damrosch Park was overflowing with curious listeners.
Yet there is a degree to which this grandly scaled expression of warning, exhortation and hope may remain a work in progress.
Mr.
Moore plans to perform it around the world over the next five years, and to usher in the year 2000 with a performance at the Cathedral of St.
John the Divine.
Given the penchant most composers have for tinkering with their scores after hearing them, it would be surprising if he did not iron out some of this work's rough spots along the way.
This is a piece with big ambitions.
In it, Mr.
Moore argues for peace, equality, inclusiveness, devotion to a universal Creator and the preservation of the earth and its ecology.
There is an inevitable naivete in this message, but in the second of the Mass's three sections, Mr.
Moore tempers its platitudinous side with reminders -- expressed in pantomime, dance and allegory -- that mankind has not done well on these points, particularly in recent times.


New Harvard Forms Hurt Only Students
To the Editor:
The real difference between the old and new Harvard applications (news article, July 29) is that the old instructions were in plain English, while the new ones are socioeducational double-talk, and thus academically chic.
You suggest that the new application, because everybody uses it, is less elitist and easier to fill out.


Looking Backward With a Klezmer Master
The propulsive Jewish folk music known as klezmer that was played by itinerant bands throughout Eastern Europe before World War II has earned many sobriquets, among them "Jewish jazz." The pumping rhythms, modal harmonies and cantorial cry of this European roots music have filtered into countless Broadway musicals.
And in recent years, klezmer has gained increasing recognition in America as an essential folk tradition that distills and keeps alive the rich Yiddish culture that the Nazi death camps attempted to eradicate.
Probably no one living has done more to perpetuate klezmer traditions than Leopold Kozlowski, the subject of Yale Strom's absorbing documentary film "The Last Klezmer," which opens today at the Walter Reade Theater.
A Holocaust survivor who is now in his early 70's, Mr.
Kozlowski, whose original name was Leopold Kleinman, is the nephew of a noted klezmer clarinetist, Naftule Brandwein, who immigrated to the United States in the 1920's.


CHRONICLE
MICHAEL JACKSON invoked the Fifth Amendment in a lawsuit by five ex-bodyguards, The Associated Press reported yesterday.
The men are claiming he fired them because, they say, they knew Mr.
Jackson had sexually abused young boys.
Their suit was filed in November, and they are seeking unspecified damages.
Documents filed on July 18 and obtained by The Associated Press said that Mr.
Jackson had refused to respond "on the grounds and to the extent that it may violate his state and Federal rights to not be compelled to give testimony that may incriminate him or prematurely divulge his defenses to or in any criminal proceeding." Calls to his lawyers were not returned.


House Health Bill in Doubt
The course of the House health care bill became more uncertain with debate being delayed and the unveiling of a rival bipartisan plan.
Page A18.


Pep Boys-Manny, Moe &amp; Jack (PBY,N) reports earnings for Qtr to July 30


Rwandans Face Daunting Task: Reviving Trust
The Prime Minister of Rwanda, Faustin Twagiramungu, faces the formidable task of reuniting his country and persuading more than a million refugees that it is safe to return home.
But first he must sell the notion to his teen-age daughter.
Fearing for her life, he said, his 14-year-old daughter has vowed to remain with her mother and two younger brothers in Brussels, where they fled when the killing erupted in April.


Judge Stops the Count on Middleweight
Middleweight JOHN DAVID JACKSON regained his World Boxing Association title yesterday, thanks to a Federal judge in Paterson, N.J.
United States District Judge MARYANNE TRUMP BARRY granted Jackson a preliminary injunction, barring the World Boxing Association from recognizing anyone else as its middleweight champion before a trial next month.
The W.B.A. stripped Jackson (31-0) of his championship after he fought a non-title fight without its permission May 6 in Atlantic City. (AP)


Joe Camel Billboard Ends Broadway Run
After five years as one of the most prominent signs in Times Square, the Camel cigarette billboard featuring the brand's Joe Camel cartoon character is coming down.
"The board did the job we wanted it to do, and now it's time to move on," Peggy Carter, a spokeswoman for the R. J. Reynolds Tobacco Company in Winston-Salem, N.C., said yesterday, as workers dismantled the blocklong sign on Broadway between 44th Street and 45th Street.
The billboard, which displayed a neon-lit Joe Camel above the words "Smooth character" and huge ersatz packs of Camel cigarettes, went up in June 1989.


Valspar Corp.(VAL,N) reports earnings for Qtr to July 29


United Illuminating Co.(UIL,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Sounds Around Town
On Vibraphone
Steve Nelson, Bradley's, 70 University Place, Greenwich Village, (212) 228-6440.
Steve Nelson is seemingly everywhere nowadays, the thinking person's vibraphonist.
He rarely leads his own groups, and for this engagement he is to perform with the pianist Mike LeDonne, the bassist Ira Coleman and the drummer Ben Riley.
Mr.
Nelson, unlike most of the great figures on the instrument, plays introspectively, demanding that the listener meet him on neutral ground.
The work is amply repaid.
Shows are today and tomorrow at 10 P.M., midnight and 2 A.M.
There is a $15 cover charge and an $8 minimum.
PETER WATROUS Music at the Museum
Cyrus Chestnut, Brooklyn Museum, 200 Eastern Parkway, (718) 638-5000.
Cyrus Chestnut is a thrilling pianist who controls his dynamics; his trio works as a group.
Mr.
Chestnut revels in swing and the blues, and his performances are always rhythmically charged, the perfect thing for the museum's Soul Connections series.
The show is on Sunday at 3 P.M., and is free with admission to the museum: $4 for adults, $2 for students, $1.50 for the elderly and free for children under 12 accompanied by an adult.
P.
W.
A Sextet
Todd Meyers's Sextet, Iridium, 44 West 63d Street, Manhattan, (212) 956-4676.
This sextet features some of the best young musicians working, including the saxophonists Steve Wilson and Walter Blanding, along with the trumpeter Marcus Printup.
It's a good chance to hear a loose group of soon-to-be-important musicians in an informal setting, just the type of situation where they'll play their best.
Shows are tonight and Saturday night, at 9:30, 11 and 12:30.
There is a $10 cover charge.
P.
W.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, the Market Place column in Business Day on Monday, about the bankruptcy proceedings of the Hexcel Corporation, misstated the business of M. J. Whitman L.P.
It is a broker-dealer, not a fund.


Mets Pack Their Bags For a Late Vacation
David Segui shoved all his belongings into his truck, his luggage and personal effects packed against the window of the passenger's seat.
He picked up some gas and coffee money, then drove to Veterans Stadium this afternoon and left the truck in the lot.
And when tonight's game against the Phillies finally came to a conclusion -- with a 2-1 Philadelphia victory in the bottom of the 15th inning in the midst of a downpour -- Segui, the Mets' outfielder/first baseman, changed out of his uniform and headed out of the clubhouse with the intention of driving 19-plus hours to his home in Kansas City, Mo.


A young American agency turns to a British import to raise its creative pitch.
A LEADING British creative director is joining Berlin Wright Cameron as the agency, nearing its first anniversary, seeks to emphasize further its creative capabilities.
Jon Matthews, a copywriter who has helped to produce popular and successful campaigns at BMP DDB Needham in London for accounts like the Barclaycard credit card and Clarks children's shoes, is coming to Berlin Wright in New York in the new position of creative director.
Scott Burns, a partner in the agency, continues as executive creative director.


Corrections
An article on Tuesday about cost cutting at the South Street Seaport Museum misspelled the surname of its president.
He is Peter Neill.


Last Chance
Here is a sampling of shows and exhibitions in New York City that are to close soon: Closing This Weekend
"PACKAGING THE NEW: DESIGN AND THE AMERICAN CONSUMER," Cooper-Hewitt, 2 East 91st Street, Manhattan.
An exhibition that traces the history of American consumerism and includes such items as furniture and household appliances.
Through Sunday.
Hours: Today and tomorrow, 10 A.M to 5 P.M.; Sunday, noon to 5 P.M.
Admission: $3; $1.50 for students and the elderly.
Information: (212) 860-6868.
WILLEM DE KOONING, C&amp;M Arts, 45 East 78th Street, Manhattan.
Paintings, sculpture and works on paper from the 1940's to 80's.
Final day is today.
Free.
Hours: 10 A.M. to 5 P.M.
Information: (212) 861-0020.
"THE ARTS PROJECT," Synchronicity Space, 55 Mercer Street, near Grand Street, SoHo.
Photographs and sculptures by homeless people from the Manhattan Bowery Shelter.
Through tomorrow.
Free.
Hours: today and tomorrow, noon to 5 P.M.
Information: (212) 925-8645.
Closing Next Weekend
W.
EUGENE SMITH, Robert Mann Gallery, 42 East 76th Street, Manhattan.
Works by the photojournalist.
Through Aug. 19.
Free.
Hours: Mondays through Fridays, 11 A.M. to 6 P.M.; closed Saturdays and Sundays.
Information: (212) 570-1223.
"A WORTHY USE OF SUMMER: JEWISH SUMMER CAMPING IN AMERICA" and "CAMP PINECLIFFE, 1981: PHOTOGRAPHS BY GAY BLOCK," Jewish Museum, 1109 Fifth Avenue, at 92d Street, Manhattan.
Through Aug. 21.
An exhibition of photographs, letters and other mementos of Jewish camp life.
Admission: $6; $4 for students and the elderly.
Hours: Sundays, Mondays, Wednesdays and Thursdays, 11 A.M. to 5:45 P.M.; Tuesdays, 11 A.M. to 8 P.M.; closed Fridays and Saturdays.
Information: (212) 423-3200.


Sanitation Dept. Gets Up-From-Ranks Chief
John J. Doherty, who joined New York City's Department of Sanitation as a garbage collector in 1960 and rose through its uniformed and administrative ranks, will be the department's new Commissioner, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani announced yesterday.
Mr.
Doherty, the first commissioner in more than three decades to have picked up trash in a department uniform, replaces Emily S. Lloyd, a holdover from the Dinkins administration who resigned in May to become a vice president at Columbia University.


White House Opens Inquiry on Agriculture Chief
Two days after Attorney General Janet Reno sought an independent investigation of Agriculture Secretary Mike Espy's acceptance of outside gifts, the White House announced its own inquiry into the matter and ordered employees not to accept travel or housing from private interests.
The White House counsel, Lloyd N. Cutler, said in a statement that he had asked the Office of Government Ethics to determine if Mr.
Espy had violated Federal ethics regulations by accepting plane rides, sports tickets and other favors from companies that the Agriculture Department regulates.


Attention Shoppers: Internet Is Open
At noon yesterday, Phil Brandenberger of Philadelphia went shopping for a compact audio disk, paid for it with his credit card and made history.
Moments later, the champagne corks were popping in a small two-story frame house in Nashua, N.H.
There, a team of young cyberspace entrepreneurs celebrated what was apparently the first retail transaction on the Internet using a readily available version of powerful data encryption software designed to guarantee privacy.


The Alluring Dragonfly, Elusive and Misunderstood
RON ZYCH is a ranger who wears a Smokey Bear hat and takes people places they've never dreamed.
On Sunday, you can follow him into the woods and see flying dragons.
He will point to lush ferns and recall that 300 million years ago, the ferns' ancestors towered like oaks.
A dragonfly will flit by, and he will tell you that in this primeval time, such animals had a wing span of more than two feet.
Mr.
Zych, an urban park ranger for the City Parks Department, is to lead a tour through High Rock Park in the Greenbelt of Staten Island.
It is called "Dragons of Summer," a name he devised when he thought up the annual walk three years ago.
Participants will walk through a forest of oaks, chestnuts and maples across a glacial terrain.
They will hear the meow of the catbird and the croak of bullfrogs, smell the rotting, regenerative odors of deepest summer, maybe see a giant snapping turtle or a northern water snake and pick handfuls of blueberries, now in full fruit.


Two More Charges Against Eagleson
ALAN EAGLESON, former head of the National Hockey League players' union, was indicted yesterday in Boston on two new charges of racketeering.
Eagleson, a Toronto lawyer, was charged in March in a 32-count indictment accusing him of racketeering, mail fraud, taking kickbacks, embezzlement and threatening a grand-jury witness.
The new counts allege Eagleson defrauded two former Boston Bruins players, ANDRE SAVARD and MIKE GILLIS, by charging them more than $50,000 to collect disability insurance claims in the mid-1980's.
Eagleson, 61, was executive director of the N.H.L.
Players Association from 1967 to 1991.
He and his companies also represented more than 150 players as a hockey agent. (AP)


CRIME BILL FAILS ON A HOUSE VOTE, STUNNING CLINTON
In a startling defeat for the House Democratic leadership and an embarrassment for President Clinton, the House shelved the Administration's anti-crime bill on a procedural vote today.
It was the third time in four years that a major crime bill was stifled or scaled back at the last minute.
A move to bring the bill to the floor was defeated 225 to 210, with 58 Democrats going against their party and their President to derail the $30 billion package that contained a ban on the sale of 19 assault weapons.
The assault-weapon ban was strenuously opposed by gun proponents, while death penalty provisions were opposed by liberals and blacks.


For Children
Open Dance Rehearsals
Brooklyn Bridge Anchorage
Old Fulton and Hicks Streets
Brooklyn Heights
(212) 206-6674
Recommended for all ages
Through next Friday
Inside three of the Brooklyn Bridge's gigantic stone-and-brick vaults, which make up a performance space known as the Anchorage, professional dancers and children are rehearsing for a performance in September.
The public is invited to watch them now.
This doesn't sound like your ordinary setting for dance rehearsals, right?
In fact, the vaults are clean, dark and cool but with spooky, phantom-of-the-opera overtones.
In a more exalted vein, the vaults can recall the experience of being in a European cathedral.
The dance troupe, headed by Ann Carlson, a choreographer in residence at the Anchorage this summer, certainly likes it here.
And if you think the vaults are strange, consider some of the sets designed by artists for the September show.
Todd Gilens's "trees" are made up of long twigs "planted" in green bases; his "gold nuggets" of papier-mache are big enough for children to sit in them.
Pat Oleszko's inflated-nylon clown sculptures are about 24 feet tall and swallow up an entire vault.
All of which is bound to perk up children on a desultory August afternoon.
They can also participate in art projects during their visit: drawing their dreams, making handprints and molding plaster impressions of their arms, knees and other body parts (the casts are to be used in the September dance show).
The rehearsals are open to the public from 10 A.M. to 3 P.M today and on Aug. 17, 18 and 19, and from noon to 3 P.M. tomorrow.
Ms.
Carlson's performance, "A Mirage," presented by Creative Time and Dance Theater Workshop, is to be held Sept. 9, 10, 11, 16, 17 and 18.
To reach the Anchorage, take a No. 2 or No. 3 subway train to Clark Street, then walk north on Henry Street to Old Fulton Street, which you cross near Hicks Street (there is no traffic light).
At the Anchorage's entrance is a large sculpture depicting a man, a woman and a child.
Fulton Ferry Esplanade and Empire-Fulton Ferry State Park
26 New Dock Street (near Water Street)
Fulton Landing, Brooklyn
(718) 858-4708
Recommended for all ages
Inside the courtyard of the River Cafe is a gate to this hard-to-find esplanade, which hugs the East River and offers a view of the belly of the Brooklyn Bridge.
And though the park and the esplanade can also be reached at their official address on New Dock Street, going through the grounds of River Cafe, at the end of Old Fulton Street, is easier.
On the esplanade is a display explaining how the bridge was built; the site is also popular with film makers, fashion photographers and tourists.
Unfortunately, there's also a big pile of trash, so you'll want to mosey on to the adjacent state park, which doesn't look like a state park (there are no rangers, although a sign reminds you who the Governor is).
This park is a quiet, enclosed, grassy three acres with a knoll to run up and down on.
Some rosehip bushes entice children to pluck their big pink berries.
There are empty brick warehouses on the fringes of the park (they once were coffee and tobacco factories).
In one corner of the park is a cluster of trees, and benches in the shade.
On a recent afternoon, the park was buzzing with children from a nursery school; they were spritzing one another and passers-by, who didn't mind.
And, oh yes, there's the river to admire.
The esplanade is open from dawn to dusk.
The park's summer hours are 10 A.M. to 8 P.M. daily.
Puppet-Making Workshop
Andrew Heiskell Library for the Blind and Physically Handicapped
40 West 20th Street
Chelsea
(212) 206-5400
Recommended ages: 8 to 12
Tomorrow
"I'm the puppet lady," said Sahyini Morningstar, who has been making puppets, doing puppet shows and teaching both skills for the last 30 years.
Ms.
Morningstar, who is also the founder and artistic director of the Speaking Shield Puppet Theater in Manhattan, is to create puppets tomorrow in a program meant for blind or partly sighted children.
"I'm going to take a tactile approach," she said, explaining that the children are to make U-shaped finger puppets that can squeeze into a pocket.
"We'll focus on smooth and soft textures and geometric shapes and dimensions, like thickness and thinness," she explained.
Ms.
Morningstar is supplying the materials: lace, buttons, beads, seashells, Styrofoam, ribbon, yarn and glue.
The free program is at 1:30 P.M. and requires registration.
A slightly different form of the program, this one for sighted children ages 6 to 12, is to be offered on Tuesday at the Hunts Point branch in the Bronx, (718) 617-0338; on Thursday at the Melrose branch in the Bronx, (718) 588-0110, and on Aug. 24 at the Harlem branch in Manhattan, (212) 348-5620. 'Jazz on the Hill'
St. Luke's Episcopal Church
Convent Avenue at 141st Street
Hamilton Heights
Manhattan
(212) 926-2713
Recommended for all ages
Sunday
Hamilton Heights wants to draw attention to its designated historical district and its artists, writers and musicians, past and present.
So the recently formed Hamilton Heights Preservation Association is holding jazz concerts to make adults and children more aware of this artsy terrain.
Sunday's concert is dedicated to the saxophonist John Coltrane, who died in 1967.
Coltrane didn't live in Hamilton Heights, but his music certainly influenced musicians in the community.
Bernice Cummings-Ubiles of the association explained that Hamilton Heights extends from West 135th Street to West 155th Street, between Broadway and St.
Nicholas Avenue (and then St. Nicholas Place).
Playing Sunday will be the C.C.N.Y.
Jazz Trio -- a pianist, a percussionist and a bass player, all CUNY graduate students -- and vocalists and a saxophonist from Hamilton Heights.
A jam session involving the audience is to finish the program.
Tickets to the show, from 6 to 8 P.M., will be available at the door.
Admission is $10 and free for children under 12.
Refreshments will be sold.
Keep In Mind "PLAYDAY AND KIDS' DAY," part of Lincoln Center Out of Doors, featuring participatory dancing, a drum workshop, mask and headdress making, the Czech puppeteer Vit Horejs, the commedia dell'arte troupe I Giullari di Piazza (Jesters of the Square), shape-note singing (a American folk tradition), storytelling, theater art, the Hudson Vagabond Puppets, the storyteller Malika Lee Whitney, clowns from the Big Apple Circus Clown Care Unit and World Patrol Kids, child singers and actors.
Tomorrow, 2 P.M. to 6 P.M.; Sunday, 1 P.M. to 5:30 P.M.; Monday, 10:30 A.M. to 11:30 Free.
Information: (212) 875-5400.
"LITTLE THUMBLING," a new musical by the Penny Bridge Players about a small being who has no fear of ogres.
At the Church of St.
Luke and St.
Matthew, 520 Clinton Avenue, between Fulton Street and Atlantic Avenue, Clinton Hill, Brooklyn.
Through Aug. 26, Tuesdays through Fridays at 10:30 A.M. and 1 P.M.
Tickets: $6 for children, $7 for adults.
Reservations: (718) 638-0686.
CHILDREN'S MUSICAL GARDEN FESTIVAL, featuring workshops about musical instruments and gardening, with free plants to take home, and a musical theater piece written for children and performed by the Manhattan School of Music.
At the New York Botanical Garden, 200th Street and Southern Boulevard, the Bronx.
Sunday, 4:30 to 7 P.M.
Admission: $3 for adults, $1 for children 6 to 16.
Parking fee: $4.
"THE SERVANT OF TWO MASTERS," a production by the British-American Youth Festival Theater of a commedia dell'arte farce by Carlo Goldoni, with music, dance, clowning, masks, costumes and sets.
At the Charles A. Dana Discovery Center, Central Park, 110th Street and Fifth Avenue.
Tomorrow at 2 P.M.
Lawn seating.
Free.
Information: (212) 567-8058.
"SUMMER FEST," an annual celebration of summer featuring live music, nature workshops (with exhibitors like the Audubon Society), live animals, face painting, martial-arts demonstrations and puppet shows.
Free.
Sponsored by the Urban Park Rangers at Kissena Park, Rose Avenue and Parsons Boulevard entrance, Flushing, Queens.
Tomorrow and Sunday, noon to 4 P.M.
Information: (718) 699-4204.


COMPANY BRIEFS
DOW CHEMICAL CO., Midland, Mich. and Asahi Chemical Industry Co., Tokyo, formed a $70 million joint venture in Hong Kong to make polystyrene.


Critic's Choice/Film; 'Green Snake' or 'Iron Monkey,' Anyone?
Some aspiring young film makers spend their time studying the works of Welles and Renoir.
Then there are the others, a la Quentin Tarantino, who see the world of martial-arts movies as a potential gold mine.
Certainly Festival Hong Kong, which begins a two-week run today at the Cinema Village, 22 East 12th Street, East Village, (212) 924-3363, has a lurid, crazy vitality all its own.
If titles like "Iron Monkey," "Green Snake," "Bullet in the Head" and "The Legend of Fong Sai-Yuk II" pique your interest, this is the place to be.


Home Video
In search of the alternative thrill: Must an on-screen game include target practice to succeed?
Not that they have forgotten how to kill, but video games now show signs of acknowledging that not everybody is a boy, 10 to 19 years old, with a quick trigger finger.
Girls, adults and young children also like to play, and for them not every setting can be a shooting gallery.


Just in Case There Is a Buried Explosive


Topics of The Times; Cutting Hospital Corners
If the experience of a recent patient is anything to go by, Manhattan hospitals are taking cost-cutting very seriously.
Arriving as an outpatient for a minor procedure, the patient was shown into a dressing room and handed a disposable gown -- along with a large paper sheet.
"After you've put on the gown," the nurse said, "you can cover yourself with the sheet."
The patient was a bit perplexed by this instruction but, in her state of hospital-induced docility, did not question it.
The reason for double covering only became clear when she donned the gown and found it was as transparent as anything from Frederick's of Hollywood.


A Wise Housekeeper Tries to Tidy Up a Bereft Family
Jessie Nelson, who wrote and directed the semi-autobiographical "Corrina, Corrina," based the title character on a 70-year-old housekeeper who helped to bring her up after her mother died.
Somewhere along the way, the housekeeper became 40 years younger and the role became earmarked for Whoopi Goldberg, who inherited all the material's built-in confusion.
Ms.
Goldberg gives a lovely, measured performance as a woman rising to a tricky challenge.
But she doesn't quite succeed in making sense of this loose-knit story.
Stylish, well-educated and skilled in the art of amateur psychoanalysis, Corrina is glaringly overqualified for her domestic job.
But she needs the work, so she signs on with the grieving Singer family and finds herself drawn both to troubled little Molly (Tina Majorino) and to Manny (Ray Liotta), Molly's lonely father.
Soon Manny begins to notice this housekeeper's exceptional talents.
Over dinner with the Singers, listening to a recording of Erik Satie's "Trois Gymnopedies," she asks: "Can you imagine being so poised and having such boldness in a composition when you're only 22?" (Manny, by the way, writes jingles for Jell-O and Mr. Potato Head, among other clients.) When Manny listens to Corrina, his jaw nearly hits the floor.


Britain Vows To Cut Troops In I.R.A. Deal
The chief of British security in Northern Ireland said today that Britain would reduce the number of army troops on patrol if the Irish Republican Army enacted a cease-fire that ended its campaign of killing in the province.
The statement, by Sir Hugh Annesley, Chief Constable of the Royal Ulster Constabulary, appeared to be an important concession to the overwhelmingly Roman Catholic I.R.A., whose goal is the end of the British military presence in the Protestant-dominated province of Ulster.


DeBartolo Realty Corp.(EJD,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


U.S. Indicts Teen-Ager Acquitted In Stabbing Death in Crown Hts.; How the Murder Case Proceeded
The Yankel Rosenbaum murder case added another chapter yesterday.
Here is a chronology of events:
AUG. 19, 1991: A 7-year-old black child, Gavin Cato, is killed by a car in a motorcade carrying Rabbi Menachem M. Schneerson, the head of the Lubavitch Hasidic movement.
The incident sets off three nights of violence in the Crown Heights section of Brooklyn.
In the melee, Yankel Rosenbaum is stabbed four times; the police say a witness saw him identify Lemrick Nelson Jr. as his attacker.


New Jersey Resources Corp.(NJR,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


More Subsidies Sought To Pay for Wiretap Plan
Telecommunications industry representatives testified before Congress today that the Federal Government was not offering enough subsidies to cover the costs of modifying digital phone equipment to permit wiretapping by law-enforcement agencies.
New legislation offers $500 million through 1998 to help pay for the installation of software on switching stations and other equipment so the Federal Bureau of Investigation and the police can keep up with the changes in technology.


How Clinton Can Be F.D.R.
After a year and a half in office, the Administration finds itself in a bizarre political condition.
It is so beleaguered -- even the anticrime bill was rejected in the House yesterday -- that Bill Clinton's own pollster is encouraging Democratic candidates not to identify themselves too closely with him this year.
Yet it is also agonizingly close to a monumental policy achievement.
Liberals (and others) have dreamed of national health insurance in vain for nearly a century.
Even five years ago, passage of any such program seemed virtually inconceivable.
Now, uncertain as its prospects remain, it is closer than it has ever been.


A Designer Of Clothes And a Muse In Overalls
Like fashion itself, the French film "A la Mode" depends heavily on whimsy and charm.
And if proof is needed that those can be elusive virtues, it's here on screen.
"A la Mode" supposes that its hero, a 17-year-old orphan with a flair for concocting odd outfits, is a delight to everyone he meets.
As Fausto, Ken Higelin is earnest and lively, but he's never the adolescent dreamboat that the film describes.
Fausto's buddy, Raymond (Francois Hautesserre), a plump, ungainly sidekick whose specialty is flatulence on cue, has a similar charisma problem.
The film follows these two after they meet in an orphanage, talk earnestly about girls for a while, and then begin work as apprentices in a Jewish section of the nearby town.
Raging hormones turn this into a coming-of-age story, at least for Fausto, who becomes smitten with a pretty young woman (Florence Darel) who wears mechanic's overalls.
She becomes his fashion muse, and she also fixes cars.


Market Place; The prices of small-cap stocks may be on the rebound.
SMALL stocks may be on the rebound, according to some of the watchers of this niche.
This bounce for stocks with market capitalizations of less than $100 million comes after a difficult year.
The Russell 2000 growth index, which tracks the prices of small-capitalization stocks, was off 10.1 percent in the first six months of the year.
The market correction battered the stocks of many smaller companies, as equity investors reacted to rapidly rising interest rates.


Oneita Industries(ONA,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Drive on Mob Sabotaged In New Jersey
An extensive Federal undercover operation that was intended to block the Lucchese crime family from gaining a new foothold in New Jersey was blown apart when a New York City transit police officer apparently tipped off a ringleader of the conspiracy, the authorities said today.
The collapse of the investigation was revealed in a Federal indictment that chronicled how an array of law-enforcement agencies had massed last year to push back the incursion by the Luccheses, who are based in New York, only to have the Government's efforts sabotaged when an informer's identity was revealed.


On My Mind; The Pope's Knight
Wait, wait as long as you can before you write a word.
It is an important story and lots of people will be touchy about it -- you are already.
So give yourself plenty of time.
Then see if you still think it is important and upsetting.
Journalists often say they wish they had that luxury, but poor us, we have to rush into print.
Actually, though, it is not in our nature or in the nature of the news business to long for that boon of time.


A President Staggering
From President Clinton's point of view, the timing could hardly have been more wretched.
Just when he needed to start building momentum for the forthcoming votes on health care legislation, just when his party needed a victory to give it a bit of a boost heading into this fall's elections, just when the White House staff needed to have its spirits restored after the blow it took last week with the change of Whitewater prosecutors, something else went wrong.


Kodak to Sell L&amp; F Units Separately
The Eastman Kodak Company has shifted slightly in its plans to divest itself of operations that are not photo related, deciding to sell its L&amp;F consumer products and household coatings division as two separate entities rather than as one unit.
Analysts said the company would probably still receive a price somewhere in its original target range of $1.7 billion to $2 billion.


Treasury Prices Drop On Rate Speculation
Treasury prices fell sharply yesterday, after two Government economic reports increased speculation that the Federal Reserve was ready to raise interest rates again.
Investors also reacted negatively to the higher-than-expected average yield at the Treasury's auction of the new 30 1/4-year bond, the last leg of the Treasury's quarterly refunding.
The average yield at the auction of the new bond was 7.56 percent, the highest since November 1992 when the yield was 7.66 percent.


Radisson and SAS Form Hotel Pact
Hoping to create a larger global presence, Radisson Hotels International announced yesterday that it has formed an alliance with SAS International Hotels, a subsidiary of Scandinavian Airlines System.
The agreement includes 30 SAS hotels in nine European countries, as well as in Kuwait and China.
And it gives SAS the right to develop additional Radisson hotels in Europe.
SAS will manage and operate the hotels, which will soon bear the Radisson/ SAS Hotels Worldwide logo, while Radisson will market them around the world and link the hotels to its existing reservations system.


Some Wonder if This Is When Cheering Stops By Claire Smith
In a game that supplies an endless amount of irony in its laborious collective bargaining wars, one of the more intriguing situations unfolded at Veterans Stadium last night.
Fernando Valenzuela, who as a rookie injected the one iota of innocence into the strike-ravaged 1981 season, took the mound for the Phillies in what could be his swan song as a major league pitcher.


In the Bleachers, Fans Cling to the Dwindling Outs
Deep in the center-field bleachers, 13-year-old Carmelo Vazquez savored the Yankees' last game before the impending baseball strike and once more imagined himself a major leaguer.
"If I was a player, I'd be here tomorrow to play, not strike," he said, staring across the greensward to home plate as if it were life's last hope.
"I mean, I play baseball for nothing, for the game. All baseball players have to play for the game."


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-10  MEXICAN PARTY IN TURMOIL  Mexico's long-ruling Institutional Revolutionary Party is mired in crisis as it heads toward what may be its toughest election, scheduled Aug. 21.
Support from unions and peasants has eroded, but somehow the party has managed to crank up its machine.
Some analysts even think it is likely to win.
A1  AIDS OUTPACES A CONFERENCE  The 10th International Conference on AIDS ended in Japan with no major breakthroughs reported in fighting the foremost new medical threat of the decade.
Meanwhile, the epidemic marched on.
A1


A Part of Growing Up: Locked in the Car


U.S. Indicts Teen-Ager Acquitted In Stabbing Death in Crown Hts.
The teen-ager who was acquitted of the fatal 1991 stabbing of a Hasidic scholar during four days of violence in Crown Heights has been indicted on Federal charges that he violated the scholar's civil rights, his lawyer said yesterday.
The new charges against Lemrick Nelson Jr., 18, who moved to the Atlanta area after his 1992 trial, came just days before the third anniversary of the Brooklyn racial unrest that tarnished the image of Mayor David N. Dinkins and became a major campaign issue between him and his victorious challenger, Rudolph W. Giuliani.


Sounds Around Town
Von Lmo, Gone and Back
Von Lmo, CBGB, 315 Bowery, at Bleecker Street, East Village, (212) 982-4052.
In 1981, Von Lmo, an eccentric New York rock guitarist and singer, disappeared.
It is unclear where he went, but two years ago he returned to Manhattan's music scene in a flash of broken guitar strings and crude lighting effects.
His music mixes the freedom of punk rock with the mechanical precision of electronic pop, and his lyrics about inner and outer space sound as if they come from experience.
The show is tomorrow night at 1 A.M.; admission is $8.
NEIL STRAUSS Grown and Growing
Jad Fair/the Stinky Puffs, Sideshows by the Seashore, Coney Island Boardwalk at West 12th Street, Brooklyn, (718) 372-5159.
Jad Fair is a saxophonist, guitarist and singer whose rock songs comes from the heart, and sometimes the nerves.
The tightly wound Mr.
Fair shares a fresh, spontaneous approach to music-making with his 10-year-old stepson, Simon Timony, who leads the Stinky Puffs.
Simon is best known for his song "I Love You Anyway," which is about Kurt Cobain, the Nirvana singer who committed suicide last spring, and which he recently performed in Olympia, Wash., with Mr.
Cobain's band mates.
The show is at 10 P.M.; it costs $6.
N.
S.


Now the Whole Sport Walked Out on Us
Was it Richard Ravitch or Donald Fehr who said:
"From this point out, it will simply be a case of dog eat dog, and the dog with the bulldog tendencies will live the longest."


Liuski Intl(LSKI,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


A Clinic Sues Two Top Employees, Calling Them Anti-Abortion Saboteurs
An abortion clinic here has sued its top two administrative employees, charging that they conspired with anti-abortion advocates to sabotage its workings by scheduling false appointments and driving up charges on its telephone number that prospective patients from throughout the region may call toll-free.
The conspiracy was uncovered early this year, the suit says, when a recording device at the clinic, the Palmetto State Medical Center, captured phone conversations between the two employees -- Melissa Spearman, the manager, and Sharon Bowen, her assistant -- and an unidentified anti-abortion advocate.


He Knew the Wrong People
For five years, Norberto Fuentes war reporter, fiction writer, biographer of Ernest Hemingway's life in Cuba -- has been isolated in Havana under virtual house arrest.
He is evidently the victim of his friendships with the wrong people -- two Army officers executed in 1989 after a show trial on what are widely believed to be trumped-up charges of drug trafficking.
They were the popular Gen.
Arnaldo Ochoa Sanchez, commander of Cuba's troops in Angola and a potential political rival to Fidel Castro, and Col.
Antonio de la Guardia Font, an Interior Ministry official who was once part of Mr.
Castro's inner circle.


Steinbrenner Trying to Make 'Economic Sense' of It All
George Steinbrenner, whose profitable baseball operation stands to be one of the biggest losers from a prolonged strike, admitted yesterday that he has a problem with his fellow owners arguing for competitive balance.
But the Yankee owner claims he has not broken ranks, that he will remain a good soldier and that he plans on supporting his peers throughout negotiations, regardless of how the owners are being represented.


Budd Canada reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Unfinished Business in El Salvador
For years the tiny nation of El Salvador preoccupied the United States, much as Haiti does now.
During the 1980's a bloody civil war, exacerbated by cold-war rivalries, terrorized the country.
Paramilitary death squads kidnapped and murdered anyone who dared to question the right-wing Government, from students to union members to the clergy, including the Archbishop of San Salvador.
Since the war ended in 1992, U.S. attention has flagged; but the peace is fragile.
While the guerrilla opposition, the Farabundo Marti National Liberation Front, or F.M.L.N., laid down its arms and participated in elections earlier this year, there is continuing evidence that right-wing death squads have not been so happy to give up their old methods.
A Truth Commission established by the peace accords released a report in March confirming the participation of the military, the police and paramilitary groups in massacres, torture, political kidnappings and other crimes since 1980.


At Long Last Smarter
Pauly Shore in a movie featuring explosives?
It's a tempting thought, given Mr.
Shore's track record as a smug, irritating neo-hippie character on screen.
But in his third starring role (after "Encino Man" and "The Son-in-Law") Mr.
Shore plays it relatively straight.
As Bones Conway, a failed video salesman, Mr.
Shore is seen enlisting in the Army Reserve, getting his head shaved and ending up on the battlefield.
Believe it or not, he's supposed to be a leader of men.
Putting Mr.
Shore under the authority of a pretty female drill sergeant (Lynn Whitfield) is, along with that bad haircut, one of this film's only ways of getting laughs.
It's not exactly sure-fire. (Bones: "Let's not fight -- c'mere!") Neither is the vulture-in-the-desert sight gag that recalls "Ishtar," a much funnier film than this.


Lands' End (LE,N) reports earnings for Qtr to July 29


Special Counsel Linked to Suit Against Clinton
Kenneth W. Starr, the recently appointed Whitewater prosecutor, agreed to represent a conservative women's group in preparing a legal brief arguing against President Clinton's claim that he should be immune from a sexual harassment lawsuit while in office.
It had been previously known that Mr.
Starr considered filing such a brief, but it was not known until his law partners acknowledged it today that he was asked to file the friend-of-the-court brief by the Independent Women's Forum, a Virginia legal policy group.


Woodstock: Time to Face the Music
FORGET, for the moment, about traffic, parking and facilities.
Don't think about how long ago the 1960's were, or about the onslaught of corporate sponsorship, or about how music that once evoked freedom now generates a vast apparatus of control.
Woodstock '94 is, after all, a music festival before it's a cultural symbol.
It's a bunch of bands playing for a lot of paying customers, on the site in Saugerties, and before television screens all over the place.
And its sheer magnitude -- more than 40 bands in three days -- guarantees some good performances.
Woodstock '94, which opens today, has booked dozens of known quantities, from surviving 60's stalwarts to current million-sellers.
What no one can forecast is how the chemistry will work out.
Will the festival become a battle of the bands, geezers versus whippersnappers?
Will tie-dyed neo-psychedelic bands beg to jam with 60's pioneers?
Will young songwriters' adolescent angst meet its match in their elders' midlife crises?
Will moshers, mopers and psychedelic swayers all dance on the same patch of farmland?


Cortines Announces Plan To Let Class Sizes Grow
Schools Chancellor Ramon C. Cortines said yesterday that he would allow the average class size in first through third grades to rise and would trim special education programs to help achieve $85 million in budget cuts demanded by City Hall.
The city's high schools and 32 community school districts would absorb $21.9 million of the spending reductions, cutting their budgets by roughly $24 per student, Mr.
Cortines said.
The central Board of Education, meanwhile, would pare $38.3 million from various citywide programs, reducing transportation for students, trimming administration costs and cutting $20 million from special education.


Going Back to the Garden Isn't Easy at Woodstock
For months now, the promoters of Woodstock '94 have been been predicting that their commemorative festival would run with a precision unseen at its famous, disorganized predecessor.
This afternoon at least, those predictions fell a bit flat.
Although the music was not scheduled to begin until Friday at noon, concert organizers had told ticket holders that they would be admitted at nine satellite parking lots as early as noon today.
About 5,000 people took the promoters up on the offer.
But instead of being taken by shuttle bus to the festival site, where they could pitch their tents and lay out their sleeping bags, they were left stranded at the lots for up to six hours because of a series of last-minute delays.
Buses Were Late
The first buses -- about a half dozen of them, all originating in a shuttle lot near Rhinebeck -- did not begin arriving until about 6 P.M.
Several other buses from various lots followed soon after.


Avnet Inc.(AVT,N) reports earnings for Qtr to July 1


Bipartisan Health Care Bill Gets Quick Industry Support
The health care bill unveiled today by a bipartisan group in the House of Representatives would offer billions of dollars to low-income people to help them buy private health insurance, but it would not raise taxes or require employers to contribute to the cost of coverage for their employees.
The bill won immediate endorsements from the American Medical Association and a coalition of five big insurers: Aetna Life and Casualty, Cigna, the Metropolitan Life Insurance Company, the Prudential Insurance Company of America and the Travelers Corporation.


The Spoken Word
POETRY AT BARNES &amp; NOBLE, 675 Avenue of the Americas, at 21st Street.
Sandy Rochelle will read from her work "Poems From the Heart." Today at 7:30 P.M.
Free.
Information: (212) 727-1227.
ART AT THE MET, Metropolitan Museum of Art, Fifth Avenue and 82d Street.


Gay Divorce: Few Markers In This Realm
Gay couples who want the right to be legally married make news these days, but consider for a moment the more quietly anguished plight of Bill and Elliot, who only want a divorce.
They lived together for 18 years near Kansas City, Mo.
They were co-owners of a small business and a home filled with expensive antiques.
They wanted a court system that had never legally recognized their union to dissolve it fairly and equitably, amid the bitter storm of recrimination that was sweeping over their lives as their relationship foundered.


Chekhov, Picked Apart and Put Back Together
Life is, at best, a lonely proposition for the hapless, love-starved provincials who inhabit Chekhov's "Sea Gull." But just imagine how isolating it must feel when the people onstage seem to come from different acting schools, different eras and, ultimately, different plays.
In Michael Greif's wildly disjointed interpretation that runs here through Sunday, the forging of human connections becomes futile to a degree that even Chekhov could never have imagined.
Watching the illustrious cast members Mr.
Greif has assembled going through their extremely varied paces at the Williamstown Theater Festival is a bit like looking at one of those cinematic spoofs, like Carl Reiner's "Dead Men Don't Wear Plaid," in which bits from different movies have been spliced together to create the illusion of continuity.
On its own bizarre terms, it's sort of a hoot, the kind of thing an aficionado of mis begotten theater could dine out on for weeks, especially if he or she has a gift for mimicry.


Topics of The Times; A Bad Budget Rule Change
The House votes today on a seemingly innocuous, but harmful, change in budget rules.
Under existing rules, members compare proposed spending for the next year with current spending adjusted for inflation.
Representative Charles Stenholm of Texas objects to that system because it counts as a budget cut a proposal that would raise spending by an amount less than inflation.
He wants budget tables to compare proposed spending only against current spending without an inflation adjustment.
But if prices are rising, spending the same amount on nutrition or research would mean that fewer families get food and fewer scientists get grants.
Government spending would be cut by the only definition that matters -- whether recipients receive more or fewer benefits.
Without proper adjustments for inflation, members would be voting on programs with little sense of the impact of their decision.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
Producer prices rose one-half of a percentage point in July, the biggest increase in 15 months, while retail sales slowed slightly.
But both overall figures masked changes in key sectors that give contradictory indications of whether the current economic expansion will lead to a sharp rise in inflation.  [ Page D1. ]
The Senate Commerce Committee approved a sweeping bill to rewrite the nation's 60-year-old communications law.
But local phone companies threatened to oppose several provisions.  [ D1. ]


Premdor Inc. of Toronto (PI,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Fed Nominee Is Confirmed By Senate
The Senate confirmed President Clinton's nomination of Janet L. Yellen, a California economist, to the Federal Reserve Board tonight by a vote of 94 to 6.
Senators were eager to put Ms.
Yellen on the board before next Tuesday's meeting of the central bank's interest-rate policy committee.


Selective Insurance Group (SIGI,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


N.B.A.'s Supermodel Defends Latest Fashion
Continuing what has been his coming-out year as a major star and arguably the leading man on Team USA, Reggie Miller stepped forward yesterday to defend his rambunctious young teammates on an off day at the world basketball championships.
Of course, little else could be expected from Miller since, as he said, "I'm a colorful player myself. If you want the other side, you should go over there and talk to Joe Dumars."
Beyond tonight's opponent, unbeaten Russia, and some torrid 3-point shooting by Spike Lee's favorite verbal sparring partner, the subject was the showboating, trash talking and, yes, even the crotch-grabbing by some of the United States players as they pulverized their last two opponents, Australia and Puerto Rico.


Foster Care Pits Children Against Bureaucracy
To the Editor:
It is with great sadness and frustration that I read the story of 3-year-old Sharmaine, who has been through the tangle of foster care in New York City (front page, July 26).


Thermo Instrument Systems Inc.(THI,A) reports earnings for Qtr to July 2


TURNER BROADCASTING SYSTEM INC. (TBS.A,A)
Turner Broadcasting System Inc. yesterday reported a 58 percent drop in second-quarter earnings from the corresponding period a year ago, mainly because of anticipated losses from the Goodwill Games, which were just completed.
The Atlanta-based company said its profits for the quarter were $13 million, or 5 cents a share, compared with $31 million, or 12 cents a share, in the period a year earlier.


Corrections
A brief report in Business Day yesterday about the second-quarter financial results of Federated Department Stores Inc. misstated the company's Wednesday closing stock price in some copies.
It was $19.50, up 12.5 cents (not $2.31, up 2.75 cents).


Slaps at Psychoanalysis Are All Too Common
To the Editor:
Two letters on July 25 have a common thread of ignorance about psychoanalysis.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
7.25
7.25
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.50
3.50
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
4.25
4.19
2.97
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.33
4.32
3.00
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.90
4.85
3.13
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.35
7.33
5.76
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.65
7.57
6.36
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.39
8.36
7.15
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.44
6.42
5.64
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


King Charged With Third-Degree Assault
BERNARD KING, the former Knicks star, was freed yesterday morning following his arrest for allegedly choking a woman who woke him up at his Manhattan apartment.
Police officers arrested King, 38, late Wednesday night.
He was charged with third-degree assault, given a desk appearance ticket and released, said Sgt.
ANTHONY BARLANTI, a police spokesman.
The woman, 22, was treated for bruises on her neck at New York Hospital, the police said. (AP)


Laser Corp.
The Laser Corporation, a maker and marketer of lasers for use in medical equipment and computer printers, saw its share price rise sharply yesterday after announcing a second-quarter profit of 16 cents a share, compared with a loss of 46 cents in the corresponding period last year.
The company attributed the results to higher sales and cost cutting.


Art in Review
'Group Show: Part 1' Sandra Gering Gallery 476 Broome Street SoHo Through Sept. 1 (after Monday, by appointment only)


Art in Review
Henry Moore Gagosian Gallery  134 Wooster Street (near Prince Street) SoHo Through Sept. 10


Bosnian Story Ends Happily; Back to Farm for Boy, 4
For months over the last year, Mirza Smailbegovic, a 4-year-old boy from Bosnia, lay in a bed at New York University Medical Center, as drugs dripped through a tube surgically implanted in his chest.
Suffering from a rare and virulent form of cancer, the boy begged for his mother, who was trapped with his father by the fighting that raged around their village.
But Mirza's story, which began so sadly, is ending most happily.


M.T.A. Overcharged New York, Comptroller's Audits Show
The Metropolitan Transportation Authority overbilled New York City last year by more than $1 million for policing and maintaining stations on two commuter railroad lines, according to audits released by the City Comptroller yesterday.
The audits also found that the majority of Metro-North Commuter Railroad and Long Island Rail Road stations within city limits had deteriorated and need repairs.
Auditors found unsafe conditions like holes in platforms, rotten beams on shelters, missing or shaky banisters and crumbling wooden borders along the platforms.


Jean-Dominique Fratoni, Casino Owner, 71
Jean-Dominique Fratoni, a casino operator who once vowed to make Nice the Las Vegas of the Riviera and who later fled France to avoid jail, died on Aug. 5 in Lugano, Switzerland.
He was 71.
The cause of death was cancer, the newspaper Nice-Matin reported.
During the 1970's Mr.
Fratoni, with the protection of a close friend, Mayor Jacques Medecin of Nice, was a powerful figure on the Cote d'Azur.
At one time he controlled casinos in Sainte-Maxime, Saint-Raphael, Juan-les-Pins, Menton and in Nice itself, where he began by restoring to prominence the failing turn-of-the-century Casino Club.


Bally Entertainment Corp.(BLY,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


A Dream Come True For African Athletes
When the first Pan Africa-U.S.A. track and field meet was held here in 1971, Wilford Daniels was an aspiring black middle-distance runner in South Africa competing in segregated clubs dictated by apartheid.
Gwen Griffith, then only 3 years old, was raised in a white family which resented but accepted a system that institutionalized racism.
Friday evening as 150 athletes march into Wallace Wade Stadium for opening ceremonies of the fourth Pan Africa-U.S.A. meet, Daniels and Griffith will be united in a historic moment that 20 years ago would have been regarded as a minor miracle.
They will march with fellow Africans under one flag, one uniform.
They will march as Africans for the first time since Nelson Mandela was elected as South Africa's first black president.
Griffith, now 26, is an accomplished 1,500-meter runner.
Daniels, 43, is the South African coach.


Meeting Lays Bare the Abyss Between AIDS and Its Cure
The 10th International Conference on AIDS ended here today with no major breakthroughs reported and with the world's researchers still far from defeating the foremost new medical threat of the decade.
Meanwhile, the epidemic marched on.


From the Bench to White House Counsel
President Clinton has hired a lawyer of high caliber in Abner Mikva, Chief Judge of the U.S.
Court of Appeals in Washington.
The choice offers hope that Judge Mikva, drawing on his judicial experience and his political service in Congress and the Illinois legislature, can both preach high ethical standards to the White House staff and command their observance.
Last week the first round of Whitewater hearings in Congress exposed once again the dire need for strong ethical and legal leadership.
Bernard Nussbaum, who resigned early this year, displayed the tenacity of a legal mouthpiece but not the ethical sensitivity required of the Counsel to the President.


For Yankees, the Field of Dreams Has a Lock on It
Telephone numbers were exchanged, the autographed baseballs nearly outnumbered the unautographed balls and the depressing clubhouse resembled a baggage carousel after the Yankees played possibly the last game of what has so far been a magical season.
Major league baseball in the Bronx disappeared yesterday after the Yankees joined the scheduled players strike, turning the potential magic into something that could be tragic, at least in Yankee vernacular.
Since the future is so uncertain, the Yankees are uncertain if their splendid record and first-place status will matter.
They do not know if they will be rewarded for lingering atop the American League East for the last 92 days.
Their reward might be one forgettable line in a record book about that strike-interrupted season if the disagreement is not settled.
To the Yankees, that would be a tragedy.


Home Holdings Inc.(HHI,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Opposition Grows to Giuliani's Plan to Merge Police Forces
Opposition to Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani's plan to merge the housing police into the New York Police Department in October is mounting in the City Council, in Congress and among leaders of public housing residents, who are collecting petitions and threatening a rent strike to oppose the move.
The Giuliani administration is taking the challenge so seriously that Police Commissioner William J. Bratton is planning to tour housing projects next week to calm public fears that a merger would bring inferior police protection to the one million New Yorkers who live in public housing.


Maritime Telegraph reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


California Congressman Is Indicted by U.S.
Representative Walter R. Tucker 3d, from a district south of downtown Los Angeles, was indicted today on eight Federal charges of extortion and filing false income taxes while he was Mayor of Compton, the largest city in his district.
The indictment, announced by United States Attorney Nora M. Manella, contends that Mr.
Tucker received $30,000 in bribes from a company that sought to build and operate an incinerator in Compton.
He was also charged with demanding an additional $250,000 to support the proposal and with signing income-tax forms for 1991 and 1992 that reflected less money than he had earned.


The Trouble With Wedowee
The rural town of Wedowee, Ala., has erupted twice in racial disturbances this year.
First the high school principal, Hulond Humphries, shocked the nation with remarks about interracial dating and by calling a student of mixed race a "mistake" of her parents.
Now the Randolph County High School itself stands gutted by fire, declared arson by local officials and a Federal investigative team.
Each episode has brought a prompt and appropriate Federal response.
It now will be up to the Justice Department and, if necessary, the Federal courts to maintain the pressure already generated.
They must finally force this pocket of resistance to comply fully with desegregation decrees a quarter-century old.


Starting Center Defects From Cuban Basketball
Richard Matienzo, the leading scorer and rebounder for Cuba at the World Basketball Championships, became the second Cuban player to defect within the past nine months when he failed to show up for the team's game here tonight against Germany.
Matienzo, a 25-year-old starting center from Havana, reportedly left the team's hotel in Toronto, about an hour's drive from here, and telephoned Toronto newspapers from a convenience store.
Canadian Press reported that employees of The Toronto Star had picked Matienzo up and taken him to the newspaper's office.
After Cuba lost its game to Germany tonight, 86-74, its coach, Miguel Calderon Gomez, said he had last seen Matienzo on Wednesday night when the team gathered at the hotel to watch a video of Germany's game against Brazil.
"That was about 8:30," Calderon Gomez said.
The grim-faced coach would not confirm or deny the player had defected.
"We have no information," he said.
"He left the hotel Wednesday night with some friends and he hasn't come back."
Pressed for a reaction, Calderon Gomez said, "Our team, like with the revolution, approached the game with conviction and strength regardless of what happened."
None of the Cuban players would comment on the absence of Matienzo, who had been averaging 19 points a game.
Matienzo had been with the Cuban national team since 1990, and played against the Dream Team in the Tournament of the Americas in Portland in 1992.
Before that game, the first for the Dream Team on its way to the gold medal at the Olympics in Barcelona, Spain, the Cubans asked to pose for pictures with the N.B.A. legends.
He played for Havana in the Cuban League.
Another top Cuban player, Andres Guibert, defected at the Americas qualifying tournament last November 30 in Ponce, Puerto Rico.
Calderon Gomez confirmed that Guibert had left the team during that tournament, but, as with Matienzo, said he had received no information and could not classify it as a defection.
Cuba has been plagued by numerous defections at recent international sporting events, as economic conditions have worsened.
Approximately 50 athletes defected last year at Central American and Carribean Games and another half-dozen at the World University Games last summer in Buffalo.


Central Garden &amp; Pet Co. reports earnings for Qtr to June 26


At the Bar; When this lawyer for New York City recounts La Guardia stories, she means her old boss.
At a reception for the newest of New York's corporation counsels earlier this year, Edith I. Spivack was asked to say a few words about several of her former bosses in the New York City Law Department.
When she got to Victor A. Kovner, who was corporation counsel in 1990 and 1991, she said she had been around to celebrate his bris.
She wasn't joking.
When Mr.
Kovner was born in 1937, Ms.
Spivack was a lawyer in the Law Department and attended his brith milah, or bris, the religious rite of circumcision on the eighth day after birth.


Unhealed Wounds of Crown Heights Bared Again
From the first night of street violence three years ago to the word of a new indictment today, Crown Heights has lodged in New York City's political craw as the case that will not go away.
The murder of Yankel Rosenbaum, the acquittal of the youth accused of killing him and the public disorder and failures of government that Crown Heights came to symbolize, dogged Mayor David N. Dinkins and might have helped to elect Rudolph W. Giuliani.
It brought grief to the once-golden District Attorney of Brooklyn, Charles J. Hynes, who is now running for state attorney general.


For Grieving Fans, Interim Therapy
IF the major-league players and owners don't agree on a contract, last night's games will turn out to be the end of the 1994 season.
One by one, the lights will go out in stadiums across America.
The bright beacon of Yankee Stadium will fade to black.
Shea Stadium, admittedly a flickering beam this year, will be extinguished like a sputtering candle.
And millions of fans will be left in the lurch.
There's only one thing to say.
Let's go, Pittsfield Mets!  Come on, Albany-Colonie Yanks! PLAY BALL!


Showalter Acts Like There's No Tomorrow
Buck Showalter was going on about the Toronto Blue Jays yesterday, fairly oblivious to the reality of the day.
He sat behind his desk in the clubhouse at Yankee Stadium with his usual furrowed brow, the strained lines in his forehead protruding.
He was plotting for today and preparing for tomorrow.
"I'm worrying about Dave Stewart Friday, Todd Stottlemyre Sunday and Al Leiter sandwiched in between," the Yankee manager said.
"I'm coming in to work like I usually do. We'll prepare for Toronto."


Steven F. Arnold, Photographer, 51
Steven F. Arnold, a photographer and film maker, died on Saturday in West Hollywood, Calif.
He was 51.
The cause was AIDS, said Wessel O'Connor Gallery, his representative in New York City.


Sports of The Times; The Owners Are Trashing Themselves
Thousands of letters, dozens of shoes, extra T-shirts, assorted gloves and balls, photographs and booklets, cassettes and CDs, all of them were stuffed into cardboard boxes in the hallway.
It was mid-August, and the Yankees were going home.
"This isn't theatrics, this isn't a show," Paul Gibson, one of the player representatives, was saying.


Creaky Juggernaut: A special report.; Torn by Change, Mexican Party Fights On
As the Institutional Revolutionary Party heads toward what may be the toughest election of its 65 years in power, it is mired in what many of its leaders consider the most profound internal crisis of its history.
Radical economic changes made by the Government of President Carlos Salinas de Gortari have grated on the party's traditional support among labor unions and peasant groups.
Ambitious efforts to build a new base of individual members rather than organizations have produced more conflict than success.
In a society pressing ever more vigorously for democratic change, the party continues to depend on authoritarian controls.


Phone Bill Advances In Senate
After negotiating at least a temporary cease-fire between feuding industry groups, the Senate Commerce Committee overwhelmingly approved a sweeping bill today to rewrite the 60-year-old communications law.
If enacted, the legislation would allow local telephone and cable television companies to enter each other's businesses, and it would gradually free the seven "Baby Bell" companies to offer long-distance service.


2d Atomic Sample, Likely From Russia, Found in Germany
The German authorities have discovered a second tiny sample of weapons-grade nuclear material that may have been smuggled out of Russia to interest foreign governments or terrorist groups that may want to build atomic bombs, the police said today.
They said they had seized the material, 0.028 ounces of highly enriched uranium-235, in June in Landshut, Bavaria, and have since arrested five Czech and Slovak men and a German woman as suspects in what they surmise was an attempt to arrange the sale of a larger amount to someone who wanted to build a bomb.


COMPANY NEWS: A Real Paper Chase; This Is a Contest With Limited Appeal
Sure, plenty of folks would love a $400 check, 40 pounds of gourmet jelly beans, 40 pounds of Wisconsin bratwurst or a free backyard barbecue for 40 people.
Some might even want a ton of carbonless paper, worth about $3,000, or an all-expenses paid trip to Appleton, Wis., for four, complete with a stay in Appleton Papers Inc.'s company-owned farmhouse and the chance to run one of the world's newest paper-making machines.
Nevertheless, Appleton Papers figured from the start that its contest offering these prizes would have limited appeal.


Dr. Robert E. Hood, Theologian, 58, Dies
The Rev.
Dr.
Robert E. Hood, director of the Center for African-American Studies at Adelphi University, died at his home in Forest Hills, Queens, on Tuesday.
He was 58.
The cause was complications after an unspecified illness, Adelphi officials said.


Art in Review
Henry Moore Gagosian Gallery  134 Wooster Street (near Prince Street) SoHo Through Sept. 10


We, the Jury, Who Are Anonymous
In his 26 years as a lawyer to Southern California's bedroom communities, Philip K. Mautino never considered the possibility that jurors feared for their lives.
But that was before a jury his wife was on convicted a gang member of murder.
Now, as the presiding judge of the Municipal Court in Los Cerritos, 15 miles southeast of Los Angeles, he has decided that jurors should be allowed to keep their identities secret.


Corrections
A picture caption heading yesterday about a possible new threat of disease at a Rwandan refugee camp in Goma, Zaire, misidentified the suspected disease.
It is typhus, not typhoid fever.


Judge Refuses to Step Aside; Battle With I.B.M. Persists
For the fourth time in a bitter legal feud that has simmered for more than four decades, Federal District Judge David N. Edelstein in Manhattan has rejected a demand by I.B.M. to remove himself from an old antitrust case against the company on the ground that he is hopelessly biased against it.
Instead of trying to force him off the case, Judge Edelstein said the International Business Machines Corporation should be pleased with his rulings because all of them, he said, favored the company.


Art in Review
'Group Show: Part 1' Sandra Gering Gallery 476 Broome Street SoHo Through Sept. 1 (after Monday, by appointment only)


Thomson Corp.(TOC) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


GAP INC. (GPS,N)
Gap Inc. said yesterday that its second-quarter earnings rose nearly 55 percent as it improved inventory management and rapidly expanded its Old Navy Warehouse chain.
Net income for the clothing retailer, parent company of the Gap and other chains, rose to $44.4 million, or 30 cents a share, in the three months that ended on July 30, from $28.7 million, or 20 cents, a year earlier.


Corrections
A picture caption yesterday about testimony by members of the National Reconnaissance Office reversed the identifications of some of the members.
Those shown were, from the left, Roger Marsh, project manager for the reconnaisance office's new buildings; Jeff Harris, director of the agency; Jimmy Hill, the office's deputy director, and Janet Andres, an aide to R. James Woolsey, Director of Central Intelligence.


When I Ran for Governor, G.O.P. Didn't Help
To the Editor:
Re your July 26 report on a Republican Party fund-raiser for State Senator George E. Pataki, who is running for governor: Please be informed that absolutely no fund-raising of any significance was done on my behalf by the party.


If It's Over, '94 Season Had Tight Races and Individual Accomplishments
Baseball's bright April hopes for a glowing October faded into an August gloom yesterday.
But not before Ken Griffey Jr. had hit a grand slam for his 40th home run, Tony Gwynn had gotten three more hits, Randy Johnson got 15 more strikeouts and the Cincinnati Reds had "clinched" the first championship of the National League's new Central Division.
As what appeared destined to be remembered as the strike-shortened 1994 season went into a troubled history, fans across the country were given a series of dramatic farewell reminders of what they might be missing in the weeks ahead, among them a cliffhanger at Yankee Stadium, where the Toronto Blue Jays beat the Yankees, 8-7, in 13 innings.


Reno Vows to Thwart Exodus From Cuba
In a swiftly escalating immigration dispute between the United States and Cuba, Federal authorities announced tonight that a speedboat carrying 20 Cubans was detained in the Florida Keys today, and Attorney General Janet Reno said the Government would take strong legal steps to stop a mass exodus from Cuba.
In a highly unusual evening news conference today, Ms.
Reno said any United States-flagged vessels that appeared to be bound for Cuba to pick up immigrants might be stopped, boarded and seized by the Coast Guard.
She warned that anyone trying to bring Cubans to the United States may be prosecuted.


Royal Dutch/Shell Group of Cos. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


P.G.A. Course Does the Big Hitting
There is never a winner after the first round of a golf tournament, but a definite favorite emerged after today's opening act of the P.G.A.
Championship.
If things continue the way they started, the champion come Sunday will be . . .
Southern Hills Country Club.
On a near-perfect day for scoring, with light winds and a slight cloud cover, the best field of this or any other year ran into a subtle buzz saw at Southern Hills.
The formidable foreign duo of Scotland's Colin Montgomerie and Nick Price of South Africa shot three-under-par 67's, good for a one-stroke lead over Ernie Els, Ian Woosnam, Phil Mickelson and Fred Couples, and indicative of just how tough the old course can be.
Only 14 players broke par, the fewest in a P.G.A. first round since 1981, at Atlanta Athletic Club in Duluth, Ga.


Foster Care Pits Children Against Bureaucracy; Cash Is No Solution
To the Editor:
If New York State's new program to pay foster care agencies a flat rate for children in their care (front page, July 31) expedites the adoption of children from the most dysfunctional families, it is to be applauded.
Its main effect, however, appears to be an infusion of cash to the misguided philosophy of family preservation.





BASEBALL's FINAL DAY
PLAYING LIKE THERE'S NO TOMORROW
The Yankees and the Toronto Blue Jays played for 13 innings, the Mets and Phillies for 15.
BIGGEST LAST DAY CROWD
The Rockies drew 65,043 fans to Mile High Stadium
LAST WINNER OF 13-RUN POOL
The Atlanta Braves, who beat the Rockies, 13-0. MOST INSPIRED FAN PROTEST
The Miami pilot who trailed a banner past Joe Robie Stadium urging a seventh-inning protest walkout by fans attending the Marlins game against the Cardinals.
LAST RAIN DELAYS
The start of the Tigers-Brewers was delayed two hours in Detroit.
After a 79-minute delay, Marlins-Cardinals game in Miami was called after seven innings.
The Orioles-Red Sox game was washed out in Baltimore.
LAST GAME
Ken Griffey Jr's 40th home run of the season, a grand-slam, led Seattle to an 8-1 victory over Oakland.
LAST OUT
Randy Johnson struck out Ernie Young at 12:45 EDT.
The Mariners finally go home to Seattle for the first time since July 19, when tiles fell from the Kingdome roof, forcing the team to go on a 20-game road trip.
MOST PHILOSOPHICAL PLAYER COMMENT
Jose Rijo: "I've always thought the season was too long, anyway."


INSIDE
Clinton Sets Bosnia Deadline
Seeking to forestall Congressional action, President Clinton pledged to seek an end to the arms embargo against Bosnia by late October if Serbs do not accept peace.
Page A3.
Congressman Is Indicted
Representative Walter R. Tucker 3d, Democrat of California, was indicted by a Federal grand jury on charges of extortion and tax evasion.
Page A12.
Clinton's New Lawyer
Man in the news: Judge Abner J. Mikva, the newly named White House counsel, is widely regarded as a pillar of official Washington.
Page A15.


Roberds Inc.(RBDS,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


A Conflict of Emotional Interests
The Mortician's Apprentice By Rick DeMarinis 303 pages.
W.
W.
Norton &amp; Company. $21.
In his last novel, "The Year of the Zinc Penny" (1989), Rick DeMarinis gave us a wonderfully evocative portrait of wartime California, circa 1943, as seen through the eyes of a bright, disaffected 10-year-old boy.
Now, in "The Mortician's Apprentice," Mr.
DeMarinis leaps forward a full decade.
This time, the year is 1953; this time, the hero is a confused 18-year-old high school graduate named Ozzie, faced with the problem of what to do with the rest of his life.


Producer Prices Up 0.5% in July
Producer prices rose one-half of 1 percent in July, the biggest increase in 15 months, while retail sales slowed slightly, the Government said today.
But both overall figures masked changes in key sectors of the economy that give contradictory indications of whether the current economic expansion will lead to a sharp rise in inflation.
And, taken together, the figures further muddled the question of whether the Federal Reserve would push up short-term interest rates again when its main policy committee meets Tuesday, Wall Street analysts said.


Uncertainty Is Clouding Health Bill
The course of health care legislation became increasingly uncertain in the House today.
The Democratic leadership acknowledged that it would delay all voting on the issue, and a rival bipartisan group unveiled a plan of its own and began trying to muster the conservative votes needed to pass it.
The Democratic leaders, stunned by their loss on the crime bill tonight, later met with their Senate counterparts and White House officials but emerged with nothing definite to say about when they would take up health care.


William M. Landau, Executive, 67, Dies
William M. Landau, a leading New York accounting executive, died on Thursday at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center in Manhattan.
He was 67 and had homes in Scarsdale, N.Y., and Manhattan.
The cause was melanoma, his family said.


Parking Rules
Because of the Roman Catholic feast of the Assumption of the Blessed Virgin, alternate-side street cleaning regulations will be suspended in New York City on Monday.
Other regulations will remain in effect.


Yank Panel Formed To Draw Local Fans
In an effort to improve relations with Yankee Stadium's surrounding South Bronx neighborhood, the Yankees announced yesterday the formation of a community council to "encourage and enhance the support of local residents as fans of the team," according to Jack Lawn, vice president of the Yankees.


Corrections
An article in Business Day on Aug. 3 about Olivetti S.p.A.'s efforts to enter the telecommunications business misidentified one of the company's American partners in developing a cellular telephone network in Italy.
The partner is Airtouch Communications, not Pacific Telesis.


Characters Who Toy With Shared Pasts
The idea of building a film by bringing talented actors together for a collaborative improvisation within a given narrative frame has a kind of irresistibility, particularly for actors and directors but even for filmgoers who are willing to indulge them.
One imagines that untethered from a script, the performers will discover their own inspired moments, and then the director can hew the best of them together in the editing room.
John Cassavetes was probably the best-known purveyor of this way of making films; its most visible current practitioner is Linda Yellen, who doesn't have the hang of it yet.
Last year, Ms.
Yellen's ponderously somber film "Chantilly Lace," about a group of women spending what turns out to be a confessional weekend together, was shown on Showtime, where tomorrow night, a second, more ambitious film, "Parallel Lives," is to have its premiere.
The setting is a college reunion of sorts, a multi-generational gathering of sorority sisters and fraternity brothers on the campus of a small college.


Changing Your Name Can Cost Very Little
To the Editor:
In "Changing a Name That No Longer Feels Right" (Your Money, July 30), you quote a family law specialist saying divorced women don't need the courts for a name change, but give no details.
Here's how:


Mozart's 'Abduction' as a Sort of Musical
"The Abduction From the Seraglio" put Mozart on the map of Europe.
He was 26 in 1782, newly let go by his patron in Salzburg and poised to make his way in Vienna.
In short order, 40 German cities had produced "Abduction." Warsaw translated it into Polish.
By the end of the century, Amsterdam had heard it in Dutch, Paris in French.
Patrons of the Santa Fe Opera heard it in English on Wednesday night: a good idea.
Too many times have American singers grappled onstage with a language imperfectly understood and subtly mispronounced for the benefit of American audiences left largely in the dark.
In "Abduction," the circumstances for translation are favorable.


COMPANY BRIEFS
AMERIQUEST TECHNOLOGIES INC., Irvine, Calif., a distributor of computer technology solutions, has signed a definitive agreement to acquire Robec Inc., Horsham, Pa., a microcomputers concern.
Under the terms of the agreement, Ameriquest will issue to Robec's shareholders approximately 2.8 million shares of newly issued Ameriquest common stock based upon an exchange ratio of 0.63075 shares of Ameriquest for each share of Robec common stock.


Delay Is Reported in Closing Pipe After Edison Explosion
Natural gas feeding the enormous fireball that erupted from a broken pipeline in Edison, N.J., in March flowed unimpeded for up to two and a half hours while workers struggled to shut off valves on the line, according to documents released here today.
Four valves, one on each side of the blast, one on a perpendicular line and a final valve had to be closed.
The first was not closed for 1 hour 20 minutes; the final valve was shut after 2 hours 25 minutes, according to the documents.
The 10 pipeline workers trying to close the valves had to battle traffic jams and fleeing residents of the nearby Durham Woods apartment complex to reach the valve sites, where they encountered balky equipment.


Simpson Signs Trading Cards From Jail
O.
J.
SIMPSON has fulfilled a contract with a trading card company by autographing 2,500 cards from his jail cell in Los Angeles.
Simpson finished signing the cards for Signature Rookies on Wednesday, TIM FLATT, the company's chief executive officer, said from Fleetville, Pa.


Scitex Corp.(SCIXF,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Disease-Carrying Mosquitoes Found on Long Island


Taking a Load Off While Taking in the Sights


Sphere Drake Holdings Ltd.(SD,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


DIARY: HEALTH CARE DEVELOPMENTS
YESTERDAY  Talk of possible compromises continued to be heard in the Senate, but the House abandoned its work on health care legislation until the Congressional Budget Office produces its analyses of rival proposals.
CONGRESS  In the Senate, George J. Mitchell, the majority leader, said that the issues raised by bipartisan moderates led by Senator John H. Chafee, Republican of Rhode Island, appeared to be negotiable.
The group's proposals are expected to focus chiefly on questions of bureaucracy, cost controls and malpractice litigation.
In the House, Speaker Thomas S. Foley of Washington said there was no "magic date" for the House to take up health reform again, but added, "I hope that's before Labor Day." Democrats backing the House leadership's plan, which relies on employer contributions to provide universal insurance coverage, criticized the much more modest health bill put forward by 10 conservative Democrats and moderate Republicans.
They complained it would leave as many as 30 million Americans without insurance.
WHITE HOUSE  Cabinet members went in a group from the White House to Capitol Hill to lobby senators on the health bill.
"We're at a turning point both in the Administration and the country," said Robert B. Reich, the Secretary of Labor.
He characterized the debate as "America versus the special interests."


Old and Young Cards: Miller and Marshall
The Arizona Cardinals yesterday signed linebacker JAMIR MILLER, the final first-round draft pick to sign, and added WILBER MARSHALL, the veteran linebacker, as well.
Miller was the No. 10 pick over all, out of U.C.L.A.
Marshall, a three-time Pro Bowler, played under Cardinals Coach BUDDY RYAN when Chicago won the Super Bowl in 1986 and with Washington when the Redskins won the Super Bowl in 1992.
He played with Houston last season but was hampered by a hamstring injury.


Tejas Power Corp.(TPC,A) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Cuban Jitters: U.S. Takes a Hard Line
Fidel Castro's attempt to blame and threaten the United States over the boat hijackings and demonstrations spawned by Cuba's political and economic problems has touched a raw nerve in Washington and Florida.
The Clinton Administration fears that Mr.
Castro's threat to engineer a flood of Cuban refugees could wreak political havoc in Florida and destroy the Democrats' chances there this November and President Clinton's chances in 1996.


Report Shows Violence Rising in Schools
The number of violent or illegal incidents reported in New York City schools rose nearly 26 percent in the last school year, school officials said yesterday.
They attributed the rise in part to more-comprehensive reporting, but said the figures nonetheless showed that more would have to be done to insure the safety of students.
More than 17,000 incidents, ranging from vandalism to robbery, were reported by principals and school safety officers between July 1, 1993, and June 30, 1994 -- a 25.5 percent jump over the previous year, according to data released yesterday.
The report said the most serious offenses, like robbery, assault and drug possession, accounted for nearly a quarter of the incidents, with the city's high schools showing a 38.2 percent increase in those offenses compared with the year before.


North Canadian Oils (NCD,A) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


KinderCare Learning Centers Inc.(KCLC,NSC) reports earnings for Year to June 3


Letter No Hoax, Police Think; Writer Has Details of Crimes
The New York City Police Department has concluded that a letter written by someone claiming to be the Zodiac killer is probably not a hoax and may offer clues to solving two murders and a series of attacks dating back to 1992.
Chief of Detectives Joseph R. Borrelli said at a news conference yesterday that the writer of a recent letter to The New York Post had "intimate knowledge" of the assaults detailed in the letter.


Atkinson Co. (ATKN,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Novell Chief Executive Adds Chairman's Title
Novell Inc. said today that Robert J. Frankenberg, who was named president and chief executive in April, had added the title of chairman.
Mr.
Frankenberg succeeds Raymond J. Noorda, who turned Novell from a struggling start-up into the leading networking software company.
Mr.
Noorda will remain on the company's board.


Karbala Journal; Who Hit the Mosques? Not Us, Baghdad Says
The scaffolding around one of the twin gilded mosques here and the ruins of houses nearby are the only signs that remain of the severe damage done by the shelling in 1991 of this site, one of the most important in Muslim history.
The senior clergyman at one of the mosques, Sayed Ali Fadhil al-Gorouvi, when asked what caused the destruction, referred vaguely to "robbers who stole gold" from the shrine.
The Government of President Saddam Hussein says the mosques were damaged by American bombs during the Persian Gulf war.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY PROSECUTORS SEEK TO TRY YOUTH AS ADULT
Federal prosecutors plan to seek permission next week to try Lemrick Nelson Jr. as an adult on charges that he violated the civil rights of a 29-year-old Hasidic scholar who was stabbed to death during violence in Crown Heights, a federal prosecutor said.
Page 25.


Teaching the Next Generation to Give of Themselves; Family Foundations Take On the Task of Getting the Young Interested in Philanthropy
As children, generations of Rockefeller offspring were introduced to philanthropy with encouragement to put nickels and dimes from their modest allowances in the collection basket passed at church.
Thousands of families with much smaller and newer fortunes -- the Rockefellers of Main Street -- are also looking ahead to the next generation, making sure the philanthropic spirit is instilled in their children.


Bally's Grand reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Pataki's Fund Raising Outpaced Cuomo's in July, Reports Show
The leading Republican candidate for governor, Senator George E. Pataki, outpaced Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo in fund raising during the past month, according to campaign disclosure forms released today.
Mr.
Cuomo, a three-term Democrat, still has substantially more than Mr.
Pataki on hand, mainly because he began the campaign with about $3 million.


Wickes Lumber (WIKS,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to June 25


Public &amp; Private; In Her Defense
It was a harrowing story Sheila Ryan DeLuca had to tell, a story of kidnapping, rape, sodomy and murder.
She told of being hassled in a Bronx after-hours club by three men, of leaving the club and finding them waiting in the parking lot, of being pushed into her car and forced to drive at knifepoint as the men drank, snorted cocaine, talked about gang-rape.
She says one of them, a probationary fireman named Robert Bissett, boasted: "Killing is nothing to me. I've done it before."
It would have made some story for the jury, but the jury never heard it.


CHRONICLE
DONALD FEHR has stopped answering his telephone.
No, not the Donald Fehr who is chief negotiator for the Major League Baseball Players Association, whose members are now on strike, but the one who's a senior editor at Addison-Wesley publishers.
Baseball fans and sports reporters don't seem to know the difference.


Settlement by Marietta
The Martin Marietta Corporation will pay $6.3 million to settle allegations that the General Electric Company's aerospace division near Philadelphia had inflated the cost of Government contract proposals, officials said yesterday.
Martin Marietta acquired the division, which is based in Valley Forge, Pa., in 1993.
Martin Marietta was not accused of wrongdoing, but the payment will clear it of liability for fraud, the Justice Department said.
Prosecutors charged the division with inflating the estimates of labor hours in proposals for Government contracts.
Fictitious hours were added to protect G.E. from unforeseen developments like labor shortages, rate increases or production difficulties, the department said.


Excerpts From the Senate Debate on Health Care
Following are excerpts from statements made yesterday on the Senate floor in the fourth day of debate over the health care bill, as transcribed by The New York Times from a broadcast on C-Span.
STATEMENT BY SENATOR EXON
I come here with rancor to none, with accusations against none, with an understanding of the passion that grips Americans and Nebraskans on the health care issue, and with an understanding of the strongly held views by my colleagues of all persuasions. . . .


Transalta Corp.(TA) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Fox Football! On Fox! Got That? It's All Fox!
Guess who started broadcasting football games last night?
Fox did.
Surely you noticed if you watched!
FOX.
FOX.
FOX.
FOX was everywhere, as if Rupert Murdoch's network were repaying its $395 million-a-year rights fee by selling each representation of the word "FOX." There were the silver-hued Fox 1st and 10's.
The Fox player bios.
Fox scoreboards.
Replays flipped on and off screen with the FOX logo prominently seen.
Prominent?
Plastered.
Yes, everything but a thick-with-cholesterol steak barbecued outside Candlestick Park was branded "FOX."


NEWS SUMMARY
International 2-4 AN ACCORD WITH NORTH KOREA  After a week of negotiations, the United States and North Korea signed an agreement that includes steps toward full diplomatic relations and a promise by the North to open its nuclear installations to inspections and seal off a nuclear fuel reprocessing laboratory.  1  EXODUS FROM RWANDA  Confirming the fears of relief officials, a second outpouring of refugees has begun from Rwanda to Zaire.
Open.  29  Metro Digest 23  Business Digest 37  Arts/Entertainment 11-17, 49  The Bastille Opera dismisses its music director.  11  A Getty wants to save a statue from the Getty Museum.  11  Brian Friel's new play may turn things around.  17  Music: Mozart's "Abduction." 11  Television: "Parallel Lives." 49  Obituaries 28  Editorials/Op-Ed 20-21  Editorials  Back to basics on the crime bill.
The unyielding AIDS epidemic.
The right to walk a street.
Press freedom, Indonesian style.
Letters  Anna Quindlen: In her defense.
Russell Baker: Living it down.
Milton Friedman: Once again -- why Socialism won't work.
Peter H. Schuck: Share the refugees.
Bridge 14 Chronicle 22 Crossword 16


Appointment in Whitewater Turns Into a Partisan Battle
Criticism of the appointment of Kenneth W. Starr as the Whitewater independent prosecutor intensified into a partisan furor today as Democratic senators demanded a public accounting of Mr.
Starr's recent political activities and challenged the impartiality of the head of the three-judge panel that picked him.
Some senators expressed shock at the news that Judge David B. Sentelle, the head of the three-judge appellate panel that named Mr.
Starr, had lunch on July 14 with Senator Lauch Faircloth, a conservative Republican of North Carolina, while the panel was still considering its choice.
Mr.
Faircloth was a leader of efforts to oust Robert B. Fiske Jr. as the Whitewater prosecutor.


Price Distances Self From P.G.A. Field
Nick Price, eloquently and forcefully stating his case for designation as the best golfer on the planet, wrapped one hand around the P.G.A.
Championship today.
After 36 holes he has a five-stroke lead, larger than any halfway lead in the 76-year history of the event.
And he shows no signs of wilting.
Price, 37, is so hot that he makes Tulsa seem cool.
He went around the steamy Southern Hills Country Club in 65 shots, leaving him at eight-under-par 132.
He is five strokes ahead of Corey Pavin, Jay Haas and Ben Crenshaw and well on his way to winning his second straight major championship.


Retiring Navratilova To Skip U.S. Open
In what amounts to the ultimate parting shot to the United States Open, 37-year-old Martina Navratilova, who plans to retire at year's end, has confirmed that she will not include the Open on what has become her 1994 farewell tour.
Navratilova, ranked fourth in the world and generally lauded as the finest female tennis player ever, said yesterday by telephone from the Virginia Slims of Los Angeles that she would spend the remainder of the summer relaxing at her home in Aspen, Colo.


Sports of The Times; Withdrawal Pain Begins For the Fans
FOR baseball fans, it was like that rare morning when you don't get around to a cup of coffee.
Around 10 A.M., there is that queasy feeling, the onset of a headache, the vague malaise, the sense that something is not quite right with the world.
And then you figure it out: no caffeine.
The fans woke up yesterday with box scores to peruse, evidence that baseball had been played the day before.
If they ignored the front-page headlines, they could convince themselves the sport still existed.
But deep down they knew something was amiss, and it was going to get a whole lot worse before it got better, if it ever does.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
7.25
7.25
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.50
3.50
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
4.25
4.22
3.00
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.35
4.33
3.00
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.90
4.90
3.10
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.28
7.35
5.70
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.50
7.65
6.35
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.35
8.39
7.15
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.43
6.44
5.64
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Leucadia National Corp.(LUK,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Playing to a Not So Packed House


Sun Distributors L.P.(SDP,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Guillotine For Those In Toques?
THE food thing has gone too far.
This column has nothing against fine food.
Au contraire, as the French like to say, and who could put it better.
In fact, this column, known in some circles as a dab hand with a copper saute pan, has evolved a charbroiled lobster on a bed of fresh spinach fettuccine, smothered in a light cream and tomato sauce accented by tarragon, which we serve with petits pois in rosemary -- stop.
Let's get a grip on ourselves.
We must deal with a really important issue facing New Yorkers.


Lyme Cases Said to Drop In 2 States
Reports of Lyme disease cases declined significantly in New York and Connecticut in 1993, but they climbed 15 percent in New Jersey, according to Federal statistics released this week.
The number of reported Lyme disease cases dropped 15 percent nationwide in 1993, to 8,185, Dr.
David Dennis of the National Center for Infectious Diseases in Fort Collins, Colo., said on Thursday.
But he noted that yearly data must be examined in the context of long-term trends, which indicate that the tick-borne disease may continue to spread geographically and increase in frequency.


Men's Wearhouse Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Southwest Gas (SWX,N) reports earnings for 12mos to June 30


Bonds Post First Gain In 5 Days
Prices of Treasury securities rose yesterday for the first time in five days after the Consumer Price Index report showed that prices were up only modestly in July.
The report raised questions about the size of the next interest rate increase by the Federal Reserve.


Corrections
A front-page headline yesterday about the baseball strike referred incorrectly in some editions to the number of games played.
Nine major league games were played yesterday.
A scheduled 10th, between Boston and Baltimore, was rained out.


Huizenga Relative Buys Control of Heat
The Huizenga family completed the cycle yesterday when HARRIS W. HUDSON, brother-in-law of WAYNE HUIZENGA, bought the managing partnership of the Miami Heat, giving the family control of all four South Florida professional teams.
Huizenga, who owns the Miami Dolphins, as well as the Florida Panthers and Florida Marlins, is in a two-year probationary period with the National Football League as an owner, with the stipulation that he not buy another team.
At a news conference yesterday, Hudson, who is married to Wayne's sister, BONNIE, said his brother-in-law "has no connection whatever to the Miami Heat."


Simon Property Group Inc.(SPG,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Disney to Put 'Lion King' Into Early Hibernation
It's almost like grabbing candy away from children.
The Walt Disney Company said today that it would pull "The Lion King" out of movie theaters at the end of September, even though the hit animated film is drawing crowds and could continue to do so.


UNILEVER N.V. (UN,N)
Unilever N.V., the giant British-Dutch consumer products company, reported yesterday that profits were flat in the second quarter as financing charges rose and investment interest dropped.
The company said it earned 1.07 billion Dutch guilders, or $568 million, in the period.
The results were flat in guilders but down 3 percent in dollars from the corresponding period a year earlier because of changes in exchange rates.
Sales rose 8 percent, to $11.53 billion.


Showalter's Nightmare: Only Fantasy Baseball
Buck Showalter was channel surfing Thursday night as 11:59 turned to midnight, still hoping for a miraculous news bulletin that the players strike would not take place, that the labor disagreement had been settled.
Of course, he never located that fantasy channel.
But with his wife, Angela, struggling to keep her eyes from drooping, Showalter searched and searched.
A news tidbit, perhaps.
Maybe a highlight of some clandestine meeting between Donald Fehr and Richard Ravitch.
Anything to stay optimistic.


World Bank Helps Argentina Go Forward
To the Editor:
David L. Bernstein says that International Monetary Fund and World Bank lending practices are partly to blame for economic policies in Argentina that disregard the poor (letter, July 22).
His allegations of "corruption and mismanagement" of World Bank projects are unsubstantiated.


Big Airlines Cut Fares Up to 50% for Fall Travel
Several big airlines said yesterday that they were cutting fares by as much as 50 percent on flights this fall, adding to a string of recent air fare sales.
Although the airlines are having a busy summer, the fare sales suggest that carriers are not selling as many seats as they would like for the fall.


Bomb Plot Suspect Will Not Be Witness for U.S.
In a surprising turnaround, Federal prosecutors disclosed yesterday that the man accused of being the ringleader in a terrorist campaign to bomb New York City landmarks will not be a cooperating witness for the Government after all when the case goes to trial in the fall.
A two-paragraph letter to the judge in the case from the office of United States Attorney Mary Jo White, said prosecutors had decided not to enter into a "cooperation agreement" with the defendant, Siddig Ibrahim Siddig Ali.


Let There Be Rock: Woodstock '94 Begins


New York's Yellow Taxicabs Aren't the Rejects of Other Cities
To the Editor:
Re "Their Discarded Taxis Wind Up in New York" (letter, July 29): This is not Phoenix, Dallas, Houston or New Orleans!


DeWitt A. Stern, 82; Ran Insurance Firm
DeWitt Asiel Stern, a New York insurance broker, died on Aug. 4 at Lenox Hill Hospital.
He was 82 and lived in Manhattan.
The cause was cancer, his family said.


Bunch Reports, but to Whom?
Giants fullback Jarrod Bunch, in one of the strangest holdouts the team has seen, has finally reported.
Or has he?
The Case of the Invisible Fullback continued today when Bunch's agent, Tom Condon, said in a telephone interview that his client flew from California and reported to two New Jersey sites: the team's camp at Fairleigh Dickinson University in Florham Park, and the team's offices at Giants Stadium in East Rutherford.
The Giants are in Berlin.
Got all that?


Teaching the Next Generation to Give of Themselves; Family Foundations Take On the Task of Getting the Young Interested in Philanthropy
As children, generations of Rockefeller offspring were introduced to philanthropy with encouragement to put nickels and dimes from their modest allowances in the collection basket passed at church.
Thousands of families with much smaller and newer fortunes -- the Rockefellers of Main Street -- are also looking ahead to the next generation, making sure the philanthropic spirit is instilled in their children.


Rise in Rates Pummels Bond Holdings
Bond funds are still losing money.
As expected, adjustable-rate mortgage funds have been the most conservative of the group.
They have not outperformed cash, however, and investors should remember that the year has been exceptional, given the rapid rise in interest rates.
Junk and convertible bond funds, which had led bond funds going into the second quarter because of their relative resistance to rate increases, began falling in tandem with the stock market, especially smaller stocks, in mid-March.


Russians One O'Neal From Worrying U.S.
This thought actually popped into a few minds at courtside tonight, as Russia was hanging with the United States into the second period at the world basketball championships: Where would the Americans be without Shaquille O'Neal?
Much later, when the United States was pulling away to a 111-94 victory before 27,083 at the Skydome, that notion seemed like something the Americans might ridicule.
But the game spoke for itself.
The Russians weren't afraid, or terribly outclassed by any of the American stars, except the 7-foot-1-inch, 301-pound Orlando Magic center.
On his way to 21 points and 9 rebounds, he was a one-man wrecking crew, particularly during a burst of layups and dunks that broke open the game in the second half.


Just Call It Quality Time for Francos
Six-year-old Nicole Franco had a simple question for her father.
"Daddy," she asked the Mets' closer yesterday morning, "how many days off do you have?"


Clinton Fights Back: 'This Crime Bill Cannot Die'
President Clinton opened a furious counterattack today against the House members who sent the crime bill down to devastating defeat, accusing them of betraying Americans who have said that crime and violence represent their greatest fears.
From the White House this morning, Mr.
Clinton, speaking hoarsely, vowed to "fight and fight and fight until we win this battle for the American people." Then he boarded Air Force One to join police officers at a convention here in a hastily arranged trip intended to project his fervor before a backdrop of men in blue.


Baker, Vendor, Scalper, Sigh: Strike Costs City Millions
From ticket scalpers to hot dog roll bakers to souvenir vendors who sell Yankee or Met knickknacks, yesterday was the beginning of a midsummer nightmare: no baseball, no customers and no cash.
The bartenders, bookies and concession vendors could only get out their calculators and weep.
The City Comptroller's office estimates that each home game adds about $2 million to New York City's economy.


To Exchange Cold Tickets
If you have a ticket for a Yankee or Met game canceled by the strike, you may get a refund or exchange it for a game later this season, if the strike is settled.
The Mets will accept exchanges for a game next season, if there is one.
Mets season ticket-holders will be notified by mail of exchange and refund policies.
The Yankees said their season box-holders and combination plan box-holders would receive automatic refunds after the season.


Fear of More Killings Starts A Second Rwandan Exodus
Thousands of Rwandans are heading for the exits of the French "safe haven" in southwestern Rwanda, bound for Zaire in what appears to be the start of a second mass exodus long feared by international relief agencies.
These Rwandans are Hutu, and they are being pushed by a general fear of the Tutsi-led Rwandan Patriotic Front, which now controls the rest of the country and is poised to enter southwestern Rwanda when French troops leave the area in 10 days.


CHRONICLE
Last year, the dragon boat crewed by the Battling Barristers -- lawyers and staff members from Battle Fowler, a Manhattan law firm -- beat every other law firm entered in the Hong Kong Dragon Boat Festival.
That feat isn't as noteworthy as it sounds: there was only one other law firm among the 24 boats in the contest, whose main sponsor is the Hongkong Bank.
Still, JAMES LAWLESS 4TH, an associate at the firm, said, "We had a lot of fun."


Miriam Carliner, 73, U.S. Poverty Expert
Miriam K. Carliner, a Federal specialist on poverty and sexual bias in education, died on Tuesday at her home in Washington.
She was 73.
The cause was stomach cancer, her family said.


Remark by Cabinet Member Adds to Italian Premier's Woes
With his right-wing coalition divided and the lira tumbling, Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi suffered new embarrassment today after a Cabinet minister asserted that "New York's Jewish lobby" was behind the currency's fall.
Commenting on the lira's decline late Thursday, Labor Minister Clemente Mastella said that "the presence of the National Alliance in the Government worries New York's Jewish lobby." Members of the National Alliance, which is led by neo-Fascists, run five ministries in the Italian Government.


TPI Enterprises Inc.(TPIE,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to July 10


Mexico's Battling Presidential Contenders Converge on Economic Matters
As the three leading candidates head toward Mexico's presidential election next week, they have shown surprisingly little disagreement over what could well have been a major issue: The ruling party's economic dealings with the United States and the shock treatment it has used to transform Mexico's system of free enterprise.
Long one of the most ardent supporters of state ownership of businesses, the Mexican Government has almost entirely withdrawn from the private sector during over the last six years and thrown open the economy to fierce competition, especially from American companies.


Teaching the Next Generation to Give of Themselves; Family Foundations Take On the Task of Getting the Young Interested in Philanthropy
As children, generations of Rockefeller offspring were introduced to philanthropy with encouragement to put nickels and dimes from their modest allowances in the collection basket passed at church.
Thousands of families with much smaller and newer fortunes -- the Rockefellers of Main Street -- are also looking ahead to the next generation, making sure the philanthropic spirit is instilled in their children.


CHRONICLE
JOE CATES, the theater and televion producer, arrived at the Russian Tea Room on Wednesday evening expecting to meet his four children for a quiet 70th birthday dinner.
Then, surprise!
He was hailed by chorus of 100 shouting "Surprise!"
In this case, it really was a surprise.
"A shock," Mr.
Cates said yesterday, still marveling over the fact that his three daughters and one son had rounded up not only theatrical friends, but also two United States Army Air Corps colleagues from World War II; relatives from Nebraska, Ohio, California and Germany, and all the members of his poker game.


Simpson Judge Refuses to Show Photos of Victims
The judge in the O. J. Simpson murder case refused today to let reporters see three photographs of the bloodied bodies of Mr.
Simpson's former wife and a friend of hers outside her town house, where they were stabbed to death on the night of June 12.
In his written response to a request by several news organizations that had sought access to those and other photographs of the crime scene, the judge said that releasing the three photos of the victims -- one of Nicole Brown Simpson and two of her friend, Ronald L. Goldman -- would create "a virtual certainty that the defendant's right to a fair trial will be prejudiced."


World Trade Pact Advances With Some Bipartisan Deals
The Clinton Administration and House Republicans took another step today toward Congressional approval of a world free trade agreement, reaching the broad outlines of deals on financing for the accord and on the Administration's future trade negotiating authority.
But many obstacles remain before the agreement to reduce tariffs and other trade barriers, which was reached in December, can become part of American law.
The legal language for today's deals is still being drafted, House Democratic leaders have yet to endorse the compromises and a conference has yet to be held to reconcile differences between House and Senate versions of the approval legislation.


Consumer Prices Rose 0.3% in July
Consumer prices rose three-tenths of a percent in July, buoyed by rising gasoline and grocery store prices, and business inventories increased in June, the Government said today.
Excluding the volatile food and energy sectors, consumer prices rose only two-tenths of a percent, slightly less than many analysts had expected.
Financial markets rallied strongly on this signal that the so-called core rate of inflation might still be under control.
Lower inflation puts less pressure on the Federal Reserve to raise short-term interest rates again soon.


Berkshire Hathaway Inc.(BRK,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Appeals Court Temporarily Halts Woman From Becoming First Citadel Cadet
A Federal appeals court panel in Richmond issued an order yesterday that at least temporarily prevents Shannon Faulkner from becoming the first female cadet at The Citadel, the all-male military college in Charleston, S.C.
Ms.
Faulkner had planned to arrive at the campus on Sunday, one day early, to try out for the college band.
On Monday, she had expected to join the Corps of Cadets and have her head shaved in a traditional "knob" cut, which leaves only a one-eighth inch stubble across the scalp -- making cadets' heads look like doorknobs.


Powell and Torrence Are Stars of the Show
Mike Powell and Gwen Torrence emerged as the stars as competition began tonight at the Pan Africa-USA track and field meet at Duke University.
Powell, the world record-holder and defending world champion in the long jump, ignored an injured right hamstring and bruised left heel to win the competition on his last attempt with a leap of 26 feet 3 3/4 inches.


Time to Turn Choosy As Utilities Compete
THAT old gray mare of investing -- the electric utility -- ain't what she used to be.
While people can still get utilities' customary slow, sure amble to high dividends, looming competition in the industry means investors may have a different ride altogether.
True, the nation's 100 electric utilities, hammered by interest rate rises, were off nearly 28 percent in early July from a year ago.
And true, bargain hunters have since bid them back up, just a bit.
No surprises there.
Although safe in many ways, utilities have always had interest-rate risk.


Latest Delay Bodes Ill
News analysis: Congressional delays on health legislation have been common, but the latest delay announced by House Democratic leaders was particularly ominous.
Page 9.


TRANSACTIONS
Football National Football League  ARIZONA CARDINALS -- Signed Jamir Miller, linebacker, to a four-year contract and Wilber Marshall, linebacker.
CINCINNATI BENGALS -- Signed Mike Frier, defensive tackle.
CLEVELAND BROWNS -- Agreed to terms with Bob Dahl, guard, on a three-year contract.
DALLAS COWBOYS -- Released George Brewer, defensive tackle.
DENVER BRONCOS -- Signed Leonard Russell, running back.
DETROIT LIONS -- Re-signed Kelvin Pritchett, defensive end.
Hockey National Hockey League  DETROIT RED WINGS -- Named Jim Nill director of amateur scouting.
College BIG SOUTH CONFERENCE -- Named Wendy Taylor compliance director.
CAL STATE NORTHRIDGE -- Named Janet Sherman women's softball coach.


No Headline
Senators Helms and Faircloth and I shared stories of old friends in North Carolina.
The lengthiest discussion concerned prostate difficulties, including radiation and surgery and how our generation of men were having to overcome the embarrassment of seeing female physicians for that sort of problem. -- JUDGE DAVID B. SENTELLE, defending his impartiality on the Whitewater prosecution.  [ 7:1. ]


Bowe Won't Go Home Crownless
He can't he won't -- go home again.
Unless, that is, he brings back the world heavyweight title.
So Riddick Bowe has not been back to Brooklyn, or New York, since he lost his crown nine months ago to Evander Holyfield.


U.S. AND N. KOREA SAY THEY'LL SEEK DIPLOMATIC LINKS
The United States and North Korea agreed early today to take steps that could lead to establishing full diplomatic relations between the two countries as part of a sweeping package of measures intended to settle their dispute over North Korea's nuclear ambitions.
Although both sides stressed that "important issues" still have to be resolved before the framework of the agreement reached Friday night can be implemented, it marks the first time that North Korea has indicated willingness to renounce the capability of making nuclear bombs.


Minor Leaguers' Dreams Deferred
Johnny Damon sat on the weathered wooden seats at the Durham Athletic Park on Thursday night as his Wilmington Blue Rocks battled Durham in a Carolina League game.
Damon, a 21-year-old outfielder regarded as one of the hottest prospects in Class A ball, was relegated to the stands for his role in a brawl Tuesday.
Although he was in a minor league stadium, his thoughts were on a major league career and what baseball's strike might mean to it.


Pataki Releases Records Of Finances for 14 Years
On a campaign day marked by tit-for-tat attacks over personal finances, George E. Pataki, the Republican gubernatorial candidate, released voluminous records yesterday that depicted the part-time legislator, lawyer and farmer as land-rich and cash-poor.
Perhaps the most interesting disclosure in the nearly 600 pages of documents was that Mr.
Pataki and his wife, Elizabeth, paid no Federal income taxes for 1986, a year when they had a profit of $401,666 on the sale of a piece of investment property in Putnam County.


United Westburne reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Observer; Living It Down
A prison term would surely have been the salvation of Richard Nixon.
The truth became apparent as that rich assortment of aging ex-jailbirds marched through the parlor this week in the TV documentary history titled "Watergate."
These were the men who did the time because in different ways they had done the crime for the President.
Yet now, a generation later, they seemed not just at peace with themselves about what had once been painful humiliation, but actually pleased with the celebrity status conferred by association with such a famous moment in history.


Cubic Corp.(CUB,A) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Vietnam Vets Earned the Right to Protest War; Soldier and Activist
To the Editor:
As a Vietnam veteran and antiwar activist, I feel I must comment on Gregg M. Taylor's July 30 letter.


Newark Schools Fight to Prevent State Takeover
Newark school officials this week officially began their battle to stave off a proposed state takeover, filing legal papers that rejected the state's depiction of the district as mismanaged, failing and tainted by corruption.
In papers filed with the New Jersey Education Department on Tuesday, Newark officials denied virtually all the allegations leveled by the state in a five-volume report released in July.


Trimac Ltd. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Vietnam Vets Earned the Right to Protest War
To the Editor:
Re "Vietnam War Protesters Had Selfish Motives" (letter, July 30): As one of the Vietnam War veterans who protested against the war after I returned from Nam, I share Gregg M. Taylor's doubts about the motives of many student protesters.


Aid Officials Say Rwandans Will Be Long-Term Refugees
Many of the Rwandan refugees who have been camped here for a month now are likely to remain in Zaire for years to come, a United Nations spokesman said today.
"We feel Goma is becoming like a new Gaza Strip," said Panos Moumtzis of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, referring to the four decades that Palestinian refugees have been in Gaza.
"We will end up with a lot of refugees who will stay here for a very, very long time."


Regulators Seize Large Canadian Insurer
Regulators in Canada and the United States have seized control of the Confederation Life Insurance Company, Canada's fifth-largest insurer, in one of the largest insurance company failures on record.
Confederation Life, based in Toronto, had assets of $19.4 billion Canadian dollars ($14.05 billion in United States dollars) at the end of 1993.
The company, which lost $29 million ($21 million) in 1993, has not released results for 1994.


Cambridge Shopping reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Woodstock, The Reprise, Under Way
Even before the music began today at Woodstock '94, the festival's much-ballyhooed security system had sprung several leaks.
As more than 170,000 concertgoers convened here on a Catksills farm as big as Central Park, many said they had been admitted without their tickets being checked.
Some said the metal detectors they passed through were not plugged in.
Everywhere there was evidence of the contraband that the promoters had pledged to confiscate, including beer cans, marijuana, plastic coolers and tent stakes. (Despite officials' prefestival jitters, the stakes were not being used as weapons.)


Royal Caribbean Cruises Ltd.(RCL,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


ERLY Industries Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


The Right to Walk a Brooklyn Street
The Federal Government has brought civil rights charges against Lemrick Nelson Jr., the teen-ager who was previously acquitted of murder in the 1991 slaying of Yankel Rosenbaum in Brooklyn's Crown Heights neighborhood.
However the case ultimately turns out, the indictment marks a bold and welcome use of Federal civil rights law against racial killings on city streets.
Mr.
Rosenbaum, a rabbinical student from Australia, was caught up in riots that followed an automobile accident in which a 7-year-old black child was killed.
The car was part of the entourage of the Lubavitcher rabbi.
Angry blacks, shouting "Kill the Jew," chased Mr.
Rosenbaum and someone stabbed him.
Mr.
Nelson, arrested with a bloody knife in his pocket, confessed to the killing but later repudiated his confession and won an acquittal in a Brooklyn court amid recriminations over a botched prosecution.


Mother Arrives To See Hurt Girl


Back to Basics on the Crime Bill
The crime bill is dead.
The bill that was sabotaged in Congress on Thursday had many good features, but in the end it deserved to die, since it added 50-odd new crimes punishable by death without including a much-needed racial justice provision.
The death penalty, barbaric in itself, is unfairly weighted in its application in America toward minority perpetrators and toward crimes against white victims.
The mitigating racial justice provision, which died in a conference committee, would have allowed minority defendants in capital cases to challenge their sentences by showing a pattern of racial discrimination in their community in applying the death penalty.
Without it, the bill was unacceptable.


Slater Industries reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Some Voices In A.A.R.P. Criticizing Leadership
Phillip Hampson, the local shuffleboard champion and a member of the American Association of Retired Persons, peered intently at the disks spinning across the court and considered his view of the organization.
It was not a warm assessment, because two days earlier, Eugene I. Lehrmann, president of the A.A.R.P., announced support for the Democratic leadership's health care bills in the Senate and House.
"The guy just comes out and says, 'We're for it,' out of a clear blue sky," said Mr.
Hampson, a 68-year-old retired accountant from New Rochelle, N.Y.
"He didn't poll anybody, or anything," he said.


Southwestern Energy (SWN,N) reports earnings for 12mos to June 30


Trying to Find Nirvana In a 90's Time Warp
"Has anybody seen the Woodstock spirit?" asked Tim Booth, the lead singer of James, an English band that performed tonight at Woodstock '94.
"I know it's not on those Pepsi cans."
Mr.
Booth, protesting corporate sponsorship while benefiting from it, wasn't the only one searching for a Woodstock spirit.
The 1969 Woodstock festival didn't have 25 years of increasingly rosy nostalgia as a precedent; it only wanted to be as groovy as the 1967 Monterey Pop Festival.
But the first 200,000 arrivals at Woodstock '94, many of whom wore their best tie-dyed clothes, may be as eager to re-enact the hippie myth as the promoters are to exploit it.
This time around, self-consciousness is inevitable, and not just because Wavy Gravy is one of the masters of ceremony, announcing, "The 60's is not over." But this time, Woodstock also has a mosh pit.


Savannah Foods &amp; Industries (SFI,N) reports earnings for Qtr to July 3


Jets Will Have to Learn How to Contain Passers
Talk about a terrifying threesome.
Check out the Jets' first three regular-season opponents -- Buffalo, Denver and Miami.
With the lineup of quarterbacks they face against those three teams -- Jim Kelly, John Elway and Dan Marino -- the Jets' defensive line can't tap dance its way around a decent pass rush.
Faced with anything less than a full assault, Kelly, Elway and Marino will pick the Jets defense apart.
Tonight could be a good dress rehearsal because the linemen will get a limited look at quarterback Randall Cunningham, a premier passer in his own right, when they face the Eagles at Veterans Stadium at 7:30 P.M., New York's second preseason game.


Clinton Enlists Giuliani's Aid
The Republican Mayor offered to help the Democratic President bolster support for his imperiled crime bill, and the White House leaped at the chance.
Page 10.


Q &amp; A
I.R.A. Withdrawals
At age 70 1/2, I must begin withdrawing 6.25 percent annually from my I.R.A., which I am going to do in monthly installments.
In future years, will I have to withdraw more than 6.25 percent, and how is the amount calculated?
MARTIN MUCKLER, Flushing, Queens


A Dutch Visitor Leads Mostly Mozart
Like any sensitive ensemble, the Mostly Mozart Festival Orchestra responds differently to every conductor who stands before it.
The orchestra has had some interesting and individualistic guests this summer, and the latest of them, the Dutch conductor Hans Vonk, had them sounding particularly well disciplined on Tuesday evening.
Using a compact string complement, he led a performance of Mozart's Symphony No. 33 in B flat (K. 319) that reconciled the seemingly opposing impulses that propel so many of Mozart's best works.
One is the urge toward courtly propriety, which Mr.
Vonk served by giving virtually every phrase a delicately nuanced shape.
The other is a need to break free of formal strictures (or at least, some of them) and to find outlets not only in Mozart's typically high-spirited finales, but also more subversively, in the adventures he undertakes in working out his themes.


New York's Yellow Taxicabs Aren't the Rejects of Other Cities; Cheating the Drivers
To the Editor:
Articles on New York City's taxi industry usually focus on the ethnicity of the drivers, fast meters or highway-robbery fares between airports and midtown.
I've worked as both a yellow-cab and a radio-dispatched driver.
It isn't accidental that drivers make so little: the Taxi and Limousine Commission represents owners, not drivers, and has put its seal of approval on the outrageous fees drivers have to pay.
The drivers need to organize, but there are several reasons that work against that.


Bastille Opera Dismisses Chung
Having chosen to ignore what he viewed as a concerted effort to force his resignation, Myung-Whun Chung, the South Korean-born conductor and pianist, was unceremoniously dismissed as music director of the Paris National Opera today.
No successor has been named.
Encore?
Well, the Paris Opera has certainly done it again.
In January 1989, even before the Bastille Opera was inaugurated, Daniel Barenboim was ousted as the new opera house's first music director.
Now it is Mr.
Chung's turn to go, again for reasons that have more to do with politics than with music.


An A.T.M. Safeguard
To the Editor:


Hoping for Their Share of Weapons


Now, Ominous Sounds On Health Bill Prospects
Health care legislation has missed one deadline after another on Capitol Hill, but the indefinite delay announced by House Democratic leaders this week is particularly ominous.
It was supposed to play out very differently: Democratic strategists had hoped to win on the crime measure this week, roll into the health care debate with a little momentum and pass the leadership's bill next week before heading home for the August recess.
That would leave a conference committee ample time to work out the differences between the House and Senate versions of the bill, with final passage of a historic piece of social legislation in time for Democrats to campaign on it in the fall elections.


British Golf Magazines Sold
A British publisher, EMAP P.L.C., has acquired three British golf magazines from The New York Times Company.
EMAP said it paid $:11.25 million ($17.4 million) for the magazines: Golf Weekly, Golf Industry News and Golf World (U.K.).


Bridge
Some bridge deals strain credulity.
Consider, for example, the diagramed deal reported recently from Poland via Norway.
East was John Lokeberg, a Norwegian living in Bydgoszcz, Poland, and West was a local player named Lewandowski.
The episode was recounted by Knut Kjaernsrod of Norway.
West opened three spades, then found himself defending three no-trump doubled.
This contract can make against routine defense, but the defense was far from routine.
When West led two spade winners and followed with the jack, East discarded both his red aces.
This was a double Emperor's Coup, a rare unblocking maneuver originally named by the French writer Jos Le Dentu.


Haiti Embargo Hurts Poor, and Nearly Everyone Else
Until three months ago, Veronique Pierre had a job ironing clothes in a textile factory here, earning the minimum wage of just over a dollar a day.
Until five months ago, Raymond Roy owned two large factories that produced pots, pans and cans and employed 600 people.
But now, as a result of the sweeping economic sanctions imposed on Haiti by the United Nations, both are idle and struggling, like virtually all of their compatriots, to adjust to an economy that is gradually grinding to a halt.
The effects of the international embargo clearly differ from one sector of Haitian society to another, but no class has been spared.


Cascades Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Vietnam Vets Earned the Right to Protest War; Students Weren't Selfish
To the Editor:
Gregg M. Taylor is, a quarter-century later, sadly misinformed (letter, July 30).
While accusing the Vietnam War protesters of self-interest, he ignores two important points: (1) at the height of the 1960's protests, students had the absolute protection of student deferments, and (2) a very large percentage of the protesters were women and not subject to the draft.


On Crime Bill, Giuliani Is a Clinton Ally
Not long after President Clinton appeared on television on Thursday night to tar those who voted down his anti-crime bill, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani called the White House.
Was there anything he could do to help restart the legislation?


Vietnam Vets Earned the Right to Protest War; 'Bad Paper' Discharges
To the Editor:
Re "Heal the 'Bad Paper' Veterans" (Op-Ed, July 30): Maxine Waters and Jonathan Shay would have the Pentagon automatically upgrade more than 560,000 less-than-honorable discharges issued during the Vietnam War era.
The Department of Veterans Affairs would then award billions to the new beneficiaries.


Yeltsin Makes Centrist Moves to Draw Support From Divided Russian Nationalist Opposition
The Russian Government is moving on several fronts to shore up political support with nationalists and clarify its policy toward the newly independent countries of the former Soviet Union.
These moves represent the latest indications that President Boris N. Yeltsin is moving to the political center and trying to co-opt his divided nationalist opposition.


Trico Products Inc.(TRCO) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


'Don't Touch That Dial' Deal
When Ralph and Brian Roberts of the Comcast Corporation initiated their surprise takeover bid for QVC Inc. last month, then doggedly pursued the deal until QVC capitulated nine days ago, many saw it as a struggle of wills and egos between the Robertses and QVC's chairman, Barry Diller.
Emotions certainly played their part.
But the real motivator behind Comcast's $46-a-share purchase agreement was a difference of business opinions.
Mr.
Diller regards home shopping on cable television as a profitable business, but nothing to compare with taking over Paramount Communications, say, or merging with CBS -- both of which he has tried and failed to do with QVC.


Welbilt Corp.(WBLT,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to July 2


Share the Refugees
As the worldwide tide of refu gees swells remorse lessly fed by crises from Afghanistan to Haiti, Bosnia to Rwanda -- the international community seems paralyzed.
The United Nations High Commissioner on Refugees admits she cannot cope; individual nations make only token contributions, though some, like the United States, are more dutiful than others.
Forced repatriation is an unpalatable option; it simply returns refugees to their persecutors.
Meanwhile, millions of refugees languish for months or years in squalid camps, prey to disease, famine and continued displacement.
These failures demand a new approach.
Clearly, the family of nations has an obligation to share the burden; the question is how to overcome every nation's tendency to sit back and hope someone else will pay the freight.


DeVry Inc.(DVRY,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Paradise Regained by Lure In a Victory at Saratoga
One month after he was rejected by England, two months after he was beaten by Paradise Creek for the second time in a row, the turf champion Lure returned to the races today and scored his revenge at Saratoga Race Course.
He ran past the 9-year-old war horse Fourstardave in the upper homestretch, he withstood the inevitable late rumble from Paradise Creek and he flew home one length in front of his archrival to win the Bernard Baruch Handicap.


Mitchell Sees Room for Dealing On Rival Health Care Proposals
Taking a major step toward agreement on national health insurance, Senator George J. Mitchell, the majority leader, said today that the issues raised by bipartisan moderates led by Senator John H. Chafee appeared to be negotiable.
Mr.
Mitchell said he could not judge the details of the group's proposals, which are expected to focus chiefly on questions of bureaucracy, cost controls and malpractice litigation, until he receives them on Tuesday.


Tritons Skewer Rollers
Jeff MacLeod's five goals helped lift the Tampa Bay Tritons over the New Jersey Rockin Rollers, 10-6, last night before 4,836 spectators at Expo Hall in Tampa, Fla.
Stanislav Tkatch had 2 goals for New Jersey (9-10-1), which, with 2 games remaining, has 19 points and is a point behind Tampa Bay (10-11) for the fourth and final playoff spot in the Atlantic Division of the International Roller Hockey League.


Players Offer Ideas on Sharing Owners' Wealth
In an effort to enhance the wealthier clubs' effort to help the poorer clubs by sharing more of their revenue, the baseball players union has devised some ideas of its own.
The owners' representative did not heartily endorse them yesterday.
"We have given them ideas we believe are economically sound," Donald Fehr, the players' labor leader, said.
"We don't know if they're politically practical since the clubs can't agree, but they are economically sound."


Adult Count to Be Sought In Crown Heights Trial
Federal prosecutors plan to seek permission next week to try Lemrick Nelson Jr. as an adult on charges that he violated the civil rights of a Hasidic scholar who was stabbed to death during four days of violence in Crown Heights, a Federal prosecutor said yesterday.
The prosecutor, Katherine Monahan, Assistant United States Attorney in Atlanta, spoke after a hearing before a Federal Magistrate in Atlanta on a motion by The New York Times to make public the details of Mr.
Nelson's detention hearing on Thursday and any records in the case.
The records have been sealed on the ground that Mr.
Nelson, who is 19 now but was 16 at the time of the stabbing, is so far being treated as a juvenile in the case.
Magistrate Richard H. Deane Jr. did not make a decision on that issue yesterday.


N.A.S.D. Experiencing Delays in Arbitration
WITH a little luck, someone who asks the National Association of Securities Dealers this month to arbitrate a dispute with a broker could get a hearing next March.
But group officials and lawyers for investors warn that the process could take much longer.
Arbitration requests have backed up this spring and summer.
The first steps in the process -- getting a complaint accepted by the N.A.S.D. and having it served on a broker -- have stretched from days to weeks.
Deborah Masucci, the association's director of arbitration, said the logjam could be traced to a surge in complaints just when there was considerable turnover in staff.


INSIDE
Citadel Ruling Is Reversed
A new ruling by a Federal appeals court will temporarily prevent Shannon Faulkner from entering The Citadel cadet corps.
Page 6.
Recall of Flammable Skirts
The Government announced the largest-ever clothing recall: 250,000 rayon skirts from India that burn faster than a newspaper.
Page 6.
Charges Under Abortion Law
The man charged by Florida with murdering a doctor was also indicted under the new Federal law protecting access to abortion clinics.
Page 6.
Accord on Mexican Economy
In Mexico, the presidential candidates disagree bitterly on a good many matters, but the economy is not one of them.
Page 3.


RESULTS PLUS
N.F.L.
Montana Helps Ruin Two D. C. Debuts  Solid efforts by Kansas City's Joe Montana and Steve Bono overshadowed the home debuts of the new Redskins coach, Norv Turner, and the new Washington quarterback, Heath Shuler, as the Chiefs rallied for a 17-14 exhibition victory last night at R.F.K.
Stadium.
Montana, making his first start of the preseason, played the first half, leading the Chiefs on two scoring drives while completing 11 of 20 passes for 118 yards.
The Washington offense sputtered under the rookie Shuler, who replaced John Friesz and played the second half after practicing just five days in training camp since ending a contract holdout.
Shuler was 9 of 21 for 61 yards. (AP)
49ers Get It Right: A week after opening with a dud, the San Francisco 49ers looked more like themselves in a 20-3 victory over the visiting Denver Broncos.
Steve Young completed 7 of 10 passes for 74 yards in a quarter of play, including his first scoring pass of the preseason.
The Broncos' John Elway was held to 3 completions in 9 attempts for 23 yards, and Richard Dent and Ken Norton, two of San Francisco's defensive acquisitions, both turned in strong efforts.
An interested spectator was the free-agent cornerback Deion Sanders, who didn't have to be with the Cincinnati Reds because of the baseball strike.
He watched the game in a stadium suite with 49ers President Carmen Policy. (AP)
George and Falcons Get Best of Bills: Atlanta's Jeff George passed for two touchdowns and Bobby Hebert, in his first appearance since underdoing elbow surgery in February, engineered two field-goal drives as the Falcons beat the visiting Buffalo Bills, 27-7, last night.
Gunnell, from Great Britain, now has Olympic, world, Commonwealth and European titles.
She also holds the world record of 52.74, set in last year's world championship final at Stuttgart, Germany.
Gunnell, 29, clocked a world seasonal best of 53.33 seconds despite being unchallenged on the homestretch.
Silvia Rieger of Germany and Anna Knoroz of Russia finished in a tie for second, in 54.68.
Colin Jackson capped a great evening for the British hurdlers, winning the 110 hurdles final in 13.08 seconds for his country's fifth gold medal some 80 minutes after Gunnell's triumph.
Jackson, who set the world record of 12.91 when he captured the world championship a year ago, finished .08 ahead of Florian Schwarthoff of Germany. (AP) GOLF McGill Near Another Women's Amateur  Jill McGill moved within one victory of her second consecutive United States Women's Amateur title by rallying for a 1-up triumph over the 1994 collegiate champion Emilee Klein yesterday in Hot Springs, Va.
Waiting for her in today's 36-hole championship match is Wendy Ward, 21, of San Antonio, who shot a six-under-par 30 on the front nine on the way to a 7-and-5 rout of Andrea Baxter at the Homestead resort's Cascades Course.
It was the most lopsided victory in the Women's Amateur semifinals since 1977, when Cathy Sherk of Canada was a 9-and-8 winner over Brenda Goldsmith of San Antonio. (AP) The Round of Her Life: Janice Gibson, never a winner or even a leader in her nine-year pro career spanning 146 tournaments, shot a six-under-par 66 for her lowest round ever and took a one-stroke lead after the first round of the inaugural Children's Medical Center L.P.G.A.
Classic in Beavercreek, Ohio.
Gibson, who played only one tournament last year because of a herniated disk in her neck, missed the cut in her previous three tournaments. (AP)
Scorched Course Policy: Before the opening round of the Senior PGA First of America Classic in Ada, Mich., the tour's leading money winner, Lee Trevino, predicted a score of six under par could win the $650,000 tournament.
Perhaps Trevino should revise that prediction because four players -- Isao Aoki, Jim Albus, Graham Marsh and Jimmy Powell -- fired six-under 66's to lead by only one stroke over the threesome of Larry Mowry, Tom Wargo and Dave Stockton. (AP)


Correcting Old Errors in a Credit Report
The Rev.
Richard A. Brown, a long-time Presbyterian minister in Montpelier, Idaho, discovered error on his credit report after being denied a credit card a year ago.
He had declared personal bankruptcy in 1987.
But almost $20,000 in debts that have been discharged under terms of the bankruptcy were listed as current liabilities on his credit report.
Creditors, which generally supply data to the three credit bureaus monthly, are responsible for updating such information.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
Consumer prices rose three-tenths of 1 percent in July, buoyed by rising gasoline and grocery prices, while business inventories increased in June, the Government reported.
Excluding the volatile food and energy sectors, consumer prices rose only two-tenths of 1 percent, less than many analysts had expected.  [ Page 37. ]


Columbus Ave. Construction Upsets Browsers' World of Cafes and Shops
On Columbus Avenue, people with khaki shorts and disposable income browse the clothiers, sidewalk cafes and curio shops and, block by block, fill their shopping bags.
Though some would suggest that much of the street's famous luster has been lost, Columbus Avenue is still trendy and pricey and popular with browsers.
The wide sidewalks are ideal for strolling, and businesses depend on customers who just drift in.
Take away easy access and you effectively take away window shoppers, diners and tourists, said Dino Makris, who owns a flower shop between 75th and 76th Streets.


In His New Play, a Message for Friel's Critics
Brian Friel's new play, "Molly Sweeney," a tale of blindness, both physical and psychological, and, above all, of self-delusion, opened at the Gate Theater here on Tuesday night.
The philosophical musing that led many critics to fault his last effort, "Wonderful Tennessee," is muted in "Molly Sweeney." And Mr.
Friel, who is directing a play of his own for the first time and who has declined all requests for interviews, seems to admonish his critics explicitly in dialogue at the end of the play.


Kodak Isn't Supplier of the Tobacco Industry
To the Editor:
Alan Blum's Aug. 6 letter recommends for various reasons that Eastman Kodak Company should continue to remain on the New York City pension trustees' list of tobacco industry suppliers.


Democratic Leaders Promise to Try Again on Crime Bill
After the worst legislative drubbing of the Clinton Presidency, Democratic leaders in Congress promised today that they would revive the crime bill that the House of Representatives sidetracked on Thursday and win its approval next week.
The Speaker of the House, Thomas S. Foley of Washington, said that crime legislation and the procedural hurdle that blocked it this week would be the main order of business before the House beginning on Tuesday.
He predicted that one way or another the bill would get to the floor.


Howard Brown Jr., Nuclear Official, 75
Howard C. Brown Jr., a former assistant general manager of the Atomic Energy Commission, died on Sunday at Georgetown University Hospital in Washington.
He was 75 and lived in Kensington, Md.
Mr.
Brown died of cardiac arrest after a long illness with non-Hodgkins lymphoma, his wife, Janet L. Brown, said.


Cashier's Checks Are Like Cash, So Take Care in Handling Them
Many people need a cashier's check at some point in their lives -- to buy a home or car, for example -- but care is called for, because the check is almost like cash.
To get one a customer simply takes cash or a check to his bank.
Assuming he has sufficient funds, the bank charges a special fee and issues a bank check called a cashier's check or teller's check.
A certified check, by contrast, is a personal check, which the bank certifies after verifying the customer's account will cover it.


Mediation Is Set, But Not One Batter Comes to the Plate
On the first day of the baseball players strike, with more than 700 major leaguers scattering to all parts of the country and beyond, negotiators for the players and owners did not rest yesterday.
But they also did not, in a two-hour bargaining session, close the gulf that separates them and imperils the remainder of the season.
Donald Fehr, the players' labor leader, and Richard Ravitch, the owners' chief labor executive, did agree on one matter: They accepted an offer of assistance from the Federal Mediation and Conciliation Service.


New York's Yellow Taxicabs Aren't the Rejects of Other Cities; Cool-It-Yourself
To the Editor:


Southeastern Michigan Gas Enterprises Inc.(SMGS,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


New Member of the Supreme Court


San Diego Gas &amp; Electric Co.(SDO,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


For Some Giants Defenders, 4-3 Isn't Adding Up
Mike Nolan, the Giants' defensive coordinator, is one of the bright young minds in the National Football League.
Observers throughout the N.F.L. think he will be a head coach within five years.
But in the meantime, he must deal with what has become a mini-crisis within the defense he designed.
The Giants haven't reached for the panic button yet, but as they prepare for their third exhibition game -- to be played here Saturday night against the San Diego Chargers at Olympic Stadium -- there appears to be concerns over the new 4-3 alignment.


The Unyielding AIDS Epidemic
The main message emanating from the international AIDS conference in Japan this week was sobering: The fight against this worldwide epidemic will have to be waged for a very long time, without the help of a magic-bullet cure or preventive vaccine.
The latest estimates from the World Health Organization suggest that some 17 million people have been infected so far with the AIDS virus and around 4 million have developed the disease.
Although the virus has done its greatest damage in Africa and may be stabilizing in the U.S., it appears poised for a major breakout in several jam-packed countries of Asia.


Sonat Offshore Drilling Inc.(RIG,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Protester Indicted by U.S. In Killing of Clinic Doctor
A Federal grand jury in Florida today indicted the abortion opponent charged in the killings of a Pensacola doctor and his escort under the new Federal law that protects access to abortion clinics.
Justice Department officials said the indictment was meant to send a signal that the resources of the Federal Government will be fully employed to prevent violence against abortion clinics.


Fresh Del Monte Produce NV reports earnings for Qtr to July 1


Press Freedom, Indonesian Style
President Suharto of Indonesia, now serving his sixth five-year term, spoke encouragingly on his re-election last year about the need for more "democratization." The country's bolder and livelier publications took him at his word, and for a brief, heady period there were actually articles on such forbidden topics as human rights abuses in the former Portuguese colony of East Timor and who might succeed the aging President.
That wasn't what Mr.
Suharto had in mind.
A few weeks ago, two respected magazines and a popular tabloid were banned; closure threats were sent to various newspapers, their apparent offense being to report critically about a Government decision to spend $1.1 billion on a fleet of decrepit East German warships.


Religion Notes; Fragrance-free services for the sensitive Changing of the guard at a Reform seminary.
No Incense, Please
The church is crowded, the people are singing, the spirit is soaring, but there's that smell -- those fumes that come from someone's perfume or hair spray or deodorant that makes the simple act of breathing difficult.
Forget the spirit.
Give me some air!


Officer Kills Suspect in Robbery Attempt
Resisting two suspected muggers, an off-duty police officer shot and killed one man and wounded another yesterday while walking alone near his home in Ozone Park, Queens, the police said.
Officer Brian E. O'Malley, 33, who is assigned to the 84th Precinct in Brooklyn Heights, was walking at the intersection of Cross Bay Boulevard and Liberty Avenue just after 2 A.M. when a woman and then two men approached him demanding his money, a police spokesman said.


Northern Border Partners L.P.(NBP,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
Storm-Tossed Art
IT was the day that Sallie Potterton went from fear to fantasy.
When the storm of March 1993 hit Fire Island it changed many people's lives.
For Ms.
Potterton, who is an artist and has lived year-round in Ocean Beach since 1970, the storm caused the greatest anxiety and, perhaps, the greatest inspiration.
"I was really scared for my life," she said.
The power of the storm was so intense "that I could feel the waves pounding the sand in my house." And her house was five houses back from the ocean.


Traci Farber and Seth Kamil
WHEN he is in a romantic mood, Seth Kamil is far more likely to take Traci Farber a container of Malaysian rice pudding or a dozen litchi nuts than a dozen red roses.
In fact, he wooed her with ethnic food.
After their first date, he sent her a brick-size napoleon pastry as a way of saying thank you; another time, he showed up on her front step with sour pickles from Gus's Pickles on the Lower East Side.
Mr.
Kamil, 27, is a Ph.D. candidate in American ethnic and urban history at Columbia University.
He also works as a director of Big Onion Walking Tours, a company that offers narrated strolls through places like the Bowery, Chinatown, Ellis Island and multi-ethnic eating spots below Houston Street.
Mr.
Kamil, whose specialty is a tour titled "Jewish Lower East Side," can tell endless stories about the people who lived there in the early part of the century, from Yiddish-speaking immigrants to tough saloon keepers to colorful criminals like Gyp the Blood.


Drug Graft in Colombia Is Rife, Giving Leader a Daunting Task
Always ready to listen to visiting American experts lecture about identifying drug smugglers, Col.
Leonel Mendoza Aguirre seemed to be the right officer to police El Dorado Airport in Bogota, the busiest airport in the Andes.
But last week Colonel Mendoza was arrested on charges of running a police ring that charged $1,300 for each kilogram (2.2 pounds) of cocaine that was allowed to pass through the airport's new X-ray machines and under the noses of American-trained dogs.


A Creepy Life - but Cushy
THE MORTICIAN'S APPRENTICE  By Rick DeMarinis. 303 pp.
New York: W. W. Norton &amp; Company. $21.


Republicans Uneasy About Giuliani Effort on Crime Bill
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani's offer to help President Clinton revive the crime bill in Congress showed no immediate results yesterday, even as there were signs of dissatisfaction from the Mayor's fellow Republicans.
On Friday, the Republican Mayor appeared with the Democratic President in Washington and Minneapolis and promised to lobby House members who had scuttled the bill.
But yesterday, one of the members closest to the Mayor, Representative Susan Molinari of Staten Island, said no amount of cajoling would change her position on the bill as written.


Aug. 7-13; Castro Blows Off Some Steam
FOR Fidel Castro it's been a summer of demonstrations, power shortages and boat hijackings.
Unnerved by these developments, he has predictably blamed Uncle Sam for his troubles, attacking in particular the trade embargo and anti-Castro radio broadcasts.
Without a Che Guevara to sow revolution in Latin America and without a Soviet sponsor to finance Cuban forces in Africa, Mr.
Castro has turned to the remaining trump card he has: the threat of a new boatlift.
After thousands of young people shouted, "Down with Castro" at an Aug. 5 demonstration in Havana, Mr.
Castro raised the spectre of a replay of the Mariel boatlift, the chaotic 1980 exodus in which 125,000 Cubans fled to Florida.
This immediately set off alarm bells in the Clinton Administration, which envisioned a flood of Cubans, coming after a tidal wave of Haitians, creating social and political havoc in Florida and scuttling the Democrats' electoral chances there in 1994 and 1996.


Water Carnival Filled With Fresh Air Fund Fun for Children
Maybe it was the smell of chlorine and freshly cut grass that led Tiffany Lopez to cheerfully accept five wet sponges in the face.
Maybe the chirp of crickets had a hypnotic effect, or the almost-palpable August heat.
Whatever the reason, the 11-year-old girl from East Harlem did not flinch when five friends hurled sopping sponges her way.


Uncharted Territories
A PASSAGE TO EGYPT The Life of Lucie Duff Gordon.
By Katherine Frank.
Illustrated. 399 pp.
Boston: Houghton Mifflin Company. $27.50.


The Sarong Floats In On a Trade Wind
The sarong returns to the summer fashion scene, worn by some women and a few adventurous men.
Most of the styles today are wrap-your-own sarongs from a length of printed fabric.
The sarong's graceful line is best complemented with sandals, for both women and men.
Hollywood glamorized the sarong when it dressed the actress Dorothy Lamour for a 1937 film, "The Hurricane."


Now You See It, Now You Don't: Thieves' Bazaar Is a Moving Target
In a way it looks like an airport terminal: a broad mix of people milling about, many with backpacks, some with bulging duffle bags and shopping bags, others with small suitcases or briefcases.
But these people aren't going anyplace.
They are buyers and sellers at a black market known as Thieves R Us, on Second Avenue in the East Village, where a $300 bicycle sells for $40, a $200 man's suit for $10 and compact disks go for a dollar apiece.
The sellers can afford to charge such low prices, local store owners and the police say, because most of the merchandise is stolen.


Island's Swat Teams Working Overtime
ELAINE BRODSKY of Great Neck refuses to leave her home after 5 P.M.
She fears attacks -- from mosquitoes.
"It's unbelievable," said Mrs.
Brodsky, who teaches dance in the Bronx.
"I step out onto my front porch, and within 30 seconds my ankles are itching like crazy."
Officials in Nassau and Suffolk Counties say residents have been calling in record numbers of complaints about being "eaten alive" by mosquitoes.
The officials said they hoped that new programs combining chemical and nonchemical controls would eliminate the widespread use of pesticides.


Amy Virshup, Peter Scaglione
Amy Virshup, a former executive editor of The Village Voice, was married yesterday to Peter Scaglione, an architect with the firm of Beyer Blinder Belle in New York.
Cantor Daniel Neiden performed the nondenominational ceremony at Isola Bella in Taconic, Conn.
Ms.
Virshup, 34, is keeping her name.
The bride, a graduate of Tufts University, is to become a John S. Knight journalism fellow at Stanford University in the fall.
She is the daughter of Jean P. Virshup of Orange, Conn., and the late Bernard J. Virshup.
Her father was a partner in the law firm of Virshup, Caplan &amp; Hecht in New Haven.
Her mother is a personal trust assistant at Shawmut National Bank there.


Straws in the Wind
Richard G. Cann dreams of a leaf blower that sounds more like a waterfall and less like an emergency siren.
Those dreams make him a soldier in a raging battle over noise in the suburbs.
While Mr.
Cann, an engineering consultant, tinkers with blades and air shafts to silence gas-powered leaf blowers, communities across Westchester County and the region have declared war on the machines.


Man Dies in Custody After Mace Is Used
An emotionally disturbed man who lashed out at police officers at a precinct station house in Queens died yesterday after several of the officers subdued him by using Mace, the police said.
The man, whose identity was not disclosed, was taken to Jamaica Hospital after being subdued and died about 3:35 P.M., said Sgt.
James Coleman, a police spokesman.


Analisa F. Sama, Mark T. Holmes
Analisa Francesca Sama and Mark Turner Holmes, deputy attorneys general for New Jersey in Trenton, were married yesterday in Lake Placid, N.Y.
The Rev.
Robert L. Decker performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at St.
Agnes Church.


Mutual Funds; Putting a New Trust in Real Estate
TALK about a land rush: seven mutual funds focusing on real estate have sprung up so far in 1994, doubling the group's size.
Among them is CGM Realty, the first fund started by G. Kenneth Heebner, one of the industry's top-performing managers.
Franklin Investments, Columbia, Crabbe Huson, American Capital, Evergreen and Pioneer also have new funds.
All invest in an assortment of real estate investment trusts, or REIT's, which are publicly traded companies that manage portfolios of real estate investments, and other real estate-related stocks, like home builders.


Nataki Higgins, R. T. Montgomery
Nataki Olamina Higgins, the daughter of Renelda Higgins Walker of Manhattan and Chester Higgins Jr. of Brooklyn, was married on Friday to Ronald Terrell Montgomery, a son of Antoinette Montgomery of Boston.
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani performed the ceremony at City Hall in New York.
The bride, 23, is a student at Howard University.
Her father is a photographer at The New York Times.
Her mother is a deputy director of the Mayor's Community Assistance Unit in Manhattan.


What's Wrong With a Voluntary Health Plan; Bureaucracy's Triumph
To the Editor:
For several semesters I was in charge of student groups in Hungary when it was a socialist state.
I thus had ample firsthand experience of the evils of a socialist health care system.
We had high-level connections, so our students were treated promptly and efficiently.
But we watched as the poor Hungarians waited hours on endless lines to meet with countless, faceless bureaucrats and fill out the same forms and answer the same questions again and again.


CHILDREN ARE ALONE
Your article left me angry beyond words.
These girls, April and Becca, crave what they clearly are not getting -- attention, guidance, love and the chance just to be kids.


Employer Mandate? We Already Have One
As the nation follows the great debate in Congress over health care reform, one issue stands out: will we require all employers to contribute to the cost of insurance for the company's workers and their families?
Listening to the critics of the so-called employer mandate, one would think the nation was facing the issue for the first time.
In fact, requiring employers to contribute to the cost of maintaining the social welfare of their workers is very much a part of American tradition.
It began in Massachusetts and Wisconsin earlier in this century with workers' compensation and unemployment compensation, both of which were subsequently embraced by Congress.


CHILDREN ARE ALONE
At the end of her piece, Orenstein acknowledges that she "left these girls' lives, uncertain of how their stories will play out." What a shame; once again, another adult vanishes from their lives.
DONNA CORNACHIO Hastings-on-Hudson, N.Y.


Unworthy Causes?
UNHEALTHY CHARITIES Hazardous to Your Health and Wealth.
By James T. Bennett and Thomas J. DiLorenzo. 269 pp.
New York: Basic Books.


Manfred Worner, 59, NATO Leader, Is Dead
Manfred Worner, the first German to be named to the highest civilian post of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization, died yesterday at his home in Brussels.
He was 59.
The cause was cancer, a spokesman said.


Kirsten Boese and Benjamin Self
Kirsten Patricia Boese, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Klaus Boese, is to be married today to Benjamin Lloyd Self, a son of Dr.
Pamela Sheingorn of New York and Dr.
William Self of Billings, Mont.
Judith Espenschied, a leader of the Washington Ethical Cultural Society, is to officiate at the Inn at Perry Cabin in St.
Michaels, Md.
The bride, 28, and the bridegroom, 27, graduated from Stanford University.
They received master's degrees from Johns Hopkins University, she in public health and he in Japanese studies and international economics.
She is a program assistant in the Africa division of Johns Hopkins Population Communications Services.


Taking Charge: A Precinct To Call Her Own
Jane Perlov remembers exactly when she came of age in the largely male world of the New York City Police Department.
It was in the early 1980's, on a nighttime raid of a drug den in the 30th Precinct in East Harlem.
Ms.
Perlov, then a rookie, and her fellow officers suddenly found themselves up against a locked metal door.


Roughing It


'Suddenly I Have Hundreds Of Friends'
NO EXHIBITION OF contemporary art is more important or more eagerly anticipated than Documenta, the giant survey held every five years or so in Kassel, Germany.
But recent Documentas have also been giant disappointments.
When a relatively little-known French curator was chosen in March to head the next one, in 1997, it was not only surprising news; it suggested the possibility of tangible change for the show.
The person chosen, Catherine David, has been a curator at the Galerie Nationale du Jeu de Paume in Paris since 1990 and for nine years before that was a curator at the Pompidou Center.
In the past, commissioners of Documentas have all been men.
Handicappers had made Kasper Konig, a well-known and respected curator from Frankfurt, a favorite for the job that eventually went to Ms.
David, who was a long shot at best.


Maybe Inflation Is to Blame?
To the Editor:
Surely J. E. Lighter is mistaken in "A Word About Money, Cash, Coin . . ." (Viewpoints, July 31), in which he defines a sawbuck as a $20 bill.
A sawbuck is a $10 bill; a double-sawbuck, $20.
I have always assumed these terms were inspired by the 19th century bills that denominated their value in Roman numerals -- "X" for $10, "XX" for $20 -- because of the designation's resemblance to a sawbuck, a rack used to support wood for sawing.
R.
H.
GREENAN Winter Park, Fla., Aug. 1


IN SHORT: FICTION
HISTORICAL NOVEL  FIVE BLACK SHIPS  A Novel of the Discoverers.
By Napoleon Baccino Ponce de Leon.
Helen and Kurt Wolff/Harcourt Brace, $23.95


An Auditory Tranquilizer
To the Editor:  "Tonality without music," a reversal of the common description of 12-tone music, seems to be a good description of the New Age pap being successfully peddled as the aural drug of choice for white affluent Americans.
But is stress really the enemy?
Is this auditory tranquilizer really good?
In his great poem "On Looking Up at the Constellations," Robert Frost poses: "We must look to other things than suns and moons and stars for the shocks and changes we need to keep us sane." Frost, incidentally, was a real artist.


Habitats/Douglas Manor; Rustic Queens Hideaway
BURIED in the tall marsh grass is an old dock, rotted now and slowly sinking.
On a cleared spot leading to the water stands a flagpole.
Egrets stalk the marshes, hunting for small fish.
In this bucolic corner of the Douglas Manor section of Queens -- a little more than a half-hour Long Island Rail Road ride from Herald Square -- Hal and Dr.
Linda Goluboff are buying a 1916 cottage, stained stone gray with barn-red shutters.
It is one of seven houses in Douglas Manor designed by Josephine Wright Chapman, a little-known Revivalist architect who had an atelier in Greenwich Village.


Mitchell Bill Puts Liberals In a Quandary
For groups that have led the push for national health insurance, the current Senate debate on the issue raises exquisitely difficult questions of political tactics.
The biggest question is whether to lobby energetically for a bill they view as severely flawed, but which may also represent the only vehicle for achieving their goals.


Daisies and Sunflowers Make the Scene
ONE day while looking at a beautiful field of golden flowers and not sure what they were, I queried a knowledgeable botanist at my side.
The response was that it was probably some kind of daisy, but "I don't do composites."
The reply was in jest, of course, but underneath was a modicum of truth.
How sad to eliminate a whole group of wonderful plants.


INSIDE
Shift on Discrimination Case
After winning a court victory for a white New Jersey teacher laid off so a black teacher could be retained, the Clinton Administration now seeks to argue that race can be considered in deciding whom to lay off.
Page 37.
NATO Chief Dies
Manfred Worner, NATO's Secretary General since July 1988, died of cancer at the age of 59.
The former Defense Minister of West Germany helped NATO find its way in the post-cold-war era.
Page 47.


Cooling Summer Days With Fresh Fruit Ice Cream
WHEN you live in the country, you shop from catalogues.
Along with a compost bin and a door mat, a new ice cream maker arrived the other day.
It was not the fancy one that costs $400, but a more modest version, priced in the middle two figures.
It cracks along for half an hour or so and switches itself off when the ice cream is done.


Britain Reopens Houses
The National Trust of Britain has reopened two of its properties this summer after extensive refurbishment: Ham House, about 15 miles southwest of London, and Waddesdon Manor in Buckinghamshire, 40 miles southwest of London.
The 17th-century Ham House, situated on the River Thames, between Richmond and Hampton Court, has been closed for two and a half years.
Visitors will now see a refurbished Great Hall, Round Gallery and Great Staircase, as well as the house library, which has reopened with a bequest of 4,000 17th- and 18th-century books.
Two rooms previously not open to the public have been restored: The oak-paneled Gentleman's Parlor and Gentleman's Dining Room, a suite of rooms set aside for the house's chief steward.
Ham House is in Ham, Richmond, Surrey; telephone (81) 940 1950.
Until the end of October, the house will be open every day except Thursday.
From the first week in November to Dec. 18, the house is open on Saturday and Sunday only.
Admission is about $6.10.


Corrections
A picture last Sunday with an article about declining vacancy rates at Co-op City in the Bronx was published in error.
It showed Stuyvesant Town in Manhattan.


Corrections
A chart last Sunday summarizing the findings of Congressional hearings involving the Whitewater Development Company incorrectly reported a detail of discussions between the White House and the Treasury Department, which conducted an investigation of Whitewater.
Jean Hanson, the Treasury Department's general counsel, did not rebuff a request from Deputy Secretary Roger C. Altman to brief White House aides about the investigation.
Ms.
Hanson did provide such a briefing; she said she did so at Mr.
Altman's request, although he said he never asked her to.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
RELIGIOUS HISTORY  THE KINGDOM OF MATTHIAS  By Paul E. Johnson and Sean Wilentz.
Oxford University, $25.


What's All the Rhubarb?
To the Editor:
As the author of one of the "increasingly outlandish Authors' Queries" challenged by Charles A. Sullivan, I am writing to defend my honor and good name.
Pseudo-author with misguided sense of humor, indeed!
Pseudo-author, maybe.
But, Mr.
Sullivan, I can be funny.


The Quality-of-Life Drive Is Nickel-and-Dime Fluff
To the Editor:
You may have made a mistake when you decided to headline your Aug. 7 article about the Mayor's quality-of-life campaign, "What Makes Us Angry." You should know that if you ask that of New Yorkers, they will tell you.


A Conjurer of New Age Vagaries and Lush Grooves
WHAT TO CALL SEAL'S blend of symphonic dance music and mystical lyrics?
New Age funk?
Progressive disco?
Seal belongs to that strain of maverick, slightly hippyish black artists -- Prince, Lenny Kravitz, Terence Trent D'Arby, P.M.
Dawn -- who aren't marketed as "black." The British singer-songwriter (whose full name is Sealhenry Samuels) broke through to stardom in 1991 with hits like "Crazy" and "Future Love Paradise" and a debut album, "Seal," that sold three million copies worldwide.
After a three-year hiatus, he's back with a sequel, also entitled "Seal," offering the same mix of lush grooves and lyrical vagaries.
Of Nigerian parentage, but born and bred in London, Seal started living as a bohemian and traveling to the Far East in the mid-80's.
By the decade's end, he found the British rave scene in full swing and threw himself into its hallucinogenic excess.


Dr. Joseph Dolgin; Pediatrician, 83
Dr.
Joseph Dolgin, a pediatrician who led a successful trial of one of the first measles vaccines, died on Thursday at his home in Livingston, S.I.
He was 83.
The cause was amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, said his wife, Barbara.


Le Grand Vefour
To the Editor: Having recently lunched at the Grand Vefour, I can second Sarah Ferrell's appraisal of the quality of its food and service ("Dining a Deux, Splendidly," July 3).
And it doesn't have to carry such a price tag.
We had wanted to dine there for years but were wary of the cost and so decided to try lunch instead of dinner.
We made a reservation a week in advance, and I asked if we could be seated at Colette's table.


What's All the Rhubarb?
To the Editor:
I am responding to Charles A. Sullivan's rather bemused request for the titles of books that have resulted from Authors' Queries you printed.


Nudging the System: How to Move a Bus One Block
Henry Brown isn't Hercules, just a wiry 75-year-old retiree who moved a bus.
His is a tale offering a glimmer of hope that the proverbial little guy can make a difference, can go to City Hall and, even without a fight, move a bureaucracy.
And it is the ease with which he succeeded that makes his story particularly encouraging.


Putting Limits On Pets
A RISING tide of legislation and court decisions is undercutting the severe pet restrictions favored by the governing boards of many condominiums, co-ops and homeowner associations.
In the future, these boards may therefore need to establish guidelines for the care and behavior of the pets under their jurisdiction rather than try to banish them completely.


'To Hell With Moe Berg!'
To the Editor:
Your review of "The Catcher Was a Spy" (July 24), Nicholas Dawidoff's biography of the baseball player-linguist-spy Moe Berg, brings to mind an amusing World War II story.


Restoring Fairness for Future Edisons
To the Editor:
David G. Soergel makes a telling point regarding the allocation of $25 billion in aggregate research and development tax deductions ("For Future Edisons, Fair Federal Rules," Viewpoints, July 3).
He points out that 90 percent of these deductions go to the nation's 400 largest companies rather than to cash-starved start-ups, whose entrepreneurs are often restricted by their own limited finances.


Mapmaker, Mapmaker
FROM the geometric clarity of midtown Manhattan to the Byzantine landscape of Queens to the suburb-like sprawl of Staten Island, New York City can be nearly impossible to navigate.
And those negotiating unfamiliar terrain often find themselves clinging to the steering wheel with one hand and to a road-by-road, block-by-block atlas with the other.
This brings them into the world of Subutay Musluoglu.


In the Region/Connecticut; Tough Competition Amid Changing Technology
REAL ESTATE in Connecticut is at its most bouyant in recent years, with sales relatively brisk.
But behind the scenes the residential real-estate industry is in a volatile state, coping with rapidly changing technologies, mergers and acquisitions, dramatically shifting business strategies and changes in decades-old traditions.
On Oct. 1 real-estate brokerages throughout the country will no longer have to join real-estate boards within their towns.
A new board-of-choice ruling by the National Association of Realtors will let them become members of any board within their region.


Smack Madness: 40 Years of Demon Heroin
POOR ZED.
HE HAS BARELY ARrived in Paris, checked into the hotel, made love with a beautiful prostitute and taken a quick look at the blueprints for the bank robbery the next day when his childhood friend Eric makes a startling suggestion: "Now we do heroin."
So begins the film "Killing Zoe," which opens on Friday, and some of the most festive heroin scenes in recent film history.
Eric (Jean-Hugues Anglade) shoots up, but the other bank robbers smoke the drug, "chasing the dragon," in foil straws.
One man explains to Zed that the feeling will be as if "the rest of the world is in a bubble of glass and you are rubbing up against it like a bad windshield wiper." Zed (Eric Stoltz) considers this and says, "I'll do it anyway."


Walter W. Braznell; Airline Executive, 86
Walter W. Braznell, a commercial airline pilot who started flying open cockpit biplanes in 1927 and retired as the commander of a fleet of jetliners 40 years later, died on Thursday at his retirement home in Longboat Key, Fla.
Mr.
Braznell, a longtime resident of Manhasset, L.I., was 86.
The cause was a stroke, said his daughter Carole Carlin.


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
A BAS FALLERINA
Paladin Orlando, the medieval hero of the Macri-Weill Sicilian Puppet Theater productions, matches wits with the wicked sorceress Fallerina in the latest epic, to be seen at Stony Creek's Puppet House Theater.
"The Enchanted Garden of Fallerina" opens Thursday and remains through Sept. 17.
It tells of Orlando's travails in ending the black magic and evil deeds of the sorceress queen by routing the army of Organa on the battlefields of Targhila and entering the dragon's lair in Fallerina's garden.


PLAYING IN THE NEIGHBORHOOD
RED HOOK Old Barge Is Mired In Mirth, Not Mud
David Sharps has made a home for original music, film, performance art and comedy on his lovingly restored 1914 Lehigh Valley Railroad barge.


Aug. 7-13: Papal Diplomacy; The Vatican Takes On The Population Planners
With only a few weeks left before a major world population conference in Cairo, Pope John Paul II has marshalled his diplomatic divisions for what some see as his most heartfelt campaign since his crusade against Communism.
At issue is the Vatican's contention that the United States and American feminist groups want to use the gathering next month to enshrine abortion as a lawful right as the world seeks to avert a catastrophic population explosion.


Quelling Anxiety
To the Editor: Carrying good luck charms ("Amulets for Anxiety," June 12) -- in this day and age?
What nonsense!


In Berlin, Brown Looks Like An All-Pro
You knew you weren't in New Jersey anymore when, after the Giants would score a touchdown, the German fans at Olympic Stadium would jam to Frank Sinatra's "New York, New York." At Giants Stadium, a song by ol' blue eyes wouldn't exactly have people rocking the stands.
Here, you'd think Michael Jackson was blaring through the loudspeakers.
Welcome to American football gone global.
This Berlin version of the American Bowl featured the Giants and the San Diego Chargers in a pretty exciting game for exhibition football as the Giants won, 28-20, before 57,329 on a cool and breezy night in one of the most historic stadiums in the world.
It was the Giants' first exhibition victory in three games as the Chargers fell to 0-3.


A Critic Turns 90; Meyer Schapiro
WHEN I FIRST telephoned Meyer Schapiro, his 91-year-old wife answered the phone.
I was hoping to schedule an interview with him, but she told me he doesn't grant any.
Schapiro himself then came to the phone.
"Surely you can write your article without me," he said politely.
His reticence was a bit surprising: Schapiro, who turns 90 next month, has hardly led a reclusive life.
A celebrated art historian, he has moved in the most elevated cultural circles of our time.
He taught at Columbia University for half a century, and was a close associate of the New York intellectuals, that brainy, noisy clan that flourished in the years around World War II.
In the late 30's, when Leon Trotsky wanted to learn more about Surrealism, he knew where to turn; he wrote to Schapiro, who sent along some essays by his friend Andre Breton, the poet who founded the movement.


Johnson and Torrence Lead U.S. to Victory
Michael Johnson decided in midweek that he would use this Pan Africa-USA International track and field meet to do something a little different.
Johnson decided to forgo the 200 meters, his signature race, and run the 400.
Within 20 meters, Johnson looked as if he had been running the race all season long.
Johnson blasted out of the blocks and not only won the race, but did it in 44.32 seconds, equaling the fastest time in the world this year on the final day of the two-day meet.


The Hat Woman
There came a moment when I accepted forever that I had no business trying to comprehend high style -- that is, women and their hats.
I just didn't get it.
Coming home from work one day, I was struck by an astonishing sight: moving ahead at a jaunty pace was a swarm of straw and linen that I am obliged, for want of a better term, to call a hat.
It pulled me along like some helpless small boat in the wake of a giant liner.
To say that the headgear was unusual misses the pith and point.
Let me just say that at any moment I half expected to see an advertising rocket catapult from its cone. (It had a cone.) Passers-by who came face to face with the hat registered momentary shock, which I regarded as a kind of salute to someone who would carry a launch pad on her head.
Finally, at the street where I live, the hat made a right turn and I could see clearly the profile of the creature underneath -- my wife.


What's All the Rhubarb?
To the Editor:
Charles A. Sullivan is shooting from the hip when he attacks the Authors' Queries and questions the existence of the books themselves.


HOW TO MAKE A POND
Michael Pollan's story of life spontaneously generating in his newly created pond is a useful antidote to the apocalyptic vision of many environmentalists, who seem to believe that disaster will inevitably follow the smallest alteration of an ecosystem by man ("How to Make a Pond," July 24).
In fact, nature is extremely resilient; it is man that is most vulnerable to change in his environment and in danger of extinction.
I have no doubt that the creatures inhabiting Pollan's pond will still be around long after we are gone.
BRUCE BARTLETT Alexandria, Va.


Le Grand Vefour
To the Editor: Just as my appetite was whetted enough to spring for a $325 dinner for two, I spied the picture of the maitre d' of Grand Vefour in Paris elegantly lighting a cigar for a patron.
The thought of having such a delicious meal ruined by cigar smoke at the next table is incredible.
So much for the Grand Vefour.
RHETA CHERNIN  New York, N.Y.


Martha R. Cohen, Steven D. Barrett
Martha Rachel Cohen, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Melvin I. Cohen of Watchung, N.J., is to be married today to Steven David Barrett, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Gary Barrett of Lansing, Mich.
Rabbi Dan Cohen, the bride's brother, is to perform the ceremony at the Chanticler in Millburn, N.J.


World Markets; Tighter Credit? London Market Yawns
IN London's financial markets, it is now considered a sure thing.
Having nursed its economy back to some semblance of health, and with signs of possible inflation flickering on the distant horizon, Britain will undoubtedly begin raising interest rates in the next several months.
With the benchmark base rate brought down over the last two years from 12 percent to its current 5.25 percent -- its lowest level in 20 years -- Britain's imminent about-face on monetary policy is hardly a surprise.
The United States, whose economic cycle has been running six months to a year ahead of Britain's, began raising rates in February to head off inflationary pressures.
The rate-cutting cycle in continental Europe, which has lagged a year or more behind Britain's, is itself drawing to a close, as last week's rate rises in Italy and Sweden demonstrated.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-19  MASSACRES SAID TO BE SYSTEMATIC  The mass killings that began in Rwanda in April were not random, but a systematic strategy to wipe out an ethnic group, say witnesses, many of whom were forced to join the killing, or pretend to, to spare their lives or others.  1  Burundi shaken but marching ahead after blast.  17


Journal


The Way It's Supposed to Be
At the ball park Friday night there weren't any signs saying, "Down with the Strike." At the ball park Friday night, under the ample lights, under a starry summer sky just made for baseball, fans had come to enjoy, of all things, a baseball game, including, when the seventh inning rolled around, the time-honored seventh-inning stretch.
The small crowd in shirt sleeves dutifully rose, and on the scratchy public address system a taped rendition of "Take Me Out to the Ballgame" began.
This game took place between the Yankees, in their traditional navy blue caps and pinstripes, and the Astros, in their snappy, familiar orange and gold uniforms.
The Oneonta Yankees and the Auburn Astros, Class A versions of their parent clubs.
Parents, it happens, who are on strike, who decided they will not try to go home again for a while.


Museum Offers a Look At Dinosaurs' Evolution
The Field Museum in Chicago has opened a $4 million, 16,000-square-foot, permanent display, "DNA to Dinosaurs," that tracks the course of evolution over 3.5 billion years, from the emergence of the first single-celled life form to the age of dinosaurs.
The exhibit uses 648 fossils, interactive computers and videos to explore biology, geology and the Earth's climate.
Walk-through environments recreate sea life of the Paleozoic era 400 million years ago, and a 300-million-year-old Coal Age forest.
In the fall, the museum plans to follow up the dinosaur exhibit with an ambitious re-creation of the evolution of mammals and humans during the Ice Ages.


Sarah C. Page, Robert W. Kyrcz
Sarah Clarke Page, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
George W. Page of Guilford, Conn., was married yesterday to Dr.
Robert Walter Kyrcz, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Walter A. Kyrcz of Hamden, Conn.
The Rev.
Joseph D. Maguire performed the ceremony at St.
Elizabeth Roman Catholic Church in Edgartown, Mass.


Rent Deregulation Of the Wealthy
To the Editor:
Robin Hood took from the rich, but then gave it to the poor.
While no one will shed a tear for tenants earning $250,000 per year, the intent of the law  [ "Rent Deregulation of the Wealthy Creeps Forward," Aug. 7 ]  concerning $2,000 per month units was to free up apartments for the less affluent.


Aug. 7-13: Adjusting the Numbers; Cities Win a Round In the Census Fight
A Federal appeals court last week handed cities an important victory in their bid to repeal the 1990 Census count and replace it with one showing higher urban, black, Hispanic and Asian populations.
But despite the favorable ruling by the Second Circuit Court of Appeals in Manhattan, it is not at all clear that the cities will ultimately prevail in this high-stakes battle over the numbers that determine Congressional representation, electoral votes, legislative district lines and billions of dollars in Federal aid.
In 1990, the Census Bureau for the first time devised a way to adjust the Census to account for the millions missed every 10 years, who are disproportionately minority city dwellers.
But Robert A. Mosbacher, President Bush's Secretary of Commerce, refused to use the adjustment.
Urban officials charged the Republican Administration with trying to stifle the power of heavily Democratic cities.
The Administration insisted that the adjustment was, in some ways, less accurate.


BECAUSE OF THE STORIES
Having love/hate feelings about the Catholic Church, I've often wondered what keeps me connected to it at midlife.
So I'm grateful to Andrew Greeley for validating the power of the familiar and so comforting images and Bible stories.
They continue to shape my responses to life's experiences -- most especially, the image of Mary.
ANNETTE MAIBERGER Westport, Conn.


Wendy Weingart, Perry W. Kaplan
Wendy Sue Weingart, a daughter of Ruth and Marvin Weingart of Forest Hills, Queens, is to be married today to Perry William Kaplan, the son of Sandra and Robert Kaplan of Boca Raton, Fla.
Rabbi Joseph Potashnik is to officiate at the Mansion at the Stouffer Hotel in White Plains.
The bride, 33, is an editor at Matthew Bender &amp; Company, a legal publisher in New York.
She graduated from the State University at Albany and received a law degree from the Brooklyn Law School.
Her father, a former assistant deputy chancellor for instruction at the New York City Board of Education, is a lawyer and a hearing officer for the board.
Her mother is an administrative assistant at CBS in New York.


This Week's Numbers
Monday Industrial production, July, pct. chg.. . . 0.5. . . 0.1 Capacity utilization, July, pct.. . . 83.9. . . 83.9 Tuesday Housing starts, July, mils., ann. rate. . . 1.35. . . 1.34 Housing permits, July, mils., ann. rate. . . 1.32. . . -1.29 Thursday Jobless claims, July, thousands. . . 321. . . 320 Trade balance (with services), June, $ bils.. . . -9.2. . . -9.5 This Week's Developments Monday Play ball!
Here's hoping.
Tuesday Federal Open Market Committee meets Johnson Redbook Report released Thursday Bundesbank Council meeting


Woodstock Redux: New Sea of Young People
The 25th-anniversary Woodstock celebration today took on the look of a benign natural disaster attended by more than 200,000 mostly cheerful victims.State officials declared the concert site and its parking areas filled to saturation and began blocking off roads as far as 15 miles away to try to stop more people, including ticket-holders, from coming.
A vast sea of tents and bodies swamped the rolling hills, woods and creek beds of the 840-acre farm where the festival is being held this weekend, making it increasingly difficult to clear away accumulating trash and maneuver emergency vehicles.
Rivers of people inching their way toward toilets, telephones, water and food snaked interminably past encampments of tents and groggy, recumbent bodies.


Meredith Gardner, Gregory Gilligan
Meredith Robyn Gardner, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Howard M. Gardner of Andover, Mass., is to be married today at her parents' house in Gloucester, Mass., to Gregory Paul Gilligan, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Vincent Gilligan of Westfield, N.J.
Rabbi Donald Pollack is to officiate.
The bride, 24, graduated from Tufts University.
She is studying for a law degree and for a master's degree in Asian studies at Washington University in St.
Louis, a joint-degree program of which the bridegroom is a graduate.
Her father, a neurosurgeon, is the medical director of New England Neurological Associates in North Andover, Mass.
Her mother, Naomi Gardner, is the public relations director at Northeast Rehabilitation Hospital in Salem, N.H.


Bench the Greed
To the Sports Editor:
In America, we rely on baseball.
It keeps us calm.
It gives our kids respectable role models.
We've paid the big bucks over the years, we've shown up, we've clapped and hollered.
We've done our part.
We want uninterrupted baseball at a fair price, and right now, we're not getting either.
If it means we need government regulation and an aggressive commissioner to keep the greed out and bring the beauty back in, then so be it.
RICHARD S. COHEN New York


'Bar Car' Squad Goes After Culprits
Just after midnight Thursday, near the corner of 83d Street and Broadway, Sgt.
John M. Scaparro spotted a culprit.
A middle-aged man in a houndstooth jacket sidled up to a shadowy stairwell and began to relieve himself.


The World; Bosnia, Where Facts Strangle Principles
YUGOSLAVIA, founded in 1918 as the "Kingdom of Serbs, Croats and Slovenes," proved to be an artificial creation.
In the absence of authoritarian rule -- the royal dictatorship of the 1930's or Marshal Tito's postwar Communist rule -- it tended to disintegrate, riven by the forces of ethnic and religious division.
Twenty-eight months after the recognition of Bosnia and Herzegovina by America and the European Union, the existence of this former Yugoslav republic as an independent state also appears tenuous.
Ill-conceived and born into war, Bosnia -- a fragmenting piece of a fragmented land -- continues to confound the peacemakers.


Nigerians Fear New Strife Could Blow the Country Apart
Six weeks into this country's worst political crisis since a civil war nearly three decades ago, many Nigerians fear that the troubles are again turning into an explosive ethnic contest whose outcome could determine whether this nation of more than 80 million can hang together.
The tense political struggle pits a steely and insular military leader, Gen.
Sani Abacha, against one of the country's wealthiest businessmen, Moshood K. Abiola.


Nurses Who Care for Children at Home
EVERYTHING happens at parties, Jane Austen observed.
And it was at a Christmas party 12 years ago that two pediatric nurses, Diane Stern and Joyce DeGhetto, first discussed starting a home nursing service exclusively for children, in the Westchester-Rockland area.
"Both of us realized there was a gap in the way care was being provided to sick kids," Mrs.
DeGhetto said.
"And we thought offering care was a niche we could fill. We were experienced in observing the needs of sick children. We were hired in 1982 to help set up the neonatal unit at the Westchester Medical Center in Valhalla, and we saw that the children who were being saved by the latest technology and then discharged had no one capable of caring for them at home."


Oil Embargo
A tumble of simple greens is where it all begins, but it rarely stays that way.
Barely have you tossed the perfect salad when whatever is left wanting in the refrigerator -- cold grilled vegetables, marinated tomatoes, shredded chicken -- finds its way into the mix.
Before long, there are pasta salads, grain and potato salads, seafood salads, salads made of leftover steak.
In the case of a summer salad, this progression is inevitable.
Once you've satisfied your physiological needs, the psychological takes over and soon you begin thinking in more substantial terms.
When that happens, thoughts turn to more substantial salad dressings as well -- dressing made from those dietary no-nos, mayonnaise and sour cream.
While commercial food processors have spent millions trying to develop dressings that use alternate emulsifiers, the slippery substances they've come up with are mere palliatives in satisfying the urge for a drop of oil with one's lettuce.


Chinatown Agencies Fined Over Job-Seekers' Fees
Lee Zhou Sheng, also known as Lee Jackson or Jackson Lee, says it was his humble beginnings as a Chinatown dishwasher 25 years ago that gave him the idea to open an employment agency.
Now, he says, he is just a struggling businessman who cannot afford to retire at the age of 64.
"I'm just trying to help people out," he said.


Ideas &amp; Trends: Playing the Statistics Game; Even if the Numbers Don't Add Up
ONE in four women attending college will be raped, the statistics seem to say.
More than half the 55 million married women in the United States will be victims of domestic violence.
Hard to believe?
How about this: Immigrants soak up $44 billion more in government services than they pay in taxes.
Or is it that they contribute $25 billion more in taxes than they use in government services?
It can depend on whom you ask, and on which answer fits a particular agenda.


Bible School for a Changing World; Teachers Face New Challenges in Imparting Christian Values
Somewhere there are probably still children sitting on a lawn, fashioning tiny crosses out of Popsicle sticks and humming "Jesus Loves Me." But more likely, on the 100th anniversary of vacation Bible school in the United States, children are listening to biblical folk music from Africa, baking Armenian bread and learning bits of sign language.
And they are struggling to stretch the lessons of the Christian Scriptures: learning what it means to love thy neighbor when the neighbor is a drug dealer and trying to decide if honesty is the best policy when it could cost a young life on dangerous streets.


They're Off and Watching!
It's high season for horses and fans at Saratoga Race Course, Aug. 6.


L.I. Cable Company Ordered to Restore a Public-Access Program
Even in the often eccentric world of public-access cable television programs, "A Chat With Glendora" stands out.
Each week its star, Glendora Buell, is videotaped in her White Plains apartment wearing funny hats, cracking jokes and reading transcripts from lawsuits she has filed.
The half-hour program has appeared weekly on cable systems in Westchester County since 1986.
But when a Long Island cable company canceled the program after just six weeks, Ms.
Buell fought back in court.


Andrew P. Averbach, Judith A. Gruen
Judith Anne Gruen, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John B. Gruen of Chappaqua, N.Y., was married last evening in Tarrytown, N.Y., to Andrew Paul Averbach, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Irwin J. Averbach of New York.
Rabbi Chaim Stern officiated at Tarrytown House.
Mrs.
Averbach, 25, is a research associate at the Massachusetts Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Children.
She graduated from Hamilton College and received a master's degree in education from the University of Virginia, of which the bridegroom is a graduate.
Mr.
Averbach, 24, is a third-year law student at Boston University.


Old-Timer's Game
To the Sports Editor:
This letter is being written by a senior citizen who loves baseball.
Why can't the greedy owners and overpaid players sit down and iron out their differences so the general public is not penalized?
I'm sure all concerned realize it is the fans who make it possible for nearly all of them to become wealthy.
Whatever happened to playing baseball for the love of the game as well as for the love of money?


John Dewey Students Defend Long School Days
For some students at John Dewey High School in Coney Island, the prospect of losing an hour a week of classroom work will mean more time for leisure activities or finding after-school work.
But for other students, the issue is larger than losing one hour.
They say that they choose to attend the school because it is the only one in New York with an eight-hour day and the extra hour provides them with an edge for college.


Homage to Two Nureyevs
Benefit for the National Museum of Dance, Saratoga Springs, N.Y., Aug. 6.


Only the Friendless Survive
THE ASSAULT By Reinaldo Arenas.
Translated by Andrew Hurley. 145 pp.
New York: Viking. $20.95.


Investigating the Case Of the Purloined Streets
The mayor of this tiny, affluent village has a simple request: he would like two of his streets back.
They were taken in secrecy, he says, swiped to consummate a political deal.
With a couple of strokes of a map maker's pen, the two streets, Meritoria Drive and Robbins Drive, were placed in a separate county legislative district from the rest of the village, a move that seemed the height of absurdity to many in a village of only 2,700 people.


FASHION


Works by Roosevelt Artists and a Retrospective
APPARENTLY, no one who lives or has lived -- in Roosevelt wants for stories about this dot on the map of Monmouth County.
A painter who was there during the 70's, recalls eloquently the houses in this settlement, which became a cultural hive by default, as a mix of the handsome and the functional with their floor-to-ceiling windows, parquet floors and nickel-painted hardware.
Roosevelt was born halfway through the 1930's as a government-sponsored project designed by a Bauhaus architect, Alfred Kastner; its purpose was to give garment workers living in the stews of Manhattan a shot at utopia, of a kind.


Tangled Up In Velvet
ONE of the newer, more playful entrants in New York's nocturnal range wars can be found in the farthest industrial reaches of Chelsea.
First-time visitors to Velvet, a former brewery at 608 West 26th Street, near the corner of 11th Avenue, may have to look carefully for the club's dimly lighted entrance.
Once past the hulking doormen, however, they find themselves ensconced in a surprisingly benign world.
Since opening in April, the club, owned by Joe Schaefer, has changed themes weekly.
One recent Saturday (Velvet is open Thursday, Friday and Saturday nights), the motif was Carnival.
This concept was realized with contraptions like a dunk-the-party-promoter machine and a 25-by-25-foot pool filled with styrofoam packing material.
Future themes are to include the wide world of sports, casinos and the wild, wild West.


NEW JERSEY GUIDE
FESTIVAL TIME
It's a good week to forget those "back to school" signs and head for the countryside or the seashore, where summer is still alive and well at festivals.
A parade of horses and carriages with costumed riders and drivers will open the Colts Neck Fair on Thursday, and Mott's Artillery Group will camp out all four days of the fair, as the township celebrates its heritage.


The World: Body and Soul; Revolution In Iran Hits Crossroads
LIKE much of the political jockeying that has taken place in Iran since its Islamic revolution 15 years ago, the struggle between President Hashemi Rafsanjani and the coterie of radical mullahs behind Iran's spiritual leader, Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, may seem impenetrable.
But stripped of its florid rhetoric and Islamic trappings, it is a struggle that has disturbing precedents in other cultures, from Russia to France to China.
Onetime allies in the successful overthrow of a repressive state, these groups now represent two distinct classes of power-holders -- the merchants and the mullahs -- who find that their revolution has come to a crossroads, and who hold opposite views of where to go.


Cuban Exiles Not Pushing for Boatlift
Fourteen years ago Derek Stirrup, hired by anxious Cuban-Americans here, picked up 43 of the tens of thousands of refugees who had left Cuba's port of Mariel and took them to the shores of Florida.
This week, he could be found taking a group of tourists from Texas out for an afternoon of deep-sea fishing off Key West.
Cuba's leader, Fidel Castro, has threatened to clear the way to the United States for any Cuban who wants to leave, raising concern here of another huge wave of immigration.
But Mr.
Stirrup, the first mate of the 43-foot charter cabin cruiser Grand Slam, has not received any offers to help out again.
Nor is he looking for any.


SUNDAY, August 14, 1994; We Are Olden . . .
While the young are celebrating the 25th anniversary of Woodstock this weekend by going to outdoor concerts, most of the people who were really there will probably be stuck in rush-hour traffic: over 40, overweight, and overwhelmed by adult life and offspring of various ages.
For them, here are some realistic suggestions on how to commemorate the occasion with daily activities, nostalgically modified:


Texas City Says Rio Grande Pollution Can Cause Fatal Illness
The city's health director has banned swimming in one stretch of the Rio Grande because the death of a 13-year-old boy last month in the Mexican town of Rio Bravo, 12 miles south of here, has been traced to an amoeba that can cause deadly brain infections and is found in the river water.
The director of the Laredo Health Department, Jerry R. Robinson, confirmed Monday that the amoeba, naegleria, was contaminating river water, as well as the pond used for water treatment in Rio Bravo.
This amoeba, found in water and soil, has been cited in the death of the Rio Bravo teen-ager.


The Selfish Sultans of Swat
The late A. Bartlett Giamatti, commissioner of baseball in the days when baseball's tycoons could tolerate a commissioner, once said that the game was "designed to break your heart." What Mr.
Giamatti had in mind was that games are often decided, and hopes crushed, by the narrowest of margins and weirdest of breaks -- the home run that hits the foul pole, the sure out that takes a bad bounce.
Yet his phrase applies just as well to the charade known euphemistically as the "negotiations" between the Players Association and baseball's 28 owners -- negotiations that led nowhere and have now produced baseball's fifth strike in 23 years.
What was and is heartbreaking about these talks is that both sides had opportunities for productive compromise and both sides missed them.
Of the two sides in this struggle among comfortable millionaires, the owners came off looking worse.
They began by saying that 19 of the 28 clubs were losing money, then dropped that number to 12.
A careful analysis in the magazine Financial World suggests that only five clubs are in real peril.


Hey, You Still Just Don't Understand
GENDER AND DISCOURSE By Deborah Tannen. 203 pp.
New York: Oxford University Press. $19.95.


Law-Abiding Recyclers Say They Resent the Trash Police
For residents and building owners on the upper Upper West Side just north of West 96th Street, the early morning sight of homeless people foraging through trash bags has long been common.
But in the last several months, people in the neighborhood have begun to notice a much more unlikely group of people opening bags on pickup day and sifting through the contents: recycling enforcement officers.


Commercial Property/'It's Not Just Business, It's Emotions'; The Brokerage That Negotiates for Its Own Space
LAWYERS who represent themselves have fools for clients, the saying goes, and doctors are said to make the worst patients.
What, then, is to be said about brokers who negotiate space for themselves?
There is ample opportunity to find out.
Real estate is literally an industry on the move.
According to ReLocate, a Manhattan company that keeps track of leases, more than a dozen real estate companies signed new ones in the last year or so.
And ReLocate -- which itself just moved to 420 Lexington Avenue, on 44th Street, from 1633 Broadway, at 50th Street -- does not record leases for less than 10,000 square feet.
Add those in, and two dozen moves is probably more accurate.


Only One Star in the Two Schools of Rap
IF HIP-HOP WERE FILM -- THE metaphor isn't much of a stretch, given that many rappers are often playing tough-guy roles -- there would be only two schools: one centered in Los Angeles, the other in New York.
Los Angeles would produce the big-budget action dramas that rake in millions; New York would create the art films that excite critics and film students and fill Greenwich Village art houses.
Last year, Los Angeles rappers dominated the box office with albums by Ice Cube and Cypress Hill and, of course, Snoop Doggy Dogg and Dr.
Dre, whose album, "The Chronic," was the year's "Jurassic Park." Of the New York rappers, only an album by the Queens group Onyx (its title is unpublishable) dented 1993's Top 10 in sales.


Extending the Gardening Season Until Winter
MY incredible good luck with a winter salad garden in Maryland last year has turned me into a born-again winter gardener.
But first things first.
This weekend, you'd better get out there and sow your fall vegetable garden.


Q and A
Gregorian Chant in France Q.  Are lay persons allowed to attend Mass and other services at the Benedictine monastery in Solesmes, France, to hear the Gregorian chant?
Where is the nearest rail station and can one stay in Solesmes itself? -- Thomas E. Crepeau, Columbus, Ohio A.  The monks of Solesmes are celebrated for their scholarly work on the Gregorian chant and, starting in the 1800's, for their revision of liturgical works.
Their abbey, St.-Pierre, was founded in the 11th century and is between Le Mans and Angers.
If you are in Paris, you can arrive in time for the main Mass, offered daily at 9:45 A.M.
Seating is limited and cannot be reserved, so it's a good idea to be on hand at 9:30 when the doors open for the Mass, sung by about 80 Benedict monks.
There four other daily services, or canonical hours -- at 1, 1:50, 5 and 8:30 -- at which time you can hear Gregorian chant.
Taking the T.G.V. from Gare Montparnasse at 7:15 A.M. on any day but Sunday will get you to Sable-sur-Sarthe by 8:30. (On Sunday, the T.G.V. also leaves at 7:15 but, because of a layover in Le Mans, does not get to Sable-sur-Sarthe until 9:56.) The round-trip fare is $89.50 in first class, $59.80 second class, calculated at 5.25 francs to the dollar.
From the Sable train station to Solesmes, a two-mile trip, you can take a 15-minute ride on the No. 8 bus ($3.25 round trip), take a taxi ($7.25 one way), rent a bicycle or walk.
Bike rentals at the station are $8.40 for a half a day or $10.50 for a full day.
There are several trains a day in each direction between Sable and Paris.
Frequency depends on the day of the week and the season, so it is best to check first.
The last train back to Paris leaves at 6:52 P.M.
If you plan to stay in Solesmes overnight, your choices are very limited.
The only hotel in town, the Grand (telephone 43.95.45.10, fax 43.95.22.26), faces the abbey; its rate is $77 for a double.
The Grand has a restaurant and charges $8 a person for breakfast.
Another option is to lodge at the Abbey of St.-Pierre, which is for men only, or at Ste.-Cecile, its female counterpart.
Ste.-Cecile is open to women, couples and families.
Most rooms have two beds or more.
Reservations must be made far ahead (especially for religious holidays) by calling 43.95.45.02 or by writing to Soeur Hoteliere, Abbaye Ste.-Cecile, 72300 Solesmes, France.
While the announced rate is $30.50 for bed and three meals, visitors may donate more.
Note that lodging is closed to guests from Oct. 1 to Palm Sunday (a week before Easter).
Services, with female singers, are similar to those at St.-Pierre.
St.-Pierre is open only to male visitors, and they are asked to respect the rules of relative silence (no radios and television).
They may eat in the refectory.
Visitors have their own rooms and bathrooms are down the hall.
Up to 35 visitors can be accommodated, and lodging is open all year.
For reservations, call 43.95.03.08, fax 43.95.68.79 or write Pere Hotelier, Abbaye St.-Pierre, 72300 Solesmes, France.
Since there is no imposed rate, guests decide how much they wish to pay.
There are also hotels in Sable: the Escu du Roy (43.95.90 31), where a double is $47.60, and the Hotel-Grill, where a double is $42.
Breakfast is $5.30 a person at both places.
Learning to Make Pasta  Q.  I plan to be in Rome and Florence in September and would like to attend some demonstration classes for making pasta.
Do you know of any schools that hold classes or demonstrate the preparation of a variety of pastas? -- Edgar Holton, San Francisco A.  Your timing is not quite ideal since September in Italy is still considered a holiday month.
In addition, none of the schools surveyed in Rome and Florence offers a course specifically in the making of pasta.
Most have courses that are broader in scope and that begin in mid-October when the weather is cooler.
But all is not lost.
There is at least one school in Rome and one school in Florence that said it could arrange a private lesson in September with a chef who speaks English.
The school in Rome, which calls itself Atavolaconlochef (Atthetablewiththechef), can set up a private lesson in pasta-making, according to Maria Teresa Meloni, a spokeswoman.
Ms.
Meloni said that the lesson, lasting three hours, would cover all the basics: making the dough for egg noodles, semolina and durum wheat noodles as well as making such different kinds of pasta as spaghetti and tagliatelle and even making stuffed pasta, like ravioli or tortellini.
You would also learn to prepare very basic sauces.
The cost is $196, computed at the rate of 1,529 lire to the dollar.
Although the school (60 Via dei Gracchi, 00192 Rome) does not reopen until October, you can leave a message; telephone and fax (06) 3203402 or telephone (06) 3222096.
In Florence, the Cordon Bleu is willing to set up a private five-hour lesson that covers the basics of pasta-making and cost $249.
The school is at 55 Via di Mezzo, 50121 Florence; telephone (055) 2345468.
Cruising in Germany  Q.  Can one take a boat on the Main from Wurzburg to Mainz. -- Tom Wurl, New York, N.Y.
A.
There is no regular service linking these two cities.
There is, though, a cruise from Sept. 10 to 17 from Wurzburg to Rudesheim (which is 21 miles beyond Mainz).
The line, Scylla Tours, has no other ships schedued on this route in 1994.
Information: the Geriberz Reiseburo, 15 Etzelstrasse, 5430 Wettingen, Switzerland; telephone (41-56) 270101, fax (41-56) 272883.
The boat, the Switzerland II, stops in Mainz for two and a half hours.
Should passengers wish to end their trip in Mainz, they must pay the full fare to Rudesheim -- a minimum of $1,026 for a stateroom.
The fare includes day sightseeing trips in Wurzburg, Gmunden, Wertheim, Frankfurt, Mainz and Rudesheim.
Finding a Japanese Soldier
Q.
I am planning a trip to Japan next fall and would like to find the record of a Japanese soldier who fought in the Philippines in World War II.
I found his good-luck banner in my father's mementos and would like to return it to the family.
To whom might I write for information?  -- Louise Steinman, Los Angeles
A.
A records center at the Japanese Ministry of Health and Welfare maintains data on four million war dead and missing.
For information, send details on when, where and how the banner was found as well as a picture of it.
Since banners bear presenters' names and messages, this information can be especially valuable if the name of the person being sought is a common one.
Send inquiries to Chitaru Satake, Office of Records Research; Social Welfare and War Victims Relief Bureau; Ministry of Health and Welfare; 1-2-2, Kasumigaseki Chiyoda-ku; Tokyo 100-45 Japan.
Telephone: (81-03) 3503-1711.
PAUL FREIREICH


Benjamin F. Price; Journalist, 74
Benjamin F. Price, a war correspondent with the military newspaper Stars and Stripes in Europe during World War II and later the picture editor of The New York Herald Tribune, died on Friday at his home in Charlotte, Vt.
He was 74.
The cause was heart failure, said his son Jeff.


Stephanie Wise, Scott Deutchman
Stephanie Lauren Wise, a daughter of Murray and Maureen Wise of New Hempstead, N.Y., is to be married today to Scott Mitchell Deutchman, the son of Barry and Ronnye Deutchman of Spring Valley, N.Y.
Rabbi Simon Glustrom is to officiate at the Fair Lawn (N.J.) Jewish Center.
The bride, 25, graduated from the State University at Binghamton, N.Y.
She is a senior auditor in the Philadelphia office of Arthur Andersen &amp; Company, the accounting firm.


Echoes From the Past?
To the Editor:  In the scheme of things, Trip Gabriel's observations about the LP and the CD are just part of a continuing progression.
Go back and read descriptions of improvements in the recording process for the 78-r.p.m. record.
You will see the very same words about clarity and definition of sound that we now apply to the compact disc.
No doubt some of those improvements were just as startling to the ear as the CD seems to be to ours.


Amid Lite Drinks and Heavy Taxes, the Last Beer Garden Struggles On
Bohemian Hall has held onto its spot in Astoria since 1910.
But its beer garden, the city's last, is being swallowed by financial troubles.
Rising taxes, maintenance costs and a changing immigrant population that includes teetotalers are draining the garden of even a bare operating profit.
Bohemian Hall was built on a plot of farmland by the Bohemian Citizens Benevolent Society, founded in 1892.
During the first half of this century, the Bohemian Hall courtyard was one of scores of Old World neighborhood gathering spots.


Winding Down the Summer Season
IT is already time for several festivals to complete their summer seasons.
The last of the Silvermine Guild Concerts at the Arts Center in New Canaan is tonight at 7:30, when the Colorado String Quartet plays Beethoven, Shostakovich and Mendelssohn.
For tickets or information about the 6 P.M. pre-concert reception with champagne and dessert (available at a $10 surcharge) call 966-9700.
In Norfolk, two concerts remain in the 1994 Chamber Music Festival before the Yale School of Music returns to New Haven.
Friday evening at 8:30, the Cassatt String Quartet, one of many ensembles nourished at Norfolk during past summers, returns to perform works of Haydn, Dvorak and Yale's Music School dean, Ezra Laderman.
The final recital, on Saturday evening at 8:30, will be performed by the Chamber Music Society of Lincoln Center, who plan to offer trios of Beethoven and Mendelssohn along with Hindemith's Quartet for clarinet, violin, viola and piano (542-3000).


Votes in Congress
Tally Last Week in Connecticut, New Jersey and New York  Senate
1.
Health Care: Vote to kill a proposal that called for deferring action on health care until next year unless the Senate gets a "full opportunity" to debate the health care bill.
Approved 54 to 46, Aug. 10.
2.
Bosnian Arms Embargo: Vote on an amendment to a defense appropriations bill that calls on the President to urge the United Nations to lift the arms embargo on Bosnia if the Bosnian Serbs have not approved a peace plan by Oct. 31.
Approved 56 to 44, Aug. 11.
3.
Bosnian Arms Embargo: Vote on an amendment to a defense appropriations bill that would order the President to unilaterally left the arms embargo on Bosnia by Nov. 15.
Approved 58 to 42, Aug. 11.
1
2
3
Connecticut
Dodd (D)
Yea
Yea
Nay
Lieberman (D)
Yea
Yea
Yea
New Jersey
Bradley (D)
Yea
Nay
Yea
Lautenberg (D)
Yea
Nay
Yea
New York
D'Amato (R)
Nay
Nay
Yea
Moynihan (D)
Yea
Nay
Yea
House
1.
Trade with China: Vote to affirm President Clinton's extension of most-favored national trade status to China.
Approved 280 to 152, Aug. 9.
2.
Crime: Procedural vote on a rule to allow a $30 billion crime package compromise to come before the House for a vote.
Rejected 225 to 210, Aug. 11.
1
2
Connecticut
1. Kennelly (D)
Yea
Yea
2. Gejdenson (D)
Nay
Yea
3. DeLauro (D)
Yea
Yea
4. Shays (R)
Yea
Yea
5. Franks (R)
Yea
Nay
6. Johnson (R)
Yea
Yea
New Jersey
1. Andrews (D)
Yea
Yea
2. Hughes (D)
Yea
Yea
3. Saxton (R)
Yea
Nay
4. Smith (R)
Nay
Nay
5. Roukema (R)
A
Yea
6. Pallone (D)
Nay
Yea
7. Franks (R)
Yea
Nay
8. Klein (D)
Yea
Yea
9. Torricelli (D)
Nay
Yea
10. Payne (D)
Nay
Yea
11. Gallo (R)
A
Nay
12. Zimmer (R)
Yea
Nay
13. Menendez (D)
Yea
Yea
New York
1. Hochbrueckner (D) . . .
Nay
Yea
2. Lazio (R)
Yea
Nay
3. King (R)
Yea
Nay
4. Levy (R)
Yea
Nay
5. Ackerman (D)
Yea
Yea
6. Flake (D)
Yea
Yea
7. Manton (D)
Yea
Yea
8. Nadler (D)
Nay
Yea
9. Schumer (D)
Yea
Yea
10. Towns (D)
Nay
Yea
11. Owens (D)
Nay
Yea
12. Velazquez (D)
Nay
Yea
13. Molinari (R)
Nay
Nay
14. Maloney (D)
Yea
Yea
15. Rangel (D)
Yea
Nay
16. Serrano (D)
Yea
Yea
17. Engel (D)
Nay
Yea
18. Lowey (D)
Nay
Yea
19. Fish (R)
Nay
Nay
20. Gilman (R)
Nay
Nay
21. McNulty (D)
Yea
Yea
22. Solomon (R)
Nay
Nay
23. Boehlert (R)
Nay
Yea
24. McHugh (R)
Yea
Nay
25. Walsh (R)
Yea
Nay
26. Hinchey (D)
Nay
Yea
27. Paxon (R)
Yea
Nay
28. Slaughter (D)
Yea
Yea
29. LaFalce (D)
Yea
Yea
30. Quinn (R)
Yea
Yea
31. Houghton (R)
Yea
Yea
KEY: (A) Absent or did not vote; (P) Present.


Cooling Summer Days With Fresh Fruit Ice Cream
WHEN you live in the country, you shop from catalogues.
Along with a compost bin and a door mat, a new ice cream maker arrived the other day.
It was not the fancy one that costs $400, but a more modest version, priced in the middle two figures.
It cracks along for half an hour or so and switches itself off when the ice cream is done.


U.S. Issues Warning On Air Travel in Russia
Because of the deterioration of domestic airline service in Russia, the American Embassy in Moscow has instructed United States Government officials working in that country to defer air travel there.
The State Department announcement said: "With the breakup of Aeroflot into many small airlines, travel within Russia is often unreliable. Domestic air travelers must often cope with unpredictable schedules and difficult conditions, including deterioration and overloading." It continued, "Private Americans may wish to consider this information when making travel plans."


The Quality-of-Life Drive Is Nickel-and-Dime Fluff
To the Editor:
Your article skips lightly over the subject of "noisy nightclubs" and fails to even register them on the map you made of Manhattan's neighborhoods, even in Chelsea, FlatIron and the Villages where they are a major, major problem.
You wonder whether they are "a nuisance, or an ebullient sign of life."


Bucks County
To the Editor: "What's Doing in Bucks County" by Barbara Crossette (June 12) brought back many happy memories, especially the picture of lovely Black Bass Hotel.


Aug. 7-13: White House Imagery; Hoping for a Break, The Democrats Make Some Changes at the Top
"I'm not going to sit here and say I want to do Bold and Dramatic," President Clinton's new chief of staff, Leon Panetta, said six weeks ago, "when what may be needed in the White House may be Incremental." Now he has tried Incremental -- rewriting job descriptions; supervising policy debates -- and concluded that Incremental alone doesn't cut it.
So last week, he did something dramatic.
Reaching outside the White House, Mr.
Panetta recruited an old friend, former Representative Tony L. Coelho, to be the Democratic Party's chief fund-raiser, strategist and gray eminence.
The stated intent was to backstop the party's chairman, David Wilhelm, who has been handed nine major political defeats by Republicans since he took the job last year.
But the effect was to hand control of the party to Mr.
Coelho.
And Mr.
Wilhelm, unwilling to be a figurehead, said on Tuesday that he will quit in November.


Ah, for the Days Of Those 45's
To the Editor:  It was not until I read Trip Gabriel's article "Not So Fast With the Last Rites; the Vinyl Underground Lives"  [ July 24 ]  that I even realized I was a part of an "underground." But I must admit what I truly miss with the demise of vinyl is 45-r.p.m. records.
Can someone please tell me how a single becomes No. 1 on the charts when you can no longer buy singles?
There was something great about being able to go and buy that one special song that called out to you over the radio, without having to spend a lot of money for a whole album of additional songs you might not care for as much.


F.Y.I.
'Gators in Subway, Now
Q.
My husband and I are curious about (and fascinated by) the bas-relief alligators (crocodiles?) that appear on the walls at floor level in the L train subway tunnel at 14th Street.
One is placed so that it looks as if it just came out of one of the vents.
What's the story?


Cars Overseas
To the Editor: A word of caution about reserving an automobile for use overseas through Hertz or Avis.
Last October my wife and I reserved an automatic transmission Toyota Corolla through Hertz, to be picked up on Oct. 19 at Oxford, England.
When we arrived we were informed that they had not had Toyotas available for many months, and so we had to settle for a Ford Escort, fortunately also automatic.


Science Fiction
BEYOND THE VEIL OF STARS (Tor/Tom Doherty, $21.95), by Robert Reed, begins as a character study of Nathan Novak, self-appointed U.F.O. researcher, and his teen-age son, Cornell.
The Novaks drive around the American heartland investigating strange sightings and inexplicable "manifestations" reported by backcountry farmers, suburban housewives and small-town shopkeepers.
Their most impressive findings -- the thick circles of smooth blackish glass that appear from time to time in someone's cornfield or front yard -- resemble thousands of other circles found around the world.
While these inert objects are hard to explain away, no one seems to take them very seriously; they are apparently too common to rouse much fear or even curiosity.
The young Cornell believes in U.F.O.'s to the same extent that he believes in his father.
His mother disappeared when he was 4 years old; according to his father, she was abducted in a spaceship by aliens.
Having set up this oddly dysfunctional family and its slightly anomalous near-future world, Mr.
Reed tosses the first of his bombshells.
One otherwise ordinary summer evening the sky changes permanently: the stars disappear, to be replaced by an "everted" image of the surface of the earth as it might appear reflected on the inside of a vast mirrored ball.
Fifty miles up, this illusion ends; the universe has not changed, only our earthbound view of it.
The Change, as people come to call it, triggers a change in Cornell's relationship with his father.
Instead of being hailed as a prophet in his own time, Nathan Novak is revealed as a pathetic old man whose lifelong obsession with aliens provides no insight into the new reality.
His rambling, contradictory explanations of the Change, patently out of sync with the facts, become increasingly embarrassing to his son; when Cornell learns the sad truth about his mother's disappearance, he leaves home -- and encounters the second of Mr.
Reed's bombshells.


Why American Express Falls Short
To the Editor:
Having been an American Express card holder for more than seven years, I recently canceled my card for many of the reasons Saul Hansell mentioned in "The New Deal at American Express" (July 31).
But what totally shocked and surprised me was that the customer service representative just took down the details and canceled my card.
Being in sales myself, if one of my customers called and said that after seven years he was no longer in need of my product and was canceling his account, I know the first thing I would not do is take his request quietly and go about my business.
Whether by first asking questions about his reasons, or following up with letters, phone calls or a visit, I would talk to him about the importance of his business to our company and the value and quality of our product.
These are the attributes of employees and companies that care for their customers.


Lend an Ear To the North
To the Editor:  I was amazed to read Jon Pareles's article "Striving to Be Rock's Next Seattle"  [ July 17 ]  and be unable to find a single reference to Halifax, an acknowledged leading center of new music development in North America that happens to be located on the East Coast of Canada.


Connecticut Q &amp; A: Richard Valeriani; The Word on Getting Out the Word
RICHARD VALERIANI spent more than 31 years as a correspondent for NBC News and The Associated Press, reporting from 90 countries and all 50 states.
As a Washington correspondent for NBC for almost 20 years, Mr.
Valeriani covered the White House, the State Department and the Pentagon and wrote "Travels With Henry" (Houghton, Mifflin, 1979), about the 500,000-plus miles he traveled covering Henry A. Kissinger, then Secretary of State.


Too Many Chiefs?
In its war to overhaul health care, the White House has put all its generals in the trenches, a move that some Democrats fear is sowing disorder and imperiling victory.
Page 24.


Cooling Summer Days With Fresh Fruit Ice Cream
WHEN you live in the country, you shop from catalogues.
Along with a compost bin and a door mat, a new ice cream maker arrived the other day.
It was not the fancy one that costs $400, but a more modest version, priced in the middle two figures.
It cracks along for half an hour or so and switches itself off when the ice cream is done.


In America; The Embarrassing Collapse of the Crime Bill
Erodito Musse Jr. is a big fellow, 19 years old, with a neat mustache and short brown hair.
He lives in Brooklyn, in a neighborhood in which both drugs and guns are more plentiful than fresh air.
He's a nice fellow, but he's not the sort of person that Newt Gingrich or the National Rifle Association cares anything about.
If Erodito were to take, say, a bullet in the head -- well, who would notice?
Certainly not Newt.
To the big shots in Washington, Erodito's a nobody, a poor kid in a poor neighborhood.
He's not even a blip on the radar screen of America's ruling elite.
Erodito came to mind last week as I watched the pathetic crime-fighting efforts of the White House and Congress collapse in an embarrassing heap.
When the crime bill -- which was no prize -- was scuttled, Mr.
Gingrich seemed almost to dance with delight.
A punishment had been inflicted on the President, and for the boorish Mr.
Gingrich that was cause for celebration.
Forget about the implications for the victims of violent crime in America.
Forget about the likes of Erodito Musse Jr.


HOW TO MAKE A POND
Pollan sparked childhood memories of the pond my dad built in our backyard, here in rural central Connecticut.
In those days, you could dig a hole in a swamp and, in a few days, voila, a pond!
The last 20 years has seen the establishment of volumes of Federal, state and local regulations to protect swamps and their sensitive ecosystems from backyard pond diggers.
Your article made no mention of permits needed for legal pond construction.
I hope it does not inspire readers to dig up our wonderful swamps for a romantic pond, without the proper permits.
DAVID BREWER COX Glastonbury, Conn.


The Cap of Not Much Hope
ON THE CONTRARY Being the Life of a Famous Rebel, Soldier, Traveller, Explorer, Reader, Builder, Scribe, Latinist, Lover and Liar.
By Andre Brink. 376 pp.
Boston: Little, Brown &amp; Company. $22.95.


Simpson Trial's Allure Puts State Politicians on the Spot
As if luring voters out of their growing political apathy and Election Day ennui is not hard enough in California, campaign strategists around the state are facing a new impediment: the trial of O. J. Simpson.
With jury selection expected to start on Sept. 15, just seven weeks before voters choose a governor and senator, 52 members of the House and 100 state legislators, the trial seems certain to grip public attention for months.
That prospect has left candidates in California scrambling to find new ways to get their faces seen and messages out, especially in Los Angeles, the state's largest market.


Amy J. Littlefield, Michael P. Norton
Amy Joanna Littlefield, the daughter of Nancy Littlefield and William R. Littlefield, both of New York, was married yesterday to Michael Peter Norton, a son of Eleanor N. Kositch of Somerset, N.J., and Robert Norton of Forked River, N.J.
The Rev.
Park Dickerson performed the ceremony at the First Congregational Church in Montclair, N.J.
Mrs.
Norton, 33, is also the stepdaughter of David A. Martin of New York.
She is a receptionist at Nordeman Grimm, an executive search company in New York.
Her father is a screenwriter and a director based in New York.
Her mother, who was the New York City Film Commissioner from 1978 to 1983, is the executive director of Queens Public Access Television in Flushing.


Data Bank/August 14, 1994
Producer Prices
July
June
May
Monthly percent change
0.5
0.0
-0.1
Retail Sales
Monthly percent change
-0.1
0.8
0.0
Consumer Prices
Monthly percent change
0.3
0.3
0.2
Business Inventories
June
May
April
Monthly percent change
0.4
1.2
0.6
3-Month Treasury Bills
Aug. 12
Aug. 5
July 29
Rate in percent
4.35
4.45
4.26
6-Month Treasury Bills
Rate in percent
4.90
4.89
4.67
30-Year Treasury Bonds
Yield in percent
7.50
7.54
7.39
Weekly Jobless Claims
Aug. 5
July 29
July 22
In thousands
321
315
329


The Nation; Let's Play Spy! (And The Money Is Real!)
THE covertly created headquarters of the National Reconnaissance Office, the super-secret agency that builds the nation's spy satellites, is turning from puzzle palace into cold war parable.
Skeptics snickered last week when the senators charged with overseeing the nation's spies said the agency had hidden its $347 million budget for a new office complex west of Washington.
Congressional oversight: careful scrutiny or careless failure?


On Sunday; At Keyboard, A Prophet With Honor
SEVEN decades of deadlines have come and gone for David Horowitz and he is still filing three times a week as a reporter, hacking away from a paper-stacked slum of a desk, his typewriter a clacking relic, his wizened outlook worthy of "The Front Page" characters who bark cynically at life's endless stories and tiresome deadlines.
But he is a far gentler soul who predates "The Front Page," however much we search for the goose-necked phone amid the desk trash, hoping he'll demand, Sweetheart, get him Rewrite, so he can confide he has Boutros Boutros-Ghali concealed in a rolltop desk for an exclusive interview.


Administration Drawing Criticism for Unfocused Tactics in Lobbying on Health Care
It is true that the Clinton Administration did something else on Thursday besides beseech the public and Congress to support national health insurance.
But the charts and battle maps of the White House's health care lobbying campaign suggest that anyone would have a hard time proving it.
On Thursday, the charts say, the Secretary of Health and Human Services was talking to Newsweek about health insurance, conducting interviews about health insurance by satellite with reporters in seven states and meeting with officials of the National Association of Public Hospitals.
The Labor Secretary was talking about health insurance with U.S.
News and World Report, the cable network CNBC and the editorial board of The Los Angeles Times.


Esther Buterman, K. J. Rubinstein
Esther Rona Buterman, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Irving Buterman of New Rochelle, N.Y., is to be married today to Kenneth Jason Rubinstein, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Max Rubinstein of Suffern, N.Y.
Rabbi Neal Turk, a cousin of the bridegroom, is to officiate at the Rye Town Hilton in Rye Brook, N.Y.
The bride, 24, graduated from Barnard College and is a candidate for a master's degree in journalism at New York University.
Her father is an obstetrician and a gynecologist at Lenox Hill Hospital in New York.


Workers' Compensation Needs Reform
To the Editor:
Workers' compensation is a system in trouble.
Maintaining a separate medical delivery system for work-related injuries and illnesses will only exacerbate problems workers' compensation now has with exploding medical costs, shifting financial burdens and excessive litigation.
Gary L. Countryman ("For Workers' Comp, Say No to Reform," Viewpoints, July 31) accurately described the two ways workers' compensation would be affected by the health reform bill advanced by the leadership of the House: workers injured on the job would be treated by the health plan they had previously selected, and a commission would be established to study the eventual merger of the medical portion of workers' compensation with the rest of the nation's health care system.


Nuclear Power Is 'the Safest Industry'
As a longtime nuclear-power activist may I respond to Richard Kessel's Shoreham fairy tale  [ Letters, "Lilco's Problems Caused Lilco's Rates, July 24 ] ? Mr. Kessel was part of an intervener group who saw political opportunity in Lilco's Shoreham problems. Playing on ignorance and fear and knowing that Freeport, Rockville Centre and Greenport were getting Niagara Falls power virtually free they coined the slogan "Power Cheap as Freeport" and proceeded to obstruct the Shoreham licensing.
The State Public Service Commission held long hearings and estimated the cost of Lilco mismanagement and the cost of intervener obstruction.
Lilco shareholders were assessed for mismanagement and the rate payers assessed with interveners' obstruction, and the rate base that is used to calculate the electric bill was adjusted accordingly.
Shoreham's ultimate cost was $5.5 billion, almost half of Lilco's total capitalization.


What's Wrong With a Voluntary Health Plan; Tax Credit Is Fairer
To the Editor:
Re "The Senate's Promising Health Bill" (editorial, Aug. 3): Senator George J. Mitchell's health bill fails to eliminate a regressive tax subsidy and thus discriminates against the self-employed.
This is a correctable defect.


CHILDREN ARE ALONE
Orenstein's criticism of the teachers and counselors for failing to help at-risk children is unfair.
Even the most dedicated school professionals can reach only a few of those who increasingly populate our nation's classrooms.
Meaningful alternative education programs cost money, but we are on the verge of flushing billions into senseless "three strikes and you're out" prison-building programs.
DOUGLAS L. BADER Richmond


Coffeehouse Slashing Suspect Viewed as Troubled Neighbor
When Richard and Karen Stimson watched news reports of the wild stabbing spree in a New Haven coffee bar Sunday night in which seven people were injured, the couple knew right away the suspect was most likely their next-door neighbor, the disheveled man they knew only as Louie.
They felt almost certain because the reports had said the man, Daniel Silva, 38, was ponytailed, had his dog with him during the attack, and had fled on a bicycle.


New &amp; Noteworthy Paperbacks
THE REST OF LIFE: Three Novellas By Mary Gordon.
Penguin, $9.95.
The author's heroines are strong, accomplished women who have in some way sacrificed themselves for love.
The men who have captivated them range from a lapsed priest to an itinerant journalist to, in the final novella, a teen-age boy who alone upheld the suicide pact he made with his lover.
Last year our reviewer, Alison Lurie, called this a "remarkable" book, peopled with "wholly alive and complex contemporary women."  SALVADOR By Joan Didion.
Vintage International, $9.
Now restored to print, this book chronicles the conditions in El Salvador in 1982.
Civil war was raging and the United States had chosen to support a regime in which anti-Communism usually meant the murder of anyone not specifically allied with the far right.
"No one in El Salvador has interpreted the place better," Warren Hoge said here in 1983.
" 'Salvador' shines with enlightening observation, and its language is lean and precise." Vintage has also reissued Ms.
Didion's first novel, RUN RIVER ($11), the story of a California family disintegrating in the midst of adultery and violence.
In 1963 one critic said, "She is, above all, cool, and an impressively skilled writer."


Susan Brene Jewell, Jon L. Lellenberg
Susan Brene Jewell, a vice president and a general counsel at Household Credit Services in Prospect Heights, Ill., and Jon L. Lellenberg, the director for European Civil-Military Affairs in the Office of the Secretary of Defense in Washington, were married yesterday in Rhinebeck, N.Y.
Judge Albert M. Rosenblatt of the Appellate Division of the State Supreme Court in Brooklyn officiated at the Beekman Arms.
Ms.
Jewell, who is keeping her name, graduated from the University of Pennsylvania and received her law degree from Northwestern University.
She is the daughter of Jeanne and Dr.
James G. Jewell of Berwyn, Pa.
Her mother, now retired, taught film analysis and esthetics at Delaware County Community College in Newtown Square, Pa.
Her father is an engineering and mathematics consultant in Berwyn.


Profile; The Sage of Caution or Just the Man Who Cried Bear?
Charles Allmon does not actually wear a belt and suspenders at the same time.
But he does carry a great big green-handled golf umbrella, even when no one else expects rain.
And he does go out of his way to avoid a busy intersection near his office in Bethesda, Md., while other people are jay-walking.
And when settling in for lunch recently at a nearby hotel dining room, he did place his napkin in his lap so that it covered not just his trousers but also about a quarter of his blue button-down shirt.
In short, Chuck Allmon is cautious, perhaps not so much by nature as by experience, 73 colorful years of it, including three decades in the stock market.
Caution is a trait that has stood him in good stead, making him one of the very few market gurus to have stayed in business for decades, unscathed by bear markets that devoured most of his peers.
His crowning glory came in 1987, when Mr.
Allmon, already admired for his ability to pick great stocks, achieved almost legendary status as one of the rare investors to make money when the stock market crashed.


At Marina, a Noteworthy Early Bird Dinner
BOSTWICK'S does not have the same commanding view of Three Mile Harbor as its more glamorous neighbor, East Hampton Point.
But it does have a noteworthy early bird dinner and a very agreeable marina-side setting.
The three-course pre-sunset price-fixed dinner, served from 5:30 to 6:30 P.M. from Mondays through Thursdays, can be eaten in a pleasant dining room of white walls, blue banquettes, ceiling fans, mirrors and Art Deco sofas.


Robyn M. Watts, Nicholas Platt Jr.
Robyn Marie Watts, a daughter of the late Dr. and Mrs.
Robert Watts, was married yesterday to Nicholas Platt Jr., a son of Ambassador and Mrs.
Platt of New York.
The Rev.
Dr.
Chalmers Coe, a United Church of Christ minister, officiated at the Plymouth Church in Brooklyn.
The bride, 28, is keeping her name.
She graduated from the University of Michigan and is a law student at Fordham University.
Her father was a dentist in Detroit.


Postings: Purchases in Murray Hill and Greenwich Village; For Vatican Diplomats and Jewish N.Y.U. Students
Two stately Manhattan properties will soon become affiliated with religious organizations.
In Murray Hill, the Vatican's Path to Peace Foundation bought a six-story former town house at 25 East 39th Street for $3 million; it will be used by the Vatican's Mission to the United Nations.
In Greenwich Village, New York University bought an 8,000-square-foot town house at 7 East 10th Street for $2.2 million; it will become the Edgar M. Bronfman Center for Jewish Student Life at New York University.
Mr.
Bronfman, chairman of the Seagram Company, is a long-time supporter of the university.


Allison M. Daly, J. R. McDermott
Allison Marie Daly, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
J.
Spencer Daly of Vero Beach, Fla., was married yesterday to Richard Gerard McDermott 3d, the son of Virginia Van Ess Lindsey of Darien, Conn., and Mr.
McDermott Jr. of Greenwich, Conn.
The Rev.
Michael Moynihan performed the ceremony at the Roman Catholic Church of St.
Michael the Archangel in Greenwich.
The bride teaches physical education at the Rye (N.Y.) Country Day School.
She graduated from Lynchburg College and received a master's degree in education from Columbia University.
Her father retired as the chief trademark counsel at the Exxon Corporation in New York.


Argentina on Alert After New Bomb Warning
Argentina has been thrown into a state of alert after the Government announced that Israel and several unnamed countries had notified it that they had obtained information that another bomb attack was imminent.
After a week in which Argentina accused four former Iranian diplomats of taking part in the fatal bombing here last month of a building housing major Jewish groups, this holiday weekend was supposed to provide a much-needed break from a conflict that nearly severed relations between the two countries.


Uncharted Territories
DAISY BATES IN THE DESERT  By Julia Blackburn. 232 pp. New York:  Pantheon Books. $22.


Washington Rally for Health Care


The Fine Art of Paris in August


Anna Montesano, Douglas Matthews
Anna Maria Montesano, a daughter of Pasquale and Aurora Montesano of Katonah, N.Y., was married yesterday to Douglas L. Matthews, a son of Edward and Marie Matthews of Princeton, N.J.
Msgr.
Daniel V. Flynn performed the ceremony at St.
Gregory's Church in Harrison, N.Y.
Mrs.
Matthews, 29; the bridegroom, 32, and the bridegroom's father work for the American International Group, an insurance company.
The bride is a workers' compensation examiner in Tarrytown, N.Y.
The bridegroom is the business development manager of an international property-casualty subsidiary in New York.
His father is the vice chairman of finance in New York.


At Agency For Drivers, New Chief Has Plans
COMPLAINTS about the Division of Motor Vehicles are as perennial as tie-ups on the turnpike.
Maybe that should not be surprising.
After all, New Jersey is a small state crammed with 4.8 million cars and the 5.4 million people who drive them.
The division charged with keeping track of New Jersey motorists and their machines is an administrative behemoth with a yearly budget of $107 million, revenue of $700 million and 2,500 employees around the state.


The Nation; Congress Decides a Crime Bill Doesn't Pay
TO hear the politicians tell it, millions of Americans are cowering in their homes, cringing in fear.
To hear the pollsters tell it, crime is the No. 1 issue on their minds.
But year after year, Congress stops short of enacting legislation that would curb the sale of guns, limit appeals by death row inmates and increase Federal spending on police protection.
This odd circumstance has continued virtually unabated for more than a decade.
But only in the last five years has it hardened into the sort of trenchant political warfare that sabotaged the latest big anti-crime bill last week.


Meanwhile, at Yasgur's Farm, Only Stars Are Above
Steven and Becky Lefebvre were skinny-dipping this morning in Filippini's Pond, a location made famous a quarter century ago at the original Woodstock festival.
They passed their 2 1/2-year-old daughter Prairie between them, while their golden retriever Peace cavorted.
"What a great hangover cure!" exclaimed Mr.
Lefebvre, who is 27 years old and a doctoral candidate in biochemistry at the University of Vermont.


SUNDAY, August 14, 1994; Unwanted Columbus
The head is in Fort Lauderdale, the body pieces in Moscow and St.
Petersburg.
So far New York, Miami Beach and Columbus, Ohio, have all spurned the chance to have the 311-foot sculpture of Christopher Columbus, which was intended as a present to the United States from the countries of the former Soviet Union.
It's big.
Some critics say it's ugly.
And some don't want to honor the Italian explorer after all.
Possible homes for the statue might be other cities and towns called Columbus.
The Census Bureau says they are found in Georgia, Illinois, Indiana, Iowa, Kansas, Kentucky, Mississippi, Montana, Nebraska, North Carolina, North Dakota, Texas and Wisconsin.


Canadian Gem Scheme Leaves Americans Holding the Stones
He had bought old coins in the 1970's, when investments in something solid seemed the best hedge against rampant inflation.
Dr.
Kane Zelle, now a retired gynecologist from Tequeste, Fla., held on to the coins for two decades.
But in January 1993 he received what appeared to be a very tempting offer in a letter from a Toronto gemstone trading company.
There was just one hitch: the buyer would purchase the coins only if Dr.
Zelle first bought two emeralds.
A few days later, Dr.
Zelle mailed checks for $6,750 and $5,400 to the gemstone company, Gheko Fox Yamoto.
But a week before he was supposed to sell his coins and emeralds, the company disappeared, and an appraiser told him that his new emeralds were worth only $900.


Pickets March At a Coffee Shop
Bill Cosby was filming his new television series, "Mysteries," at the Schaller &amp; Weber meat store last week, but the crowd was bigger and louder next door.
Dozens of strikers and their supporters were picketing the Viand Coffee Shop on the corner of 86th Street and Second Avenue, accusing the diner of discriminating against Hispanic staff members, paying less than the minimum wage and physically abusing workers.
"About 75 percent of the business has gone," said Miguel Maldonaldo, an organizer with the Center for Immigrants' Rights, who is helping the strikers.
Strikers say a majority of the Greek diner's 30 employees walked out Aug. 6.


Ann C. Wurzer, Caleb Thomson
Ann Christine Wurzer, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Henry K. Wurzer of New Canaan, Conn., was married yesterday to Caleb Whittlesey Thomson, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Warren R. Thomson of Manchester, Mass.
Msgr.
W.
Robert Schmidt performed the ceremony at the Church of St.
Thomas More in Darien, Conn.
Mrs.
Thomson, 29, graduated from Northeastern University.
She is a member of the staff at Putnam Investments in Boston.
Her father is the marketing director of Hearst Newspapers in New York.


A Doctor in the Inner City
NOT ALL OF US ARE SAINTS A Doctor's Journey With the Poor.
By David Hilfiker. 259 pp.
New York.
Hill &amp; Wang. $20.


Recycling Catches On in More Ways Than One
Every weekday morning the Metro-North commuters flowing across the platforms of Grand Central Terminal leave thousands of newspapers in recycling baskets.
A Metro-North spokesman calls the recycling program, which collects four tons of newspapers a day, "a rip-roaring success."
But this success, at rail and subway stations where it has been tried, has yielded some surprises: At Grand Central, hundreds of commuters reach in and pull the papers out again.


Cathy Selinka, Jonathan Levison
Cathy Selinka, a teacher at the Bedford (N.Y.) Village Elementary School, is to be married today to Dr.
Jonathan Levison, a surgical resident at Long Island Jewish Hospital in New Hyde Park, Queens.
Rabbi Melvin Sirner is to officiate at Beth El Synagogue in New Rochelle, N.Y.


Four Concerts Conclude The Caramoor Festival
FOUR concerts are enlivening the final week of the Caramoor Festival in Katonah.
Today at 5:30 P.M., the newly organized piano-violin-cello trio of Misha Dichter, Robert McDuffie and Ralph Kirshbaum, in its Westchester debut, will perform sonatas of Ravel and Rachmaninoff plus the B major Trio of Brahms.
Lighter music fills the courtyard at 8:30 P.M. on Friday, as the John Hicks Power Trio, with the guest saxophonist Arthur Blythe, offers contemporary jazz, while the Women of the Calabash celebrate the African diaspora with songs and percussion.


Making the M.T.A. Clean Up Its Mess Through Persistence and Pictures
There was a videotape, but the only steam was from irate residents.
Nevertheless, in the end, it was a hard lesson in borough politics, or proof of the power of images.
The problem had existed for years, community officials said.
People dumped garbage in and around six subway yards and three bus depots throughout the Bronx, but the Metropolitan Transportation Authority didn't lift a finger.


The World: Hands Off; In Mexico, U.S. Hones Art of Laissez-Faire Diplomacy
ONLY last fall, as the United States anguished over the uncertainties of a new economic partnership with Mexico, the cry in Congress was: How can we propose free trade with a neighbor that does not hold free elections?
The Clinton Administration answered emphatically that the North American Free Trade Agreement would enable the United States to push Mexico more quickly and effectively toward a fuller democracy.
It prevailed, and Nafta is now a central fact of commerce and investment between the two nations.


Biosphere Gets Help From the Ivy League
Edward P. Bass, the billionaire whose Biosphere 2 project in the Arizona desert went awry amid secrecy and intrigue, is completing a major restructuring of the $150 million effort by forging close ties to Columbia and Harvard Universities and throwing open the glass domes to the scientific world.
For Columbia and Harvard, it is as if a shiny new scientific toy suddenly fell into their laps.
"It's a whole new ball game," said Dr.
Wallace S. Broecker, a prominent geochemist at Columbia who is assisting in the renewal effort.
"They're really interested in good science. There's a wonderful opportunity to do some really good stuff with the place."


Jennifer D. Goldberg, Neal G. Ranen
Jennifer Dawn Goldberg, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Joel Goldberg of Owings Mills, Md., is to be married today to Dr.
Neal Gilbert Ranen, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Carlton Ranen of Newton, Mass.
Rabbi Mark Loeb is to officiate at the Hyatt Regency in Baltimore.
The bride, 24, teaches English and drama in the public schools in Columbia, Md.
She graduated from Towson State University.


A Russian Outpost Now Happily Embraces Asia
Strange things are happening in this graceful port on Russia's Asian frontier.
A popular Korean takeout place has opened at the corner of Leo Tolstoy and Kim Yu Chen Streets.
Women are wearing cotton sundresses bought from Chinese salesmen who live across the border, 20 miles away.
A visitor from Seattle has set up an espresso bar.
And at the top of the city's Intourist Hotel, part of a chain that in most Russian cities still seems about as innovative as an old Communist Party boss, Japanese businessmen perform karaoke and eat Tokyo-quality sushi (while paying for it with fistfuls of yen.)


Judith L. Kern, Jonathan Tamir
Judith Lynne Kern, the daughter of Bernice and Harry Kern of East Meadow, L.I., is to be married today to Jonathan Tamir, the son of Hadassah and Theodor Tamir of Teaneck, N.J.
Rabbi Maurice D. Simckes is to perform the ceremony at Temple Israel in Merrick, L.I.
The bride, 31, is a senior programmer and analyst at Information Resources, a marketing research company in Boston.
She graduated from the State University at Albany.
Her father retired as an electrical engineer at General Electric in New York.


Baseball Beaned
To the Sports Editor:
I've read the baseball strike stories in the news about the labor negotiations, expensive salaries, the owners, baseball as a business and even fans trying to organize a boycott.
I hate to think of what this strike could do to ball park tickets.
I am dismayed about what has happened to America's pastime.


Jessica Cilluffo, Barton B. Clark
Jessica Rose Cilluffo, the daughter of Anthony and Dr.
Patricia Cilluffo of Dix Hills, L.I., was married there yesterday to Barton Burkhard Clark, the son of Peter and Heide Clark of Chevy Chase, Md.
Msgr.
Saverio Mattei officiated at St.
Matthew Roman Catholic Church.
Mrs.
Clark and her husband, both 25, received law degrees from the University of Chicago.
She graduated magna cum laude from the University of Pennsylvania, and he is a magna cum laude graduate of Harvard University.
They are to become law associates next month in Washington, where she plans to join the law firm of Hogan &amp; Hartson and he is to join Debevoise &amp; Plimpton, the New York law firm.


Global Fans Unite!
To the Sports Editor:
Like the millions of devoted fans throughout the United States, we have thousands in Israel who are distraught about the strike.
It is most disturbing and grossly unfair to those who, over the decades, have supported and followed their favorite team.
After all, it is our funds that make it possible for the owners and players to become millionaires.
And yet is we, the fans, who are deprived and denied in the midst of one of the most exciting seasons in many decades.


On Second Avenue, a Market of Thieves


The World; Haiti Is a Land Without a Country
WHEN Haitians say their country has a state but is not truly a nation, as they often do, they are thinking of places like this mountain hamlet.
There's never been electricity here, and drinking and bathing water comes straight from the same small stream.
The nearest hospital is more than three hours down a rocky, rutted dirt track, and the closest public high school is almost as far away.
The presidential palace in Port-au-Prince may be less than 125 miles away, but in rural areas like this one, home to 70 percent of the Haitian population, the government rarely makes its presence felt, except when the police or tax collectors appear.


Familiar Voices and Familiar Themes
Deja vu arrived on the second day of Woodstock '94.
It wasn't just the mid-afternoon downpour, which instantly reminded those who had been at the first festival of the texture and smell of Catskills mud.
Other flashbacks had been planned, as Joe Cocker, the reconstituted Band and Crosby, Stills and Nash (minus Neil Young) performed at their second Woodstock festival.
This time, Crosby, Stills and Nash got to sing their hit "Woodstock," which Joni Mitchell wrote after the 1969 festival.
When Mr.
Cocker sang "With a Little Help from My Friends," hundreds of thousands of arms waved and swayed in the air, and everyone seemed to be singing along, in a tribute to 1969 as heartfelt as it was predictable.
Later, the Band (without its main songwriters, Robbie Robertson and the late Richard Manuel) juxtaposed songs from "Music from Big Pink," composed in Saugerties, with more recently recorded material.
Other 1960's figures sat in with the Band, including Roger McGuinn of the Byrds and more Woodstock alumni: Hot Tuna (the guitarist Jorma Kaukonen and the bassist Jack Casady, who were with the Jefferson Airplane) and Bob Weir of the Grateful Dead.
But the next generation, which outnumbers baby-boomers on the field and among the performers, was also making its own, more ambivalent statements about past and present.


Hospital in Dobbs Ferry Shifts Its Affiliation
COMMUNITY HOSPITAL AT DOBBS FERRY has ended its two-year affiliation agreement with Phelps Memorial Hospital Center in North Tarrytown and has affiliated with the Bronx-based Montefiore Medical Center, the university hospital for the Albert Einstein College of Medicine.
The Montefiore-Community Hospital affiliation is part of the trend that has seen New York City hospitals reaching into suburban areas to develop relationships with smaller health-care institutions, said Thomas E. Green, executive director of the 50-bed community hospital here.


SUNDAY, August 14, 1994; The Palio: No Picnic
In Siena, Italy, dining out can occur on a grand scale.
The town is famous for its fierce horse race run twice a summer in the town square. (The next one is Tuesday.) Each of the town's "quarters" that sponsors a horse holds a prerace feast the night before, as they have for more than 300 years.
The tables at left were set for last year's August dinner in the Nicchio (Shell) ward, one of the largest.
There were places for 1,800.
An even bigger street banquet is held in the fall by the quarter that has the winning horse.
On the night after the race, tempers run too high for peaceful dining.


A Welcome, Timely Touch of Tuscany
TIMING has much to do with a restaurant's success.
The new Tuscan Oven on Route 7 in Norwalk is a case in point.
This part of Route 7 has recently sprouted a series of office buildings, and Tuscan Oven, with an airy, inviting trattoria-style decor, offers an alternative to the fast-food spots that line the highway.
Of the restaurant's two nonsmoking dining rooms, the front room, with pastel sponged walls, decorative posts and wood floor, is larger and faces the open kitchen and brick oven.
The rear room, with tiled floor, faux grotto details and exposed beams, is cooler and quieter.
In all three rooms, tables are well spaced for comfortable, uncrowded dining.


In Best Interests of Baseball, Will Someone Hide the Rangers?
For those who believe the players should not be striking over their distaste for a salary cap, just pretend they are on strike to save the owners from the biggest embarrassment in baseball history.
If the players stay out long enough, there will be no playoffs this year, and if there are no playoffs, the Texas Rangers can't play in them.
If the season is over, the Texas Rangers are the champions of the American League West.
They shouldn't look at the standings, though.
The sight could be dangerous to their health.
Everyone else who looks at the standings laughs, or shakes his head in disbelief.


BECAUSE OF THE STORIES
Why does Greeley sit squarely on the fence nitpicking small matters in the church that annoy him, yet remaining under the priestly mantle because "he likes it"?


Jack D. Barchas, Rosemary A. Stevens
Rosemary A. Stevens, the dean of the School of Arts and Sciences at the University of Pennsylvania in Philadelphia, was married on Tuesday to Jack D. Barchas, a professor and the chairman of the department of psychiatry at the Cornell University Medical College in New York.
Judge Louis H. Pollak of the United States District Court in Philadelphia officiated at the Federal Courthouse there.
Professor Stevens, who is keeping her name, is also an author of medical books.
She graduated from Oxford University and received a doctorate in epidemiology from Yale University.
She is a daughter of Mary A. Wallace of Sussex, England, and the late William E. Wallace.
The bride's previous marriage ended in divorce.


At Work; The Gender Wars: Talking Peace
GIVE a workshop on the gender gap and they will come.
They will hike and fish and experience difference.
The men will discuss the collective pain they have caused women.
They will learn that women never feel heard.
The women will take long, hard looks at their personal shadows.
They will learn that trout fishing is not the Eleusinian mysteries, but a matter of putting a hook into the water.


Altman Likely to Quit Soon Over Whitewater, Aides Say
Under heavy Congressional criticism for his testimony on the Whitewater investigation, Deputy Treasury Secretary Roger C. Altman is expected to step down from his post in the next week to 10 days, Administration officials said today.
But a Treasury official speaking for Mr.
Altman said he had not decided whether he was willing to resign and had not been asked to do so.


Currency
Last
Prior
Year
Week
Week
Ago
Japanese Yen
100.13
100.20
104.45
per Dollar
German Mark
1.5510
1.5790
1.6970
per Dollar
Canadian Dollar
1.3813
1.3865
1.2915
per U.S. Dollar
British Pound
1.5474
1.5415
1.4978
U.S. Dollar per British Pound
Gold
$376.70
$377.60
$376.00
Republic National Bank
Currency: Friday NY Close


Nigeria in Crisis
Nearly 25 years after the end of the ethnically divided country's civil war, fears are rising that it may be fractured again, along with the promise of democratic government.
Article, page 16.


Women Take to Sailing, Lama Takes In Tennis
DOWNTOWN -- For some sailors, raising sails and raising funds are all in a day's work.
Glamour magazine, a sponsor of the first all-women's team slated to compete in the America's Cup, gave a cocktail party and sunset sail on Aug. 10 to woo advertisers to commit to a special advertising section on "achievement-oriented women."


Meet Will Be Barometer of U.S. Future
Except for brief interludes, notably when East German women built muscles with banned anabolic steroids, American swimmers have been the world's best since World War II.
Now the current crop of Americans, with a few old heroes and many young, potential replacements, faces a major test.
On Sunday, the Phillips 66 United States Swimming championships start a seven-day run at the Indiana University Natatorium.
More important, this meet serves as the world-championship trials, with the first two Americans in most events sure to represent the United States in the world aquatic championships Sept. 1-11 in Rome.


Wildlife Refuge Reopens on Kauai
The Kilauea Point National Wildlife Refuge on the Hawaiian island of Kauai has reopened to the public.
The 203-acre wildlife sanctuary was closed after Kauai was hit by Hurricane Iniki in September 1992.
Nesting sites, wildlife habitats and buildings in the refuge, including the visitor center and lighthouse, were damaged.
Visitors can now hike the trails, observe the nesting sea birds, admire the ocean sea cliffs and depending on the season, watch migratory whales and seals.
The focal point of Kilauea Point is the white lighthouse, which is on the National Register of Historic Places.
Construction on damaged portions of the lighthouse has begun, but the lighthouse is never open to the public.
There is no entry fee to the refuge until the visitor center is repaired and open to the public.


Paula Ruthen, Michael Kushnir
Paula V. Ruthen, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Gerald C. Ruthen of New City, N.Y., was married last evening to Michael Edward Kushnir, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Harry Kushnir of Framingham, Mass.
Rabbi Allen Kaplan performed the ceremony at the Stouffer Westchester Hotel in White Plains.
Mrs.
Kushnir, 25, teaches kindergarten at the Williams North School in Chelsea, Mass.
She was elected to Phi Beta Kappa at Brandeis University, from which she graduated magna cum laude.
She received a master's degree in early childhood education from Tufts University.
Mr.
Kushnir, also 25, graduated cum laude from Brandeis and received his law degree in May from Northeastern University.


TRANSACTIONS
Football National Football League  DENVER BRONCOS -- Signed Leonard Russell, running back, to a one-year contract.
Released Robert Delpino, running back.


The Value of Error
Recently I had a long talk with Danny, my 3-year-old son, on the difference between tentacles and testicles.
To a 3-year-old who is articulate enough to use big words but young enough that he has not yet wrestled language to the ground, this was a big subject.
He pretty much had the idea of testicles, so the main points we covered in discussion were:
1. The nature of tentacles -- flexible snakelike arms (suckers optional).


What's All the Rhubarb?
To the Editor:
I thought I was a diligent follower of the Authors' Queries in your pages, but I missed the rhubarb request that set off Charles A. Sullivan.
The notion of a phony query never occurred to me, but then some have called me Oblivia.


Gramercy Abuzz Over Tree Cutting
Since its creation 163 years ago, Gramercy Park has served as the bucolic centerpiece of its neighborhood, offering a shady sanctuary to those who had keys to its locked gates and a bit of mystique to a city with no other private parks.
But the park's tranquillity was broken in April by the whine and whir of a chain saw cutting down nine trees, and the ensuing cacophony has reached a crescendo of sorts, in the form of a $1 million lawsuit.
Sharen Benenson, the chairwoman of the park's trustees, arranged for the cuttings, which were scheduled to take place after a public meeting to discuss plans for the park.
She did so, she says, at the recommendation of experts, to prevent a repetition of the recent falls of two trees and some limbs.


A Cautionary Prescription
To the Editor:  There is an important distinction between using music and listening to it  [ "By Any Other Name, It Would Sound Sweeter," July 31 ] .
New Age is often little more than background music for tired neurons.
Doctors should prescribe it with the caution: "Whatever you do, don't listen to it." Music is food; New Age is a drug.
KEITH JARRETT Santa Barbara, Calif.
The writer is the noted jazz pianist.


Should Judges Pick the Juries?
A recent interview with Paul Tieger ("How to Search Out the Unbiased Jurors," July 17) introduced your readers to the controversial subject of the scientific selection of jurors.
This field of study maintains that characteristics such as race, sex, religion, profession, economic status and personality type are likely to influence views that may be favorable to a particular side in a court case and that these "types" can be concentrated on a jury during the selection process.
Proponents of the scientific selection of jurors, including Mr.
Tieger, rationalize their work by suggesting that they are looking for open-minded jurors who will fairly evaluate their client's case.
The disingenuous nature of this argument is demonstrated by Mr.
Tieger's role in a civil case in which a successfully selected jury awarded $7.25 million to the plaintiff in an accidental shooting.
Mr.
Tieger, who worked for the plaintiff, acknowledges that in preparation for the trial he had conducted research into what types of jurors would most likely hold negative views toward the defendant's actions.
Clearly the goal of the selection process is to obtain the most favorably biased jury possible.


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
PAINTING TILES
The first 108 children who sign up for one of four workshops to be held on Aug. 22 at the Katonah Museum of Art, will have their work exhibited in a permanent display at Nordstrom's in White Plains.
The fee is $30, and the age limits are 4 through 8.
A waiting list will accommodate additional children should any of the first 108 drop out, and 20 scholarships are available for children who cannot afford the fee.


Gregory Hallisey And Cece Rey
Cecilia Rey, the daughter of Ambassador and Mrs.
Nicholas A. Rey of Warsaw and Larchmont, N.Y., was married in Warsaw yesterday to Gregory Steven Hallisey, a son of Col. and Mrs.
William Hallisey of Charlotte, N.C.
The Rev.
John P. Spellman performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at the Church of the Nuns of the Visitation.
The bride, 28, is known as Cece.
She graduated from Princeton University and received a master's degree in public policy from Harvard University.
She is the special projects manager at the resource development office of the New York City Human Resource Administration in Manhattan.
Her father is the United States Ambassador to Poland.
Her mother, known professionally as Lisa Machado, is an artist.


Son of the Founder of Nation of Islam Speaks in Harlem


Baseball 1994: The Virtual Season
The last baseball strike, in 1985, lasted just two days.
If the one that began early Friday doesn't last much longer, the big loser may be Matt Williams of teh San Francisco Giants, who nees every at-bat he can get in pursuit of the single season home run record.


Germans Seize 3d Atom Sample, Smuggled by Plane From Russia
German officials said today that the police had made the biggest seizure yet of weapons-quality nuclear materials smuggled from Russia, calling it the most unsettling indication to date of a well-organized criminal conspiracy to provide buyers with the ability to build a bomb.
As much as 500 grams, or 17.6 ounces, of highly radioactive plutonium 239, the prime fissionable material of atomic warheads, was seized on Wednesday from baggage from a Lufthansa flight from Moscow at Munich international airport, the officials said.


Residential Sales
In the following reports, the "listed at" price is the asking price when negotiations began that ended in the sale.
Time on market is from most recent listing to contract.
MANHATTAN
GREENWICH VILLAGE $357,500
51 Fifth Avenue (12th St.)
2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,100-sq.-ft. co-op in a prewar building; manned elevator, dining area, eat-in kitchen, beamed ceilings, 2 exposures; maintenance $1,241, 65% tax deductible, listed at $399,000, 42 weeks on market (Brokers: Herbert H. Kliegerman &amp; Associates; Corcoran Group)
MADISON SQUARE $290,000
5 East 22d Street
(Madison Green)
2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,100-sq.-ft. condo in an 11-year-old building; 24-hr. doorman, dining alcove, health club, 2 exposures; common charge $507, taxes $4,584, listed at $315,000, 1 year on market (Brokers: Newell &amp; Associates; Olshan Realty)
UPPER EAST SIDE $682,000
169 East 69th Street
3-bedroom, 4-bath, 1,800-sq.-ft. prewar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, manned elevator, dining room, 2 exposures; maintenance $1,730, 48% tax deductible, listed at $775,000, 47 weeks on market (Broker: Corcoran Group)
UPPER WEST SIDE $850,000
33 Riverside Drive (75th St.)
3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 1,800-sq.-ft. prewar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, renovated eat-in kitchen, dining room, wrapped terrace, Hudson River view; maintenance $2,566, 56% tax deductible, listed at $850,000, 1 year on market (Broker: Argo Corporation Real Estate)
BRONX
BAYCHESTER AREA $122,500
1566 Allerton Avenue
2-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 43-year-old semi-attached brick house; dining room, h/w floors, full basement, 1-car garage; taxes $1,498, listed at $145,000, 8 weeks on market (Broker: Cancro Realty)
RIVERDALE $90,000
3616 Henry Hudson Parkway
(Algiers)
2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,200-sq.-ft. postwar co-op: 24-hr. doorman, dining room, parquet floors, terrace; maintenance $636, 55% tax deductible, listed at $149,000, 3 years on market (Broker: Trebach Realty)
BROOKLYN
CLINTON HILL $285,000
357 Washington Avenue
4-bedroom, 3-bath, attached frame house built in 1840; dining room, den, 8 freplaces, landmark district; taxes $1,200, listed at $325,000, 29 weeks on market (Brokers: Naida McSherry; Brooklyn Properties of 7th Avenue)
DITMAS PARK AREA $229,000
329 Stratford Avenue
5-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 90-year-old wood-frame house; front porch, eat-in kitchen, den, semi-finished basement, 50- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,550, listed at $259,000, 1 week on market (Broker: Jacob Gold Realty)
PARK SLOPE $206,000
336-A 4th Street
2-family, 4-story brownstone; dining room, 2 baths in lower duplex; dining area, 1 bath in upper duplex; 3 bedrooms in both; 16.8- by 100-ft. lot;needs repair; taxes $2,340, listed at $245,000, 17 weeks on market (Broker: Aguayo &amp; Knox)
QUEENS
ELMHURST $180,000
90-64 51st Street
4-family, 85-year-old detached wood-frame house; 3 bedrooms, dining room, eat-in kitchen in primary unit; 1 bedroom, 1 bath in others; front porch, finished basement, 40- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $2,800, listed at $199,000, 48 weeks on market (Broker: Kremer Real Estate)
FOREST HILLS $238,000
111-06 76th Street
3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 70-year-old attached brick Tudor; dining room, fireplace, 1-car garage; taxes $1,750, listed at $270,000, 20 weeks on market (Broker: Advantage Realty)
STATEN ISLAND
GRANITEVILLE $94,000
71 Holiday Way
(Holiday Villas)
2-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 840-sq.-ft. duplex condo; eat-in kitchen, cathedral ceilings, office in finished basement; common charge $111, taxes $516, listed at $99,900, 27 weeks on market (Broker: Kingsley Real Estate)
NEW SPRINGVILLE $280,000 24 Gadsen Place
2-family, 18-year-old detached wood-frame house; 3 bedrooms, 2 baths, dining room in primary unit; 2 bedrooms, 1 1/2 baths in other; eat-in kitchen in each; finished basement, 1-car garage; taxes $2,100, listed at $295,000, 12 weeks on market (Brokers: Coldwell Banker/Schlott Realtors; DiTommaso Realty)
NEW JERSEY
CAPE MAY $135,000
406 Provincetown Road
3-bedroom, 2 bath, 7-year-old ranch; 1-car garage, c/a, deck, w/w carpeting; taxes $2,706, listed at $145,000, 2 years on market (Broker: Coldwell Banker Sol Needles Real Estate)
FLORHAM PARK $200,000
250 Ridgedale Avenue
2-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 11-year-old condominium town house; 1-car garage, common charge $212; taxes $2,846, listed at $212,000, 4 weeks on market (Brokers: The Prudential New Jersey Realty; Weichert Realtors)
HARRINGTON PARK $170,000
214 Martha Road
3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, over-50-year-old colonial; den, patio, fireplace, 1-car garage; taxes $3,654, listed at $179,900, 13 weeks on market (Brokers: Prudential Higgins Realtors; Lenk-Friedberg Properties)
MIDDLE TOWNSHIP $115,200
9 Country Village Road
3-bedroom, 2-bath, 4-year-old ranch; 2-car garage, family room, deck, 1.3-acre lot; taxes $2,342, listed at $121,900, 8 weeks on market (Broker: DeMusz Real Estate)
CONNECTICUT
DARIEN $295,000
249 Old Kings Highway
3-family, 213-year-old wood-frame colonial; 3 bedrooms, dining room, fireplace in primary unit, 1 bedroom in others; eat-in kitchen, 1 bath in each, 1.04 acres; taxes $3,487, listed at $325,000, 8 weeks on market (Broker: Preferred Properties Inc.)
GREENWICH $1.425 million
441 North Maple Avenue
4-bedroom, 4-bath, 94-year-old colonial; eat-in kitchen, family room, 2 fireplaces, c/a, 2-car garage, 3.05-acre lot; taxes $5,313, listed at $1.575 million, 4 weeks on market (Broker: Preferred Properties Inc.)
NEW CANAAN $670,000
69 Heather Drive
4-bedroom, 3-bath, 13-year-old contemporary; dining room, family room, study, 2 fireplaces, c/a, 2-car garage, 2 acres; taxes $7,057, listed at $699,000, 20 weeks on market (Brokers: Preferred Properties Inc.; William Pitt Real Estate)
STAMFORD $510,000
1845 Shippan Avenue
4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 65-year-old Tudor; family room, fireplace, 2-car garage; taxes $5,485, listed at $529,000, 9 weeks on market (Brokers: Preferred Properties Inc.; Prudential Connecticut Real Estate)
WESTCHESTER
EASTCHESTER $275,000
39 Claudet Way
4-bedroom, 3-bath, 41-year-old split level; dining room, fireplace; taxes $8,637, listed at $299,000, 3 weeks on market (Brokers: The Prudential Ragette; Re/Max Prime Properties)
PELHAM $400,000
271 Corona Avenue
4-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, 72-year-old Tudor; fireplace, sunroom, au pair suite, updated bathrooms; taxes $11,327, listed at $439,000, 28 weeks on market (Broker: C.S. McClellan &amp; Co.)
SCARSDALE $987,000
4 Normandy Lane
6-bedroom, 4 1/2-bath, 3-year-old colonial; 3-story entry hall, granite fireplace, library, .5 acre; taxes $25,123, listed at $1.05 million, 53 weeks on market (Broker: Julia B. Fee)
YONKERS $180,000
636 Scarsdale Road
4-bedroom, 2-bath, 41-year-old Cape Cod; patio, 2 kitchens; taxes $5,574, listed at $189,900, 21 weeks on market (Brokers: Ley Management; The Prudential Ragette)
LONG ISLAND
ALBERTSON $128,000
800 Willis Avenue
1-bedroom, 2-bath, 10-year-old condo apartment; screened terrace; taxes $3,000, monthly common charges $325, listed at $139,000, 10 weeks on market (Broker: Atanas Realty)
BABYLON $530,000
58 Thompson Avenue
7-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, 78-year-old waterfront colonial; dining room, 2 fireplaces, pool, 1 acre; taxes $15,200, listed at $575,000, 32 weeks on market (Brokers: Eric G. Ramsay Jr. Associates; Snover &amp; Company)
FLORAL PARK $262,500
234 Cherry Lane
3-bedroom, 2-bath, 70-year-old contemporary; dining room, eat-in kitchen, 2-car garage; taxes $4,000, listed at $289,000, 3 weeks on market (Broker: Prudential Galeria Real Estate)
WEST SAYVILLE $147,500
103 Hillary Road
3-bedroom, 1-bath, 28-year-old ranch; dining room, den w/fireplace, finished basement; taxes $3,900, listed at $148,000, 4 weeks on market (Broker: Prudential Long Island Realty)


Jodi B. Schneider and Saul A. Scherl
Jodi Beth Schneider, the daughter of Susan and Sanford Schneider of Boca Raton, Fla., was married last evening to Saul Adam Scherl, the son of Sheila and Dr.
Newton D. Scherl of Englewood Cliffs, N.J.
Rabbi Irving Spielman officiated at the Tamcrest Country Club in Alpine, N.J.
Cantor Zev Scherl, a brother of the bridegroom, took part in the ceremony.
The bride, 26, graduated from George Washington University and is a law student at American University.
Her father is the president of Conserv Energies Technology in Boca Raton.
Her mother teaches the first grade at the Donna Klein Jewish Academy there.


CHILDREN'S BOOKS
JUMPING THE BROOM By Courtni C. Wright.
Illustrated by Gershom Griffith.
Unpaged.
New York:  Holiday House. $15.95. (Ages 5 to 9) NOW LET ME FLY  The Story of a Slave Family.
Written and illustrated by Dolores Johnson.
Unpaged.
New York:  Macmillan Publishing Company. $14.95. (Ages 5 to 9)


PHOTOGRAPHER'S JOURNAL


WHAT'S LIFE WORTH?
AMERICANS LIKE TO BELIEVE THAT THE BODY is not a commodity and that no price tag can be put on a human life.
American law, in fact, forbids the selling of body parts.
But at a time when few subjects are sacrosanct, legal scholars and doctors are wrestling with such thorny issues as compensation for families of deceased organ donors and financial incentives to increase the supply of available organs.
And this leads to the inevitable question: What is the value of a human life?
If a life were seen as the sum of the salable body parts, then in countries where the sale of human organs is not so much legal as tolerated the value of a human being is upward of $300,000.
The value of the hormones alone makes each of us a potential $6 million man or woman.


Solitude and Skyline, Helicopters and Bird Walks in a Far-off Field
As Linda O'Sullivan walks along the shore of Jamaica Bay searching for pinkish stones to decorate her backyard with, her husband, James, quietly watches seagulls glide over the blank, murky waters.
The tide is up, the city's skyline is muted and magical in the sunset, and there is no one else in sight for hundreds of acres of pancake-flat, weedy horizon.
"We don't have to go out to Long Island or Pennsylvania," said Mr.O'Sullivan, a resident of Marine Park.
"I have it all right here."


Wall Street; A 'Story Stock' With a Past
THE Western Water Company of San Diego is what Wall Street calls a "story stock" -- a company without a lot of market muscle but with a great tale to tell.
As the company's calling card suggests, this Wall Street story is about the money to be made by controlling precious sources of water in a desert region.
Western Water assembles and sells water rights in California and Colorado.
The company hasn't actually made much money in that line of work yet.
What money it has made came from selling some of its California and Colorado real estate.
But given the recent history of those particular real estate markets, you can see that "Western Land Company" would suggest a far less enchanting story than "Western Water Company."


A Female Holden Caulfield for the 1990's
CLAIRE DANES IS CROUCHING in the entrance to the kitchen when the director calls "Action!" Sliding her back up the door frame, she stands, fixes the camera with a look of ineffable disgust and stalks off.
Behind her, her fictional mother is rattling on about trust.
In front of her, her real mother is worrying about what this maneuver, performed for the umpteenth time, is doing to Claire's knees.
A 15-year-old who is actually playing 15, Claire is an anomaly in Los Angeles, where women of 30 routinely dress up like high school juniors.
As the protagonist of "My So-Called Life," a new ABC series that begins this month, she is Angela Chase, a confused, sometimes soulful Everyteen.


NEIGHBORHOOD REPORT: FLLOYD BENNETT FIELD Making Do; A Unit Ready for Anything, Even the 1940's
Formed in the 1920's, the Emergency Services Unit is the closest thing to a SWAT team on the current police force; its 270 officers are trained to rappel off buildings, scuba dive and perform rooftop helicopter rescues.
Now, to make way for a National Parks Service expansion, it is leaving its World War II-era hangar at Floyd Bennett Field for another building on the other side of the field.


Two-Part Solution
To the Sports Editor:
This is how the baseball strike might be settled.
1.
Allow the owners the salary ceiling they want so much, a uniform amount of money (to be negotiated) to be spent by each team for basic player contracts.


Valerie W. Narins, Jeffrey M. Malsch
Valerie Whitman Narins, the daughter of Drs.
Rhoda and David Narins of Scarsdale, N.Y., was married last evening to Jeffrey Martin Malsch, the son of Margaret Roffee of Gaithersburg, Md., and Martin Malsch of Chevy Chase, Md.
Rabbi Richard Jacobs performed the ceremony at the Metropolitan Club in New York.
Mrs.
Malsch, 25, is to begin teaching the third grade at the Horace Mann School in Washington in September.
She and her husband graduated from the University of Vermont.
The bride received a master's degree in education from Columbia University.
Her father, a urologist in White Plains, is an assistant clinical professor of urology at New York University in Manhattan, where her mother, a dermatologist in White Plains and New York, is an associate clinical professor of dermatology.


Mindy E. Levin, Thomas K. Lee
Mindy E. Levin, a social worker at New York Hospital-Cornell University Medical Center, is to be married today to Dr.
Thomas K. Lee, a chief resident in general surgery at the hospital.
Village Justice William R. Crosbie of Tarrytown, N.Y., will officiate at Tappan Hill there.
The bride, 32, graduated from the State University College at Oneonta, N.Y., and received a master's degree in clinical social work from New York University.
She is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Stanley D. Levin of Greenwich, Conn.
Her father is the managing editor, in Westbury, L.I., of the New York division of the West Publishing Company, a legal publishing concern.


Ms. Marmelstein, David R. Gitlin
Stephanie Gwen Marmelstein, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles Marmelstein of Potomac, Md., was married last evening to David Lawrence Gitlin, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard Gitlin of West Hartford, Conn.
Rabbi Kenneth Weiss performed the ceremony at the ANA Hotel in Washington.
Mrs.
Gitlin, 26, and her husband, 25, graduated from Cornell University and she received a law degree from the University of Pennsylvania.
The bride is to become an associate next month at Shipman &amp; Goodwin, a Hartford law firm.
Her father is a partner in Nikaido, Marmelstein, Murray &amp; Oram, a law firm in Washington and Tokyo.


That Postcard On World Cup Soccer
It was with great interest and concern that I read the recent interview with George R. Zoffinger in "New Jersey Q &amp; A: Behind the Campaign for the World Cup." I am both a resident of New Jersey and an employee of the United States Postal Service in the Northern New Jersey District.
I can easily identify with Mr.
Zoffinger's frustration at the omission of the host state's name from the official World Cup souvenir postcard.
It was an oversight that cannot be adequately explained to any New Jerseyan's satisfaction.
It is a lesson in the importance of community relations and sensitivity from which I hope the Postal Service will learn.


Sound Bytes; An Underwater Path to Apple
LIKE many employees of Apple Computer, David C. Nagel has held a lot of jobs in a relatively short time.
His first position, as manager of application technology in Apple's Advanced Technology Group, lasted exactly one month in 1988.
By 1990, he was vice president of the group, Apple's R.&amp; D. operation.
Mr.
Nagel's route to Apple was typically Silicon Valley -- only on close scrutiny does its logic appear.
He had been a research scientist with a passionate interest in the way people hear underwater.
Later, his interests expanded to the myriad ways people learn and process information.
In the early 1980's, he applied the same principles to aerospace work at NASA's Ames Research Center, where he began using a Macintosh.
His affection for the Mac eventually led him to Apple.


Mount Desert's Little Neighbors
A CENTURY ago most visitors to Mount Desert Island, off the Maine coast, arrived by ocean on ferry steamers from Portland or Rockland.
Threading through a phalanx of small coastal islands, they saw gradually revealed the violet and blue-tinged mountains of Mount Desert rising from the mist and the sea.
Except for sailors and cruise-ship passengers, visitors today approach Mount Desert Island by car, missing out on this perspective.
The panoramic view from Cadillac Mountain, a first stop for many, reveals suddenly and surprisingly the islands that surround Mount Desert Island like a carelessly tossed necklace of dark green beads.
But the attractions of Acadia National Park and the villages around it are so numerous that these outer islands usually remain a tantalizing mystery.
In fact, they are not difficult to reach, and they offer a glimpse into a life that has nearly vanished, where children play unfettered and adults are peacefully tuned to the tides and the mail boats.


Corrections
A picture caption in the Styles pages last Sunday with an article about the decline of teen-age idols omitted part of a reference to Lisa Morra, age 12, and the television show "Saved by the Bell." She is a fan of the show.


ALSO INSIDE
MAKING IT WORK 3  Subutay Musluoglu is truly streetwise, a master of the constantly shifting geographic minutiae of New York.
NEW YORKERS &amp; CO. 4  In an era of "value" and "quality," there's growing talk of restaurant-marketplace mergers.
Anyone smell a trend?


New York Costs
To the Editor: While I enjoyed reading Terry Trucco's "What's Doing in New York" (June 5), I found the Vital Statistics chart to be misleading in listing the cost of a hotel accommodation in New York City.
The average rate of a hotel room in New York City including tax is $164.34, not $281.


The World; N. Korea Relents, Sort Of
GIVEN the Clinton Administration's considerable need for a foreign policy triumph, senior American officials were surprisingly cautious about the nuclear agreement they concluded with North Korea early yesterday in Geneva.
Perhaps it was out of respect for Pyongyang's infamous unpredictability.
Perhaps it was simply that, as Robert L. Gallucci, the chief American negotiator, has often warned, "the devil is in the details."
But while it is too soon to celebrate, the new framework agreement has already created the best opportunity in 45 years to end the confrontation between Washington and Pyongyang.
For this to happen, the United States is insisting that North Korea renounce all pretensions and possibilities of becoming a nuclear power.
After a week of negotiations, North Korea indicated it was willing.


In Ireland, Getting Wet During a Vacation Is Not Difficult
Here in the wettest country in Europe, thousands have headed off for vacations in drier, sunnier lands.
But while August is often the soggiest month, many people stay in Ireland for vacation.
The Irish, damply aware of what makes their isle emerald, continue to redefine the weather in ways that make it acceptable in a country and its capital where it rains 225 days a year, compared with 183 in Moscow, 153 in London, 148 in Paris and 125 in New York.


Correction
An article on Aug. 7 about the Salishan Lodge in Gleneden Beach, Ore., misstated its age.
The resort is 29 years old this month, not 20.


Sports of The Times; United States Can Get Back On Fast Track
MIKE POWELL added some unexpected sizzle to the Pan Africa-USA track and field meet when he castigated Carl Lewis, his rival and archenemy, for avoiding him in the long jump.
In the middle of an upbeat news conference after his dramatic victory Friday in the long jump, Powell, who astonished the world in 1991 by jumping 29 feet 4 1/2 inches to break Bob Beamon's 23-year-old record, chastised Lewis for ducking out of the two-day dual meet.
Powell was asked whether his victory would have been sweeter had Lewis been present.


What's All the Rhubarb?
To the Editor:
Please assure Charles A. Sullivan that querying authors do write books and answer letters.


Battered Utility Stocks Might Have Hidden Value
COMPETITION is ferocious, dividends are in jeopardy and the stocks, understandably, have been getting creamed.
So what's a respected research firm doing with a new "buy" recommendation on the utility stocks?


Billions at Stake in Debate on a Gold Rush
In 1872, the Sioux Indians still roamed free over part of the northern Plains, Wyatt Earp had yet to draw a bead on the Clanton gang and President Ulysses S. Grant signed two laws that would shape the American West.
One created the world's first national park, at Yellowstone, a place whose theatrical geysers and waterfalls were still thought to be a fiction from Thomas Moran's paintbrush.


5 Florida County Jails Make It Real Hard Time: No Television
In response to public complaints about luxuries for prisoners, five Florida county jails have removed all television sets while two other county jails are sharply restricting the television viewing of inmates.
Some law-enforcement officials hope that the move may even deter crime.
"Knowing there's no television here, maybe they'll think twice before committing a crime," said Sgt.
Dan Smith, public information officer for the Clay County sheriff's office in Green Cove Springs, about 30 miles south of Jacksonville.


What's All the Rhubarb?
To the Editor:
It sounds as if Charles A. Sullivan, who is "perplexed by your increasingly outlandish Authors' Queries" (Letters, July 17), could use a rhubarb tonic to cleanse his spleen.
I suggest a tea brewed from diced stems and sweetened with molasses, as recommended by one of the 20 (to date) responses to my Author's Query on culinary and horticultural rhubarb.
And while he is being refreshed by a remedy documented in a 2500 B.C.
Chinese herbal, he can browse the 3,000 international entries in Dale Marshall's bibliography of rhubarb articles (which does not include the 300 rhubarb cookbooks in his personal collection), or he can read Clifford M. Foust's book "Rhubarb: The Wondrous Drug."


Are These Books, or What? CD-ROM and the Literary Industry
THIS spring William H. Gates, the plugged-in chairman of the Microsoft Corporation and a man who lives for his computer, announced that he wanted to publish a definitive 300-page discussion of his views on the information revolution -- where it had been and where it was going.
But when it came time to choose a format, Mr.
Gates rejected the familiar tools of his trade: on-line services, floppy disks, CD-ROM's, all the hardware and all the software.
He turned to a technology that has been around since the mid-15th century.
He decided to sell his book as a book.
You can't get more conventional.
Books are cunning and resilient creatures.
They have survived world wars and revolutions and totalitarian regimes and the waxing and waning of other media, including magazines, newspapers, radio, movies, videos, records, tapes, compact disks and television.
Whenever their end was predicted, books managed to defy their own death sentences and spring back to life.
Books have persevered so effectively, in fact, that in 1993 more of them were sold in the United States than in any year before, $18 billion worth.


CHILDREN ARE ALONE
Peggy Orenstein's article "Children Are Alone" (July 24) turned my relaxing Sunday afternoon into a painful walk down memory lane.
At the tender age of 11, I began to mother myself, my own mother incapacitated by divorce, alcohol abuse and manic depression.
Like Becca and April's, my needs were overshadowed by my mother's problems, a burden that rested on my shoulders alone.


Editorial Notebook; The Doctrine Nobody Can Define How Monroe's Message Became a Political Icon
When the Clinton Administration sought United Nations approval to intervene militarily in Haiti, it was instantly accused of undermining that holy of holies, the Monroe Doctrine.
This is a tried and true way of gaining shocked attention since most Americans have no idea what the doctrine is, but nevertheless are certain that upholding it is a Good Thing.
In fact, there is no single definition of the doctrine, which has meant different things over the years and most assuredly was not originally a license for invasions.


A Novelty No More, Mexican Leftist Is Struggling
Painted with derogatory slogans, the dark coffin was borne above the heads of thousands who had come to root for the demise of Mexico's long-governing party and for the victory of the leftist candidate, Cuauhtemoc Cardenas, in the presidential election next weekend.
Despite the crowd's enthusiasm, and the outpouring of emotion at the candidate's rallies all over Mexico in these last days before the election, polls and other measures of support indicate that it may be Mr.
Cardenas's chances of being elected President that will be interred on Aug. 21, not the Institutional Revolutionary Party, which has controlled Mexico for 65 years.


KIM PHILBY
Kim Philby's life makes sense only if one assumes that he belonged to the last imperialist British generation, who despised the upstart Germans, resented the upcoming Americans and who used the Soviets to counterbalance the intrusions of both into the British spheres of interest ("Kim Philby and the Age of Paranoia," by Ron Rosenbaum, July 10).
In their end game, Philby and friends tried not to betray each other, but only whom they considered lesser breeds, especially those who worked with Americans.
When this double play began to dawn on their American partners, the British political establishment could cover its tracks only by sacrificing Philby, reluctantly, and gradually presenting him as a longtime Soviet agent.


No Need to Replace Whitewater Counsel
To The Editor:
The delay of Congress in re-enacting the Independent Counsel Act has created unnecessary embarrassment in the Whitewater investigation for the Special Division of the Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia circuit; for the Attorney General, and for the independent counsels Robert B. Fiske Jr. and Kenneth W. Starr.


Snip, Snip: Styling Hair and Talking Heads
TIMOTHY TATE is 45 years old, a hair designer by trade, a commentator by calling.
He circles ideas the way he circles a head -- back, front, sides, top, visualizing connections to unseen parts before he moves in to cut boxes, circles, tips.
He approaches heads, and debates, from his own special angles.
Today's topic is black English.
"We know that black people are innovative and stylish," he says, "and I think that a ritual, tribal language is fine. But it doesn't belong in mainstream society. Whites will let blacks do anything to make themselves look bad, so they can point at them and say, 'See, they don't belong here with us.'


Yacht Waits For Money And Name
A sizable blue sloop, looking every bit the outsider, recently showed up on a mooring off this island community.
The sailboat's low, flat hull set the yacht apart from others in the bay.
With a plumb bow sticking straight up from the water, a saucer-shaped stern and a splash of corporate graphics on the top, this had to be a racing boat.
But what was the name?
The name, as it turns out, doesn't exist.
Listed among entries in the nine-monthlong BOC yacht race around the world, which is scheduled to start Sept. 17 in Charleston, S.C., the sailboat is noted only as "tba": to be announced.


Heather E. Sarno, Marc O. Getman
Heather Elissa Sarno, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Paul S. Sarno of New York, is to be married today to Marc Owen Getman, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Edward A. Getman of Framingham, Mass.
Rabbi Edward Feld is to officiate at the Pegasus Suite at the Rainbow Room in New York.


G. G. Divinagracia, Lorin Engquist
Angelica Galvez Divinagracia, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Paul V. Divinagracia of Fremont, Calif., was married yesterday to Lorin Michael Engquist, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard O. Engquist of Brooklyn.
The Rev.
William D. Barnes performed the ceremony at the Westminster Presbyterian Church in Pasadena, Calif.
The bride, who is known as G. G., will keep her name.
She graduated from the University of California at Los Angeles and is a senior litigation paralegal at Riordan &amp; McKinzie, a Los Angeles law firm.
Her father is the senior claims manager at Hartka &amp; Company, insurance adjusters in San Francisco.
Her mother, Severina G. Divinagracia, is a chemist in Torrance, Calif., for Rohm &amp; Haas, a manufacturer of chemicals.


Ms. Blank, Mr. Frankenthaler
Marci Jill Blank, a daughter of Phyllis and Stanley Blank of Parsippany, N.J., is to be married today to Michael Lee Frankenthaler, a son of Ethel and James Frankenthaler of Marlboro, N.J.
Rabbi Gerald Chirnomas is to perform the ceremony at Congregation B'nai Tikvah in North Brunswick, N.J.


Justice Dept. Switches Sides In Racial Case
After winning a court victory last year on behalf of a white New Jersey high school teacher who lost her job so that a black teacher could be retained, the Clinton Administration is seeking to switch sides.
If the Administration succeeds, employers will be allowed for the first time to take race into consideration in deciding whom to lay off.
Courts have upheld hiring or promotion on that basis, but have rejected its use in letting employees go.


SUNDAY, August 14, 1994; Old Type on New Machines
Some writers wear faded jeans and flannel shirts.
Some smoke unfiltered cigarettes.
A hardy few work on manual typewriters, producing manuscripts that at least look like those of Raymond Chandler.
Now, there's an easier way.
David Rakowski, a Columbia University music professor, has designed a computer font that mimics the output of just such a typewriter.
The letters in the font are spotty and misaligned with a deliberate and almost precious effect, like "authentic" prewashed blue jeans.
Called Harting, the font works with Windows, and is swapped around on the Internet.
Rakowski requests that users send a tax-deductible donation to the Columbia University music department.
The amount is based on your area code; if it's 212, you pay $2.12.


With 2 Valdez Trials Down, Big One Is Coming Up
Now that the jury in the Exxon Valdez trial in Alaska has reached its second verdict, both sides in the exhausting legal contest that has lasted all summer are making preparations for the third and most important stage.
The questions that will be put to the jury are these: Should the world's largest oil company pay punitive damages for soiling Alaskan waters in 1989 with 11 million gallons of oil, and if so, how much?


Postings: Speeding Construction Approvals; Four Agencies Under One Roof
Bureaucracy is one of those realms in which "express service" is measured in weeks, not minutes.
But thinking that weeks would at least be an improvement over months, the Buildings Department has devised a pilot "express" review program.
It is to begin tomorrow in the agency's Queens office, 126-06 Queens Boulevard, cater-corner from Borough Hall.


Power Snooze
What are all those nonstop, super-stressed go-getters doing with their weekends this summer?
Ask someone on a Monday morning, and chances are you'll get the triumphant response "Took a nap."
Apparently, no one is in a rush to get to the beach to absorb ultraviolet rays, hiking just invites ticks, and tennis is too sweaty.
For people with small children, a daytime snooze is indeed an accomplishment.


Theater Is Flourishing on the East End
IN bars, restaurants, churches, art galleries and storefronts -- even in a television studio and an old Western Union laboratory -- more professional theater groups are presenting new and alternative works on Long Island this summer than in the last five years.
For years well-known actors, playwrights, directors, composers and other theater professionals have gone to the East End to rest, relax and create.
But with few exceptions, notably the playwright Joseph Pintauro, they have rarely introduced new works on the Island.


So Far, It's Been A Vintage Year For Quirkiness
THE BULLISH NEWS ANnounced at the end of the art-auction season two weeks ago was that since last August sales rose internationally at the two largest houses -- 15 percent at Sotheby's and 12 percent at Christie's.
And with these increases came a battery of record prices paid for all sorts of objects produced between 1000 B.C. and A.D. 1990.
Some are described below.
So far this year, in fact, there have been a number of auctions at which the totals paid for antiques and collectibles shot upward -- if not to the levels of the late 1980's, then at least higher than in several years.
Fueling the recovery were rarities, celebrity memorabilia and some of the quirkiest items ever put on the block.


Condo Draws Tourists
The latest evidence that sightseeing is not necessarily synonymous with good taste has surfaced in Los Angeles, where the home of Nicole Brown Simpson, the slain former wife of O. J. Simpson, has turned into an unofficial tourist attraction.
Eight weeks after the killings of Nicole Simpson and her friend Ronald L. Goldman, police officers are still stationed by her condominium at 875 South Bundy to "help maintain the flow of car traffic," according to Officer Sandra Castello, a spokeswoman for the Los Angeles Police Department.


RESULTS PLUS
HARNESS RACING Robinson's Dontgetinmyway Wins Wilson  Trainer Bill Robinson, whose stable has dominated harness racing the past few seasons, continued his winning ways last night as his 2-year-old colt, Dontgetinmyway, pulled away down the stretch to win the $774,750 Woodrow Wilson Pace, highlighting the final night of the standardbred meeting at the Meadowlands Racetrack.
Dontgetinmyway, the 6-5 favorite with driver John Campbell, grabbed the lead in midstretch and stormed home to win by two lengths over Tattler's Torpedo in a time of 1:534/5 for the mile.
Dontgetinmyway boosted his earnings to $438,625 with his fifth victory in eight starts on the season.
The favorite returned $4.40, $2.40 and $2.40 with Tattler's Torpedo returning $3.60 and $3.20.
Neutrality was third and paid $9.00.
Efishnc won the $567,500 Sweetheart Pace for 2-year-old fillies, defeating the 3-5 favorite CR Daniella by 3 1/4 lengths in 1:543/5 .
TENNIS Grossman Reaches Final in Los Angeles  Ann Grossman, who is without a victory in six years on the tour, outlasted the seventh-seeded Julie Halard of France, 1-6, 6-3, 6-1, yesterday in the semifinals of the Virginia Slims of Los Angeles.
Grossman advanced to today's final against the winner of the later semifinal between No. 8 Sabine Appelmans of Belgium and No. 10 Amy Frazier.
Grossman, from Columbus, Ohio, has made three-setters a habit this week, going the distance in four of her five matches so far.
She put together three-set upsets of No. 2 Martina Navratilova in the third round and No. 5 Zina Garrison-Jackson in Friday's quarterfinals. (AP) GOLF Neumann Ahead in British Women's Open  Sweden's Liselotte Neumann shot a three-under-par 70 yesterday for a three-stroke lead after three rounds of British Women's Open in Woburn, England.
Neumann, whose 208 is 11 under for 54 holes, withstood a strong charge from a group of Americans led by Cindy Figg-Currier.
She had a 68 and was in second place. (AP) Four Share Lead in Rain-Shortened Senior Event: The foursome atop the leader board in the First of America Classic PGA Senior Tour event got 18 holes closer to victory yesterday when the second round of the $650,000 tournament was rained out in Ada, Mich.
Tournament officials said the event will be shortened to 36 holes and conclude with 18 holes today.
Graham Marsh of Australia, Isao Aoki of Japan and Americans Jim Albus and Jimmy Powell shared the first-round lead after shooting 66's Friday in their first tour of the Egypt Valley Country Club. (AP) Ward Claims Amateur Title: Wendy Ward defeated Jill McGill, 2 and 1, yesterday to win the United States Women's Amateur Championship at the Homestead's Cascades Course in Hot Springs, Va.
Ward, of San Antonio, shot 145 over two rounds.
McGill, of Denver, shot 150.
Ward's birdie on the 16th hole and McGill's bogey on No. 17 helped produce the decisive margin of victory for the 21-year-old senior at Arizona State University. (AP) PRO FOOTBALL Steelers' Quarterbacks Ground Raiders  Neil O'Donnell and Mike Tomczak directed a pair of scoring drives apiece and the Pittsburgh Steelers rebounded from deficits in each half to beat the visiting Los Angeles Raiders, 29-17, last night in a National Football League exhibition game.
Victor Jones, the fourth-team fullback on the Steelers (1-1), scored on two 1-yard runs in the fourth quarter.
Jeff Hostetler and Vince Evans threw touchdown passes to Darryl Hobbs for the Raiders (2-1). (AP) Seahawks 29, Buccaneers 6: Rick Mirer passed for his first touchdown of the exhibition season and rookie defensive tackle Sam Adams scored his first N.F.L. touchdown on a fumble recovery as Seattle topped Tampa Bay.
The game was played at the University of Washington's Husky Stadium while the Kingdome in Seattle continues to undergo ceiling repairs. (AP) Browns 16, Lions 7: The rookie Derrick Alexander returned a fourth-quarter punt 75 yards for a touchdown to help keep Cleveland unbeaten in two preseason games.
The Browns' defense dominated visiting Detroit (1-1), holding the Lions' star running back Barry Sanders to 15 yards on 3 carries. (AP) Colts 26, Bengals 21: Sixth-round pick Lamont Warren took over for an injured Marshall Faulk and led Indianapolis to two second-half touchdowns against visiting Cincinnati.


Donald Byrd: An Unabashed Eclectic
DONALD BYRD IS A CHOREOGRApher with multiple personalities.
It is impossible to predict how he will express himself next.
Take his plans for the forthcoming season.
Among the works he hopes to create are a study in domestic violence inspired by the theatrical theories of Brecht and an African-American interpretation of "The Nutcracker" that will use Duke Ellington's arrangements of Tchaikovsky's melodies.
His newest work to be seen in New York was the evening-long "Bristle," which his company, Donald Byrd/The Group, offered earlier this summer at the Majestic Theater in Brooklyn.
"Bristle" turned out to be a decidedly bristly battle of the sexes.
Other works in recent years have ranged from plotless mood pieces to flamboyant dance-dramas.
"Whoosh/Matts" (1988) depicted desperate people.
The choreographic texture of "Rend" (1989) was torn apart by wild slashings.
In contrast, "Dance at the Gym" (1991) was a bright piece about adolescent bravado.


Parking Rules
Because of the Roman Catholic feast of the Assumption of the Blessed Virgin, alternate-side street cleaning regulations will be suspended in New York City tomorrow.
Other regulations will remain in effect.


Kelly L. McKeige, David L. Williams
Kelly Lynne McKeige and David Landis Williams, lawyers in New York, were married yesterday in Manchester, Vt.
The Rev.
Hal C. Miller 3d performed the Unitarian ceremony at the home of the bridegroom's father, Richard Williams.
Mrs.
Williams, 33, is an assistant vice president and legal counsel at Union Bank of Switzerland, in New York.
The bride and bridegroom graduated from Tufts University, and she received her law degree from New York University.
Her stepfather, James Davidson, is a broker at the Dana Company, an insurance agency in Des Moines, where her mother, Linda Davidson, is a designer at Pigott Inc., an interior design concern.
The bride's first marriage ended in divorce.


Aug. 7-13: Independent Prosecutor; Agriculture Secretary Gets Some Unwanted Attention
Agriculture Secretary Mike Espy hasn't exactly been a household name among Mr.
Clinton's cabinet officers, until last week when the glare of scrutiny turned upon him.
Attorney General Janet Reno asked a three-judge Federal appeals court panel to appoint an independent prosecutor to investigate whether the former Mississippi House member broke any laws when he accepted transportation, lodging, meals and entertainment from Tyson Foods Inc.
Ms.
Reno said a preliminary investigation hadn't turned up evidence that Mr.
Espy had performed favors in return for gifts, but indicated that further inquiry was warranted into charges, like accusations by some Agriculture aides who have said in news reports that one of Mr.
Espy's former top aides ordered them to halt work on tougher poultry inspection standards.


Unmentionables? No More
BUYING men's underwear used to be simple.
But like asking for water in a restaurant or ordering a cup of coffee to take out, it has become a potentially complicated and costly endeavor.
"It's no longer basic white boxers and briefs," said Stuart Glasser, the general merchandise manager for men's wear at Bloomingdale's, which is doubling the space it devotes to men's underwear and related items at its Manhattan store.
"It's a fashion business. It's a personal-statement business. It's a casual-wear business."


Miss Hesler, Mr. Cunningham
Diane Carol Hesler, a daughter of Stephanie Slater of Godalming, Surrey, England, was married on Friday in London to Richard Butler Cunningham Jr., the son of Richard and Monique Cunningham of Troy, N.Y.
The Rev.
Ignatius Harrison performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at the Brompton Oratory.


'Forrest Gump' Tries to Turn Back Clock but Distorts Our Past; 'Being There' Revisited
To the Editor:


NEW YORKERS &amp; CO.
A Magazine Turns a Corner, Bolstered by the Cafe Boom
The Java Journal, which styles itself "Manhattan's Cafe Culture Magazine," started up last December with an initial investment of $3,000 each from Paul Millman, the publisher, and Peter Waack, the editor, and they had to underwrite the first four issues.
But with the August issue, they say, advertising revenue entirely covered printing and production costs, though they have yet to draw salaries.


Feuding Bodines Starting Side by Side
Nascar managed to get feuding brothers GEOFF and BRETT BODINE to talk and even shake hands, but the relationship remains cool going into today's Budweiser race at Watkins Glen, N.Y.
The feud became public knowledge a week ago at the Brickyard 400 in Indianapolis after a bumping incident.
It began when Geoff bumped the rear of Brett's car, then slipped around his younger brother to take the lead.
Brett came right back and whacked Geoff, sending him spinning into a concrete barrier.
Brett said of Friday's meeting arranged by Nascar, "We discussed the on-track situation of last weekend and any future ones that may develop." The two will start side by side today, 15th and 16th in the 40-car field. (AP)


Privatizing America's Prisons, Slowly
ERNEST ANDERSON, his biceps straining his blue prison fatigues, cocks back his shining bald head and smiles his gap-toothed smile as he talks about crime, punishment and private enterprise.
"I am a career criminal," Mr.
Anderson said.
Then, the 35-year-old convict goes on to describe the last decade of his life, years filled with gunplay, drug dealing and struggling, often unsuccessfully, with what he calls "my anger problem." He has spent most of those years in prison, five different ones.


Tracking Down Disease on Ships
"LEGIONELLA is widespread in water systems," said Dr.
Robert F. Breiman, one of the people who supervised the examination of Celebrity Cruises' ship Horizon for the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.
"If we cultured the cooling towers up there in New York City, we'd find Legionella in 50 percent. But the vast majority do not transmit disease. And we don't have the answer why, and right now cannot predict."
Dr.
Breiman, who is the chief of the respiratory disease epidemiology section of the C.D.C. in Atlanta, said that for that reason, testing water samples from all cruise ships for Legionella would still not detect where Legionnaires' disease might originate.


MANHATTAN UPDATE
EIGHTH STREET: Last summer, the Sixth Precinct was inundated on Monday mornings with calls from residents complaining about weekend traffic, noise and litter.
"Now the phone doesn't ring except to say how great things are," said Capt.
Peter Cassidy, executive officer of the precinct.
What made the difference, he said, were new "No Standing" signs and the closing of Eighth Street on weekends after midnight when traffic volume is high.
The signs calling for no standing from 11 P.M. to 6 A.M. were put up between Broadway and the Avenue of the Americas at the request of Community Board 2 to reduce the crowds and noise from boom-boxes, said Rita Lee, district manager.


The Japanese Also Like Eating
To the Editor:  I should like to add to Suzanne Hamlin's article on food in films by pointing our that Japanese films are (as indeed are most Japanese) singularly obsessed with food  [ "Le Grand Exces Spices Love Poems to Food," July 31 ] .


The Quality-of-Life Drive Is Nickel-and-Dime Fluff
To the Editor:
Your article fails to pay heed to the most obvious quality-of-life shortcoming of all: the city administration itself and its inability to police quality-of-life violations.


Corrections
A review of "Degrees of Disaster" in The Times Book Review last Sunday, about the 1989 oil spill in Prince William Sound on the Alaska coast, misstated the amount of oil involved.
It is now estimated above 10 million gallons and perhaps as high as 11 million gallons, not "millions of barrels." (Ten million gallons is 238,095 barrels.)


The Nation: The Odds on Health Care; Going From a Good Bet to (Maybe) Even Money
HARRIS WOFFORD is a soft-spoken, unabashedly idealistic, professorial sort of man.
When he ran for the Senate in Pennsylvania in a special election in 1991, whatever small national reputation he may once have enjoyed had long since faded.
He appeared to have little chance against Dick Thornburgh, his Republican rival, a former Governor and United States Attorney General.
But he struck political gold.
His television commercials contained one memorable sentence -- "If criminals have the right to a lawyer, I think working Americans should have the right to a doctor" -- and it melted Mr.
Thornburgh's lead like butter in August.
Mr.
Wofford won, and politicians everywhere scrambled to get on the "right" side of the health care issue, whatever that was.


The Executive Computer; New Software Helps Organize Flood of Incoming Data
MONDAY morning.
You stumble to your desk and flick on your computer.
With a cup of coffee in one hand you reach for your phone to retrieve the two dozen voice mail messages that accumulated after you left for a long weekend.
After transcribing the names and phone numbers, you turn to face the volumes of electronic mail that have arrived from both inside and outside the company.
A stack of day-old faxes clutter your in box.


Badillo Contends That the Cost Of Special Education Is Inflated
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani's special adviser on New York City school finances says the Board of Education has allowed special education and bilingual programs to develop bloated payrolls, draining money from students in regular classrooms.
The adviser, Herman Badillo, who was appointed four months ago, said that the city was doing more than the law required in providing services to special education and bilingual students and that he was assembling a team of lawyers to study alternatives.


Lakeway Loses by 7 To Jinx of Saratoga
Racing's house of upsets produced one of its biggest today when the great California filly Lakeway was outrun by seven lengths in the Alabama Stakes by Ogden Phipps's Heavenly Prize, who had not won in 10 months.
Gary Jones, the trainer of Lakeway, who became the dominant 3-year-old filly in America by winning six of her seven races, conceded that he had been tempting fate and said: "The Saratoga mystique must have gotten to her."


Fleeting Monuments of the Dispossessed on the Lower East Side
THE Glyndor Gallery, at Wave Hill, may seem an unlikely setting for street gardens improvised by the homeless.
Then again, what better context could there be for such an idea than the beautifully landscaped acres of this Riverdale estate by the Hudson?
If nothing else, the contrast indicates that gardening is one of the great levelers.
Actually, they are nests rather than gardens, and they are represented in black-and-white photographs, square in format, that were taken by Margaret Morton for a recently published book titled "Transitory Gardens, Uprooted Lives" (Yale University Press), along with text by Diana Balmori.


Theater Shuts Down, but Play Goes On
THE theater shut down, but the show went on anyway.
When the South Jersey Regional Theater ran out of money and ceased operations in May, theatergoers wondered what would become of "Calamity and Wild Bill," the new musical scheduled to open in June in its world premiere.
What happened was that it opened in July instead.


New Life Anticipated For Old Movie House
THE Scarsdale Plaza theater on Garth Road here has been vacant for nearly five years, and most passers-by have stopped peering into the darkened lobby for signs of life.
But behind the scenes interest is running high in this 72-year-old former movie house, which was once a home to silent films and vaudeville.
Two suitors view the theater as the place of their dreams, and each promises to enliven the community with entertainment, beauty and old-time fun.
Martin Hollander of the Scarsdale Plaza Amusement Corporation holds the lease from the owner, Brookside Apartments, and says he hopes to go before the Planning Board here next month for permission to open a first-run movie house with occasional live shows.
But if Mr.
Hollander's plans go astray, Earl Groner is ready to step in.


Despite Pains In East, Kohl Is First in Poll
In March, when public opinion polls showed his party so far behind that it could not possibly win general elections in October, Chancellor Helmut Kohl laughed and said that they were wrong, that he was going to win anyway.
This month, the polls are predicting that he will.
The respected Allensbach Institute, in a poll published in the daily Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung on Wednesday, said the governing coalition would win over 50 percent of the vote if the elections were held this weekend.


CHILDREN'S BOOKS
THE HOLES IN YOUR NOSE Written and illustrated by Genichiro Yagyu.
Translated by Amanda Mayer Stinchecum.
Unpaged.
Brooklyn: Kane/Miller Book Publishers. $11.95. (Ages 3 to 5)


Andrea Steinfeld and Neil Rothenberg
Andrea Carrie Steinfeld, a daughter of Ruth Steinfeld of Lynbrook, L.I., and Dr.
Philip S. Steinfeld of East Rockaway, L.I., was married last evening to Neil Harvey Rothenberg, a son of Eleanor Rothenberg of New York and the late Daniel Rothenberg.
Rabbi Eugene Lipsey performed the ceremony at the Park Lane Hotel in New York.
Mrs.
Rothenberg is a social worker in obstetrics at Bellevue Hospital Center in New York.
She graduated summa cum laude from Hunter College and received a master's degree in social work from Columbia University.
She is a stepdaughter of Sherry Steinfeld.


Daisies and Sunflowers Make the Scene
ONE day while looking at a beautiful field of golden flowers and not sure what they were, I queried a knowledgeable botanist at my side.
The response was that it was probably some kind of daisy, but "I don't do composites."
The reply was in jest, of course, but underneath was a modicum of truth.
How sad to eliminate a whole group of wonderful plants.


Corrections
An article last Sunday about quality-of-life issues in Manhattan misstated the name of a street in Inwood that has a persistent drug-trafficking problem.
It is Vermilyea, not Vermillion.


Car Sales Falter, So a Dealer Turns to Development
ENOUGH is enough, Tom Abruzzi decided.
After two straight years of poor sales at his Oldsmobile dealership on Cross Bay Boulevard in the Howard Beach section of Queens, he reached a decision.
No more Good Olds Guy for him.
"Sales dropped from 100 cars to 40 in '89 and '90," said Mr.
Abruzzi, who is 65 years old and built his Bond Motors sales, service and parts center as a general contractor in 1966.
"It was part of a general decline in sales. And the costs of operating a dealership had skyrocketed. We had to get out of the business."


Trish M. Drobner, Noel M. Spear
Trish M. Drobner, a daughter of Max Drobner of New York and the late Judith Drobner, is to be married today to Noel Matthew Spear, a son of Susan and Robert Spear of New City, N.Y.
Cantor Craig Scheff is to officiate at the Bear Mountain (N.Y.) Inn.


Ideas &amp; Trends; Kneeling at the Altar of Death: From Belief to Fanaticism
IT is an enduring paradox, how religions that teach peace can be taken by some adherents to justify acts of violence and bloodshed.
Combatants in some of the world's seemingly intractable conflicts often boldly wear their religious identities, whether in Bosnia, the Caucasus or Northern Ireland.
But in many cases, their spiritual beliefs are a minor feature in a more complicated conflict, one that turns on ethnic rivalries, a clash of national claims or economic interests.


24-Hour Trades May Yet Prove A Winning Idea
WALL Street has a wonderful ability to focus on a vision of the future, reach virtual unanimity it is important and likely to come, and then turn around and dismiss it completely when the first efforts do not pan out.
So it has been with the concept of 24-hour trading.
In the late 1980's the idea was all the rage among exchanges.
But efforts to seize off-hours business have ranged from mild successes to outright failures.


Melissa R. Hurst, R. J. Oppenheim
Melissa Robin Hurst, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Kenneth S. Hurst of Dix Hills, L.I., was married last evening to Robert Jon Oppenheim, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Jerome Oppenheim of Cleveland.
Rabbi Brooks Susman performed the ceremony at Temple Israel in Lawrence, L.I.
Mrs.
Oppenheim, 24, and her husband, 25, graduated from the University of Michigan.
She is a medical student at New York Medical College.
Her father, a nephrologist, is the medical director of the Good Samaritan Hospital Chronic Dialysis Center in Bay Shore, L.I.
Her mother, Marian Hurst, teaches English as a second language at East Kindergarten Center in Brentwood, L.I.


Rwandians in Death Squad Say Choice Was Kill or Die
Inside the Roman Catholic church here, a stone edifice with a rectangular bell tower high on a promontory jutting into Lake Kivu, several thousand Tutsi men, women and children sought sanctuary in April when killing started in their villages.
But a mob of several hundred Hutu men, some in uniforms with rifles but most in civilian clothes with clubs and machetes, had no respect for the church or for life.


U.S. Lists 25 Places That Require Insecticide
A list of 25 countries or territories that require airlines to spray insecticides aboard planes arriving from the United States has been issued by Secretary of Transportation Federico F. Pena.
Mr.
Pena said his department compiled the list and was making it public as a way of protecting travelers.
He said the department would also propose a rule requiring travelers to be notified at the time they book a flight that the plane would be sprayed.
The list of 25 places was compiled from direct government responses to inquiries and from information obtained from airlines that fly to the areas; the latter information has not been confirmed by the countries involved.
The 25 are American Samoa, Argentina, Antigua, Barbados, Belize, Cape Verde, Chile, Congo, Costa Rica, the Dominican Republic, El Salvador, Grenada, India, Kenya, Jamaica, Madagascar, Mauritius, Mexico, Mozambique, New Caledonia, Nicaragua, Seychelles, St.
Lucia, Trinidad and Tobago and Yemen.
In addition, Australia, New Zealand and Panama reported they required spraying, but left it up to the airline whether to spray the plane while empty or do it with passengers on board.
Since there is no approved spray for use in the United States, this results in spraying before arrival, while passengers are aboard.


Allison Pines, Jeffrey Wolf
Allison Pines, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Isidore Pines of Old Westbury, L.I., was married last evening to Jeffrey Wolf, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Edward Wolf of West Islip, L.I.
Rabbi Martin Zion officiated at Maxim's in New York.
Mrs.
Wolf, 28, graduated from Northwestern University.
She was until recently an associate brand manager at Hebrew National Kosher Products in the Bronx, a company founded by her grandfather Leonard Pines.
Her father is the chairman of National Foods in the Bronx, of which Hebrew National is a division.


Emtman, Past the Pain, Has a Mission in Mind
he smooth, crescent-shaped scars covering both of Steve Emtman's knees can only hint at the searing pain associated with a kneecap being wrenched from its moorings.
The scars can only provide a clue to the dark depression that engulfs a promising athlete after he has had major surgery on both of his knees in the first two years of his professional career.
And yet, one can look at Emtman's knees and sense the severe damage visited upon the Colts' young defensive lineman.


Chelsea Evenings
FOLLONICO * (212) 691-6359; 6 West 24th Street; $$; all major credit cards
An attractive Italian restaurant, with an exposed wood-burning oven, cream-colored walls, subdued lighting and neighborly tables.
Spirited Tuscan fare includes a half-dozen wood-fired pizzas with toppings like smoked tuna, capers, olives and sun dried tomatoes, or baby artichokes and wild mushrooms.
Among main courses are roasted pork chop with braised fennel; wood-roasted lamb with a balsamic vinegar reduction and basil-mashed potatoes, and whole red snapper for two roasted in a rock salt crust. (Review: 12/25/92)


Political Notes; Father's Death Sways Lautenberg on Health Care
After weeks on the White House's 10 Most Wanted List of Senate Democrats who are uncommitted on health care, Senator Frank R. Lautenberg declared his support for the majority leader's bill last week -- even as prospects for passage of health legislation grew more complicated by hang-ups in both houses of Congress.
Mr.
Lautenberg, who was one of six Democrats to vote against President Clinton's budget last year, has a reputation as a careful windsock on big votes.
His lively re-election battle against Chuck Haytaian, and New Jersey's strong pharmaceutical industry, had helped keep him on the fence.


Where the British Show Their Many Faces
AS THOUGH amused by all the fuss about his posthumously uncovered skulduggery, Robert Maxwell, half laughing, glances casually at me.
Next to him, Lord Mountbatten, an overwhelming and stern presence, stares directly, almost challengingly, until I lower my eyes.
The self-made publishing magnate, born Jan Ludwig Hoch in Eastern Europe, is an unexpected companion to the last Viceroy of India, aristocratic friend of princes.
In a few steps, I find myself among a crowd of politicians.
Anthony Eden, standing with square shoulders in front of a brocaded screen, looks vigorous and dapper.
Harold Macmillan, however, is a disillusioned old man with wrinkled skin and thinning hair, lids almost closed over his eyes.
Alec Douglas-Home, also old, seems much cheerier.
Informally dressed for a day in the country, he has brought along a fishing pole and his favorite retriever.
I notice others nearby whose names, if not always faces, I know: Winston Churchill, Edward Heath, Clement Attlee, Aneurin Bevan, Hugh Gaitskell, Harold Wilson.
I wish I could hear what they are saying to each other.


Where Mozart Goes on Vacation
IT IS opening night, three hours before curtain at Quisisana, a summer resort in western Maine, and Randy L. Braunberger has butterflies.
The source of Mr.
Braunberger's anxiety is not his role as Henry Higgins in "My Fair Lady," this summer's featured production.
It is the 70 orders of roast halibut (with a compote of tomato and rosemary served with orzo and toasted pine nuts) and the 45 orders of grilled chicken breast (with sesame cucumbers served over rice noodles) that Mr.
Braunberger, the resort's Paris-trained chef, must prepare for dinner.
Once Mr.
Braunberger finishes in the kitchen, he will toss off his white tunic, smear on some greasepaint, don a houndstooth blazer and transform himself into the proper professor who, in turn, transforms Eliza Doolittle.


You Call That Music?
HOLE IN OUR SOUL The Loss of Beauty and Meaning  in American Popular Music.
By Martha Bayles. 453 pp.
New York: The Free Press. $24.95.


Jets' Offense Shows Flashes of Brilliance
It was just the second preseason game and certainly nothing anyone could hang their regular season on, but the Jets' offense showed some signs of being imaginative, entertaining and, at times, explosive against the Philadelphia Eagles tonight.
Is it a harbinger of better things or just a preseason aberration? Stay tuned.


A French Director Straight Out of (Enfin) Spike Lee
THERE WAS NO CHANCE of not recognizing Mathieu Kassovitz.
Skinhead haircut, stubbly beard, a red knapsack on his back, a Walkman attached to his ears, the 26-year-old director rolled up for a meeting in a 16th arrondissement brasserie on a mountain bike, looking just like Felix Lokcinski, the part he plays in his first feature film, "Cafe Au Lait," which opens on Friday.
Not that the film, which Mr.
Kassovitz also wrote, is autobiographical.
It tells the story of Lola, a caramel-colored young Catholic woman from Martinique, who is double-dating a poor Jewish delivery boy and a wealthy Muslim law student from Africa.
When she becomes pregnant, she informs them she cannot tell which man is the father until she sees the color of the baby.
In the meantime, she asks, get along.


Can Advocate Answer Important Question?
"Campaigner for Ordaining Female Priests"  [ July 17 ]  was an interview of Eileen McMahon of the Long Island National Women's Ordination Conference.
One question posed by the interviewer and the response to it causes me concern, and perhaps suggests at least one reason why the question of the ordination of women is, indeed, neither a matter of feminism nor justice.
"Is the critical difference between a priest and other religious vocations the power to turn bread and wine into the symbolic body and blood of Christ?" (Emphasis mine.) Ms.
McMahon responded to the question put to her, but in no way did she come close to addressing or correcting the far more important issue that was raised.


All in the Family (Great Neck Version)
FOR 17 years Millie's Place has been a Great Neck standby.
In the past, the pretty plant-filled American bistro responded to trendy new foods by adding them to its menu.
There were 79 entree possibilities listed at a midwinter meal.
They included a smoked turkey salad and a veal meatball hero.
Among the other international choices were fettuccine with smoked salmon, bouillabaisse, grilled shrimp teriyaki, chicken pot pie and a vegetable combination of mixed-vegetable-and-spinach cakes.
When sun-kissed Mediterranean food became the rage, Millie Gubbins, the owner, took a new tack.
Instead of adding a page to the already voluminous menu, she split the restaurant in two.
Half remains Millie's Place.
The rest is My Mediterranean Cousin, with its own chef and menu.


Susan Heuisler and Thomas McCabe
Susan Mary Heuisler, a daughter of Judith and Charles Heuisler of Cherry Hill, N.J., was married yesterday to Thomas Allan McCabe, the son of Dorothy and Donald McCabe of South Orange, N.J.
The Rev.
Edwin Leahy officiated at St.
Colman's Roman Catholic Church in Ardmore, Pa.
Mrs.
McCabe and her husband, both 25, graduated from Princeton University.
She is an inventory-control buyer in New York for the J. Crew Group, the clothing manufacturer.
Her father is a partner in Archer &amp; Greiner, a law firm in Haddonfield, N.J.
Her mother is a fund-raising director at St.
Joseph's Preparatory School in Philadelphia.


Audrey H. Lewis, Adam R. Belkin
Audrey Heather Lewis, a daughter of Margaret K. Geller of Allendale, N.J., and Edward S. Lewis of Peekskill, N.Y., was married last evening to Adam R. Belkin, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Lawrence Belkin of Freehold, N.J.
Rabbi Philip Schechter officiated at the Rye Town Hilton in Rye Brook, N.Y.
Mrs.
Belkin, 28, is a product manager at the Hartz Mountain Corporation, the pet-supply company in Harrison, N.J.
She graduated from Cornell University and is studying for an M.B.A. at Pace University.
Her father is the senior vice president at Burlington House Area Rugs in New York.
Her mother teaches English at Lincoln High School in Yonkers.


Artists Commandeer A Ukrainian Battleship
IT WAS LIGHT-YEARS FROM SOCIALIST REALISM.
For two days last month, a battleship docked at this port city on the Black Sea was transformed into a daring and provocative post-Soviet art gallery.
Ten of Ukraine's leading artists took over the Slavutich, the Ukrainian Navy's flagship, billing the event as an escape from the tensions that have arisen between Ukraine and Russia over what to do with the jointly owned Black Sea Fleet.
A Russian theater group with the idea of turning a warship into an art happening approached Marta Kuzma, an American of Ukrainian descent who left the International Center for Photography in New York last year to direct George Soros's Center for Contemporary Arts in Kiev.
Commanders of both Russian and Ukrainian ships proved curiously open to the project, but only the Ukrainians were prepared to open their ship without restrictions.


'To Hell With Moe Berg!'
To the Editor:
Every once in a great while, you read a review that moves you to run out and buy not only the book reviewed but the reviewer's book as well.
That's what happened when I finished Dick Teresi's most entertaining piece on "The Catcher Was a Spy." I never dreamed my summer reading list would include "The God Particle," a book to do with -- arrrgh! -- physics.
MARY-ANN TIRONE SMITH  Ridgefield, Conn.


At a Burundi Market, Business as Usual After a Deadly Attack
In Bujumbura's cavernous central market, Gervais Ngendakumana and his neighboring merchant and friend, Jacques Safari, reopened their stalls today for the first time since the grenade exploded inches away two days ago, killing two people, wounding a dozen more and sending panic throughout this tense city.
"I can't stay at home because of this incident," Mr.
Ngendakumana said as he unpacked dozens of Western-style dresses from a huge metal chest and arranged them on hangers before suspending them from the latticework that serves as the shop roof.


[ APPEARANCES ] ; War Paint
IT'S SATURDAY NIGHT IN alphabet Land, and sounds from the album "Brand New Heavies" are pounding through a converted loft.
The amateur anthropologist is standing in a bathtub taking notes as Bekah and her friends are putting on makeup, getting ready to go out.
The anthropologist is testing a theory that while the original purpose of makeup may have been to render the female more attractive to the opposite sex, it has evolved far beyond that primitive impulse, into a vast array of products and rules, whose primary focus is not the male (who is generally incapable of appreciating the distinction of a smudge of cocoa brown versus a swath of frosted blue) but the female, for whom such variations are clues to tribal identity.
Or, makeup as the hidden language of women.


Little Damage Is Expected From Plot Suspect's Shift
After learning that a defendant's cooperation with the Government in a terrorism conspiracy case had ended, lawyers for the other suspects said yesterday that they did not think he had seriously damaged their cause.
The lawyers said it was possible that the informer, Siddig Ibrahim Siddig Ali, had hurt some of the other defendants by tying up loose ends in the prosecution's case in what it calls a campaign to bomb New York City landmarks.
But they said it was more likely he had undermined information previously provided to the Government by its undercover operative.


They'll Always Have Auckland
DANGEROUS DESIRES  By Peter Wells. 220 pp. New York: Viking. $20.95.


Deciding Who Lives And Dies in Rwanda
To the Editor:
Re "Rwanda's Lottery of Life And Death" (The Week in Review, July 31): Doctors who practice in the United States rarely have to deal with the problem of whom to choose for treatment when confronted with an overwhelming number of seriously injured and ill patients.
Dr.
Nimet Lillani, the physician in the orphanage outside of Goma, Zaire, says, "They all deserve an equal chance."


BECAUSE OF THE STORIES
In "Why Do Catholics Stay in the Church? Because of the Stories" (July 10), Andrew M. Greeley's point seems to be that Catholicism's naive charm is a harmless indulgence, suitable for the servants, immigrants and those who like that sort of thing.


Excerpts From the Debate in the Senate on Health Care Legislation
Following are excerpts from statements made yesterday on the Senate floor in the fifth day of debate over the health care bill, as transcribed by The New York Times from a broadcast on C-Span: STATEMENT BY SENATOR COHEN
In the fall of 1992 Senator Dole, Senator Chafee, myself and several others approached the majority with a list of what we called 11 points of commonality between Republican and Democratic proposals.
And we met with the majority leader's task force on more than one occasion to press for these reforms, on which there was broad-based bipartisan agreement.
And they were significant steps that we believe could and should immediately slow the growth of health care costs and increase access to quality health care for millions of Americans.
And frankly, Mr.
President, we were rebuffed.
We were told that the reforms were not comprehensive enough and anything short of comprehensive reform would not do.


No Headline
"There's certain things in life that there's only one of. There's only one Love Canal. There's only one Elvis. And there's only one Woodstock." MARIE RICE.  [ 42:1. ]


Boy, 13, Drowns at Beach in Coney Island
A 13-year-old boy drowned yesterday during an afternoon at the beach in Coney Island, the police said.
Lifeguards pulled the boy, identified as Rocky Velez of 1569 West Third Street in Brooklyn, out of the water around 5:20 P.M. and tried to revive him, said Sgt.
James Coleman, a police spokesman.


The Sad Value of Max's Dime
WHEN I was nine years old, I overheard my mother and father talking about a man, a friend of theirs, who had been sentenced to life in prison for murdering another man.
This friend, I'll call him Max, shot his victim at the neighborhood barber shop in Los Angeles in a dispute over a dime wager in a back-room craps game.
"Max asked him for his money," I remember my father saying, almost proudly.
"And when he didn't get it, he shot him dead."


SUNDAY, August 14, 1994; A Fable for Fleas
On a podium in front of Independence Hall in Philadelphia last month, the President of the Czech Republic, Vaclav Havel, gave a remarkable speech.
He declared that the world, for its political survival, must find a new, shared system of transcendent values to replace the traditional religious beliefs that science has eroded.
And he proposed to derive this new value system from a surprising source -- science itself.
It's rare enough to hear a politician talk about transcendent values, rarer still one willing to lay out a plan for developing a new universal system.
And it's especially notable that this man, who spent his life resisting one system that claimed universal validity, should seek so soon after the death of Communism to erect another.
If his high arc above the mundane proves less than fully satisfying, it's because the scientific ideas he selected for his oracle have more elegance than substance.


No Diapers Or Food? Mothers Find Help
NORTH PORCH, on Rector Street here, might best be described as a special kind of emergency room.
The waiting area is full of comfortable couches and chairs, and in the storage room the shelves are stocked with baby supplies.
The "patients," mothers who have got to the end of the week or month and have no money for diapers or baby food for their infants and toddlers, get immediate help.
Since 1984, North Porch has provided the emergency assistance to thousands.


Astronaut Lands at Museum, Leaving Children Starry-Eyed
AS densely packed as stars in the Milky Way, a line of autograph seekers cut a wide swath across the courtyard of the Hudson River Museum here one recent afternoon, as hundreds waited in the heat to shake the freckled hand of an astronaut, Charles E. Brady.
The occasion, called Astronaut Training Day at the museum, marked the 25th anniversary of two events: the landing of American astronauts on the moon and the opening of the museum's Andrus Planetarium.


Advertising's Role in Health Care
AS competition for patients among Westchester's hospitals grows, so do those institutions' budgets for advertising.
And while some observers of the health-care scene worry that critical dollars are being diverted from patients' bedsides, others argue that aggressive marketing has become an economic necessity in light of the sea changes taking place in medicine and the delivery of health care.
"It's part of an industry shakedown happening all across America, and Westchester is no exception," said Arthur E. Weintraub, president of the Northern Metropolitan Hospitals Association in Newburgh, a nonprofit organization representing 40 hospitals in the Hudson Valley.
"Advertising is a valid attempt on the part of hospitals to convey their mission in today's world."


Howe's Pinstripes Have the Union Label
Fifteen days ago, when the Players Association set last Friday as its strike date, silent Steve Howe suddenly turned into the David Gergen of the Yankees.
Howe had shunned most reporters all season because of a lawsuit he has against The New York Post, but he reverted to being the energized Howe.
He was emotional and provided nifty sound bites and bombastic remarks.
Was Howe's reaction sincere or staged?
Was he being silly or shrewd?
With Howe, one of the more animated personalities in baseball, the answer is never simply black and white.
Shades of gray always peek into any answers or any composites involving Howe.
He is different.
He throws hard, 92 miles per hour.
He has lived hard, seven suspensions from the major leagues because of drug violations.
And he still acts hard, intimidation is his forte.


Jennifer Stahl, James Finnerty 3d
Jennifer Lynn Stahl, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Curt Stahl of Scarsdale, N.Y., is to be married today in Tarrytown, N.Y., to James J. Finnerty 3d, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Finnerty Jr. of Lincroft, N.J.
Cantor Raymond Smolover is to officiate at the Tarrytown House.
Vincent Heidenreich, a deacon of the Roman Catholic church, will take part in the interfaith ceremony.
The bride, 28, is a management intern, in West Haven, Conn., for the pharmaceutical division of Miles Inc., a chemical and pharmaceutical company.
She and the bridegroom graduated from Johns Hopkins University, from which he also received a master's degree in international relations.
She received an M.B.A. from Fordham University.
Her father is the president of Stahl Research Laboratories, a robotics engineering firm in Elmsford, N.Y.
Her mother, Sylvia Stahl, is a mathematics teacher at Intermediate School 181 in the Bronx.


Mediators Meet With Both Sides In Strike
Maybe this is where angels fear to tread, but a Federal mediation team plunged into the baseball players strike yesterday four-strong.
While the second day of the strike forced cancellation of a second set of 14 games and the realization that the summer game is not being played, the mediation team met separately with labor representatives of the owners and the players.


Play It Again, Stefan, in Another Final
After an out-of-character victory by the defending champion, Michael Chang, second-seeded Stefan Edberg played to form in beating third-seeded Michael Stich, 6-2, 7-6 (8-6), last night to set up a rematch of last year's final at the Thriftway ATP Championship.
Edberg produced his best at the end, rallying from a 5-1 deficit in the tie breaker and saving two set points in the process to reach the final of the hardcourt tournament for the sixth time.


Old-World Gym, Minus the Bloomers
In 1910, at the Bohemian Hall gym in Astoria, Czech women in bloomers and stockings with white blouses and red neckties stood in rows, clutching at their toes and grasping for the ceiling, bending and stretching through a regimen of calisthenics that they called gymnastics.
Czech men in long blue pants and T-shirts tossed medicine balls or climbed ropes, mounted the horses or swung on the parallel bars.
Much has changed since Sokol, the Czech gymnastics society, arrived in the United States in 1865, in particular gymnastics itself.
But the sport is still the premier activity at Bohemian Hall, as it has been since the building opened 84 years ago.


Another View on the Yen's Rise
To the Editor:
If a dim possibility of political reform and an increase in trade surplus are the major causes of the recent dramatic appreciation of the yen, it seems to contradict the fact that the Japanese Government had never been more ready to reform than after the fall of the Liberal Democratic Party in 1992, the same period the yen rose 25 percent against the dollar ("Who Controls the Yen? Just Japan," Viewpoints, July 24).
Furthermore, Japan's increasing trade surplus has more to do with the appreciating yen than any underlying policy change in recent years.
Japan is not any more of an export-oriented country now than in the 1980's.
As recession arrived in Japan, however, companies restructured, slowed the recycling of overseas profit and slowed overseas expansion.
There was a decline in overseas investment by Japan, which certainly increased demand for the yen and drove up its price.
That may be one of the causes of its recent appreciation.


Daisies and Sunflowers Make the Scene
ONE day while looking at a beautiful field of golden flowers and not sure what they were, I queried a knowledgeable botanist at my side.
The response was that it was probably some kind of daisy, but "I don't do composites."
The reply was in jest, of course, but underneath was a modicum of truth.
How sad to eliminate a whole group of wonderful plants.


D. M. Goldstock, Douglas E. Ringel
Deborah Michelle Goldstock and Douglas Eric Ringel, graduates of Cornell University and the University of Michigan Law School, were married last evening at Anabel Taylor Hall at Cornell in Ithaca, N.Y.
Rabbi Larry Edwards officiated.
The bride, 25, is an assistant district attorney in Manhattan.
She is a daughter of Ronald Goldstock of Larchmont, N.Y., and Lori Henry of Mamaroneck, N.Y.
Her father is the director of the New York State Organized Crime Task Force in White Plains.
Her mother is an independent fund-raiser for movie and television projects.


Cheryl B. Cohen and Jeffrey L. Snow
Cheryl Beth Cohen, a daughter of Dorothy and Dr.
Harvey Cohen of Needham, Mass., is to be married today to Jeffrey Louis Snow, the son of Barbara and Stephen Snow of New City, N.Y.
Rabbi Michael Menitoff is to officiate at Temple Mishkan Tefila in Chestnut Hill, Mass.
The bride, 25, graduated from the University of Pennsylvania and received a law degree from Suffolk University in May.
Her father is the director of Cambridge Technical Associates, consultants and expert witnesses for legal cases, in Needham.
Her mother is the office manager there.


But What About the Children?
VICKY B. knew her sons were in danger when they just took out their coloring books and watched as their father beat her.
"They were doing very poorly in school. They always fought. They were always in trouble," she said, asking that her last name be withheld to protect her sons' privacy.
"When I realized it was affecting my children, I put him out."


What's Wrong With a Voluntary Health Plan; No Retreat in Europe
To the Editor:
In "Unfair to Pizza Hut" (letter, July 30), John A. McCulloch states that "the Health Care Reform Project and its supporters distort the truth in an attempt to lead us down the path from which many European countries are retreating."


FALLING FOR IT
John Tierney's article "Falling for It" (The Big City, July 17) was hilarious.
Joey Skaggs is a modern-day Till Eulenspiegel whose impact on society probably exceeds that of Ralph Nader.
As Skaggs says, "These special interest groups are screamers, and the media listen to screamers."


Corruption Charges Force Top Polish Police Officers to Quit
Already saddled with one of Eastern Europe's fastest growing crime rates, Polish law-enforcement officials now have to contend with a new problem: law-enforcement officials.
The arrest in July of Mieczyslaw Grzybowski, head of the white-collar-crime division in Poznan, was just the latest scandal involving high-ranking police officials, prosecutors and judges.
If convicted, Mr.
Grzybowski, accused of accepting "very substantial bribes," faces 15 years in prison.


What's All the Rhubarb?
To the Editor:
I queried Book Review readers for material for my biography of Thurgood Marshall.
I received correspondence from eight people, all of whom offered information that was valuable to me.
Three respondents offered photographs that were available only through them.
My book, tentatively titled "Mr. Civil Rights," will be published next year.
NANCY WHITELAW  Jamestown, N.Y.


Business Diary
COMPANIES Peat Marwick Settles S.&amp; L. Charges, and U.S. Keeps Hunting
The folks at KPMG Peat Marwick, the nation's fourth-largest accounting firm, got something they understand last week: a number.
Dogged like other accountants by uncertain liability for audits of failed savings and loan institutions, the firm settled Federal charges over the crisis for $186.5 million -- a tab of $116,563 for each partner.
The payment, mostly covered by insurance, is "an intelligent business decision," said Jon C. Madonna, the firm's chief, and the deal did add up nicely when compared to some other Federal S.&amp; L. settlements by the Big Six.
But the Government's figures are pretty nice, too.
Federal agencies have collected $2 billion from accountants, lawyers and other professionals from the S.&amp; L. debacle -- half from four big accounting firms.
"And the program is still young," a Government spokesman said, with hope.
The payments are funneled to institutions made insolvent by the S.&amp; L. crisis.
At P.&amp; .G, Profit Follows Flub
The lesson may be to stick to soap.
Tarnished by a $102 million loss in its third quarter from bad derivatives investments, Procter &amp; Gamble regained some shine last week, announcing net earnings of $406 million in its fourth quarter.
At 56 cents a share -- up 12 cents from the comparable quarter last year, excluding adjustments -- the results impressed analysts and spurred P.&amp; G.'s chief, Edwin L. Artzt, to write the tale's epitome.
"This was a good year," he said, "and if not for the derivatives it would have been a great year." Even more notable: P.&amp; G. achieved its results despite sales not much higher than a year ago.
Internet: New Way to Spend!
Credit card issuers rejoiced last week when some young, intrepid entrepreneurs successfully conducted the first secure retail transaction on the Internet, the global computer network.
"Secure" is the key word; without a practical way to keep credit card numbers confidential, businesses will balk at turning the Internet into a major marketplace.
Using a scrambling technique known as data encryption, though, tiny Net Market Company of Nashua, N.H., has solved the problem.
And what was the pioneering purchase?
A compact disk, "Ten Summoners' Tales," by rock musician Sting.
Price: $12.48 plus shipping.
Disney Turns Interactive
Built on imagination, the Disney company had nonetheless envisioned little future for itself on the information superhighway.
Until last week, that is, when the company announced a venture with three Baby Bells -- Ameritech, BellSouth and Southwestern Bell -- to offer video services to homes.
The venture is still vague, with no word on how ownership or profits will be split, but the Bells' reach to 50 million customers in 19 states makes the deal's potential broad.
That is, if Michael Eisner, Disney's chairman, has really discarded his well-known disdain for the superhighway and believes, as Tinkerbell would surely hope.
Valdez Catch: $287 Million
About 10,000 Alaskan fishermen reeled in nearly $287 million in damages from Exxon last week, courtesy of a Federal jury deliberating over the Valdez oil spill of 1989.
But the compensatory award was much closer to Exxon's damage estimate of $113 million than to the fishermen's $895 million goal -- and that's how the paid parties saw it.
"It's not what I wanted," said the plaintiffs' lead lawyer.
But it's not over till it's over, and the jury in Anchorage will next consider whether Exxon should pay punitive damages for the mishap.
The plaintiffs are asking for a whopper: $15 billion.
INTERNATIONAL Rockwell, Russia in Air Plan
Faster and safer are an odd mix in the world of transportation, but that's what Rockwell International and Russia's aviation-research agency expect from their plan to modernize the nation's air-traffic control system.
Announced in Moscow last week, the project will eventually trim hours from flights between the United States and the Far East, and enhance safety by enabling planes near or over Russia to rely upon both Russian and American navigational satellites.
True, it's yet one more story about the cold war's demise, but there's a kicker.
Rockwell is getting $4.7 million in financing -- from the Defense Department.
For Kenneth A. Medlin, a Rockwell executive vice president, the deal represents "defense conversion at its very best." China Lands a Boeing Deal
When Boeing announced it would invest $100 million in a Chinese plant to make the tail sections of its most popular plane -- the 737 -- the reasons were several and self-evident.
One, China is a big Boeing fan, with 52 of the nation's 79 plane purchases last year coming from the Seattle manufacturer.
Two, China is looming ever larger on Boeing's ledgers, with 14 percent of the company's 1994 deliveries destined for that fast-emerging market.
And three, Boeing competitors Airbus Industrie and McDonnell Douglas are also energetically investing in China and chatting up the Chinese.
Uncounted was Wichita, Kan., where the 737 tail sections are currently made.
But to union complaints that last week's deal hurts American workers, Boeing just pointed to reasons 1, 2 and 3.
THE ECONOMY Greenspan's Secret: Stories
How do Alan Greenspan and his Federal Reserve colleagues divine where inflation is headed?
Complex computer models?
Reams of statistics?
Forecasting formulas?
In part, yes, Mr.
Greenspan told Congress last week, but there are also . . . stories.
The Federal Reserve chairman used a dressed-up phrase, "detailed readings of firm behavior," but he essentially meant stories -- stories from companies, trade groups and others about rising prices.
Changes in the American economy and statistics' assumptions about economic relationships makes mere data insufficient for decision making, Mr.
Greenspan said.
Prices Up, Sales Down, Be Wary
Alan Greenspan's reliance on stories (see above) was vindicated last week, when the Government's July figures for producer prices and retail sales were released -- and at once were labeled misleading.
Producer or "finished goods" prices rose half a percentage point, but the rise came mainly from coffee and gasoline prices, not from the prices that make the inflation-wary Federal Reserve snap to.
And while retail sales fell one-tenth of a percentage point in July, the drop did not mean consumers wanted to buy less.
It just mirrored auto makers' difficulty in restocking car lots that buyers had picked clean last spring.
Fittingly, the deceptive data just "adds to the ambiguity" of whether the Fed will raise interest rates, said one economist.
Companies Tapped for Wiretaps
The electronic frontier needs sheriffs like any other, and the F.B.I. says bills introduced in Congress last week will give it the technological draw on cyberspace bandits.
Under the proposals, telephone and cable companies must alter their networks to make wiretapping easier, and they will get $500 million in Federal money to pay for the modifications.
Company executives were reluctant to be deputies in the deal, however; one testified that $500 million is "severely underestimated." The true costs are "very, very difficult" to come by, agreed the F.B.I. director, Louis J. Freeh.
But, he warned, "I certainly know what the cost of not proceeding will be." Info Highway: No Traffic Jam?
It all depends.
That's the answer to the commercially pressing question of how many people ride the Internet, the global computer network.
Cyberspace demographers often say 20 million to 30 million, but when Network Wizards, of Menlo Park, Calif., counted 3.2 million computers on the Internet in a survey last week, doubts arose.
Not over the machines, but over how many people use each of them.
About 10 people per machine is a common assumption; it underpins the 20 million to 30 million estimate.
But some revisionists now say 3.5 people per machine, and some say 5 to 10.
Riding on it all: how many potential buyers pass by the electronic storefronts that businesses are now scrambling to build.


Amanda O. Barad, Paul D. Morgan
Amanda Oberon Barad, the daughter of Elizabeth Barad of New York and the late Dr.
Martin Barad, is to be married today in Brooklyn to Paul David Morgan, a son of Heather Morgan Thomas of Rhyd Lewis, Wales, and the late John Thomas.
The Rev.
Eugene S. Callander, a Presbyterian minister, is to perform the ceremony at the Brooklyn Botanic Garden.
The bride graduated magna cum laude from New York University and is an associate at the Golden Casting Company in New York.
Her first marriage ended in divorce.


'Forrest Gump' Tries to Turn Back Clock but Distorts Our Past
To the Editor:
Re "It's 'Forrest Gump' vs. Harrumph" (The Week in Review, July 31): And I thought I was the only anti-Gump grump.


Rothenberg Wins in Bitter Election
ALAN ROTHENBERG, who headed this summer's World Cup, survived a bitter campaign to win re-election yesterday as the president of the United States Soccer Federation.
Rothenberg won another four-year term at the federation's annual general meeting in San Diego when he defeated the unit's treasurer, RICHARD GROF, on the second ballot. (AP)


State Continues to Study Toxic Site, and Greenlawn Is Upset
SINCE April, when they received a letter from the State Environmental Conservation Department informing them that part of the Hazeltine Corporation property in Greenlawn had been listed in Class 2 of the Registry of Hazardous Waste Disposal Sites, neighbors of the company have been concerned.
The environmental department said it had found high levels of contaminants in wells that monitor ground water at the site.
Class 2, the letter said, "means that a significant threat to the public health or environment exists, and action is required."


South Korea Sees North's Move as Helpful
Long distrustful of its neighbor to the north, South Korea reacted positively but cautiously today to what analysts here called a surprisingly broad agreement reached in Geneva by the United States and North Korea.
Government officials and analysts here said that while the accord could defuse tensions on the Korean peninsula, it might end up being only another in a series of seemingly promising agreements made by North Korea that are never carried out.
The South Koreans also said the agreement in Geneva failed to explicitly address one of South Korea's central concerns: that there be inspections of nuclear sites in North Korea in an attempt to determine whether it already has nuclear weapons.


Not to Mention The Italians
To the Editor:  How about Luchino Visconti's 1963 masterpiece "The Leopard"?
In this film, which is articulated and relies on (like the novel) a series of great scenes, each in its way a grand tableau, food often ritualizes and mediates the text.
KARL-LUDWIG SELIG New York


SNET and Its Union, Tennis and 2,500 Jobs
IS a public utility company justified in paying eight tennis players a half million dollars for a three-day exhibition in New Haven when it is in the process of eliminating 2,500 jobs in the state?
No, say officials of the union that represents most of Connecticut's telephone company workers, but, yes, says a spokesperson for the Southern New England Telecommunications Corporation, better known as SNET.


Price, Still the P.G.A. Leader, Is No Longer a Sure Thing
A predictable thing happened on the way to Nick Price's coronation as golf's undisputed king today at the P.G.A.
Championship.
A golf tournament broke out.
Price, who began the day with a five-stroke lead, found himself stuck in neutral.
He shot an even-par round of 70 and the rest of the field closed in to set up what could be a frantic final-round chase here at Southern Hills Country Club.
After finishing the day exactly where he started it, at 8 under par, Price goes into Sunday's final round with a three-stroke lead over Jay Haas and a four-stroke advantage over Corey Pavin and Phil Mickelson.


One Person's Recycling Bin Is Another's Newsstand


Judith A. McLean, Frederick Jubitz 3d
Judith Adrienne McLean, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Vincent R. McLean of Westfield, N.J., was married yesterday to Frederick Albert Jubitz 3d, the son of Eleanor Jubitz of Ridgewood, N.J., and the late Mr.
Jubitz Jr.
The Rev.
Dr.
Howard M. Fish, a minister of the United Church of Christ, officiated at the Adirondack Community Church in Lake Placid, N.Y.
The Rev.
Eric Zimmer, a Roman Catholic priest, took part in the ceremony.
The bride, 30, is keeping her name.
She graduated from the University of Michigan and received a master's degree in management from Northwestern University.
Until recently, she was an associate director at Barclays de Zoete Wedd Securities in New York.
Her father retired as the executive vice president and chief financial officer of the Sperry Corporation in New York.


SUNDAY, August 14, 1994; World's Worst Cuisine?
Chinese food, movie popcorn, Mexican food -- the Center for Science in the Public Interest has been slamming them all recently, mostly for the fat content.
Do ordinary citizens know what's bad for them?
A spontaneous, unscientific telephone poll of 25 people produced some information of unknown reliability.
It suggests that one message is getting through loud and clear -- fat is bad.
Asked what kind of food is worst for your health, the respondents chose, in order, American fast food -- 5; Mexican -- 4; Southern/soul food -- 4; Eastern European -- 2; all American food -- 2, and 1 each for Cajun, Lithuanian, Salvadoran, whatever is greasiest, German, French, Russian and undecided.


Worldwide Plaza: Progress and Promises Unmet
Even for the frenzied 1980's, Worldwide Plaza was a daring venture.
There was its size: a $650 million office-apartment-retail complex occupying an entire block.
Even riskier was its location -- the old Madison Square Garden site vacated two decades prior -- on the wrong side of Eighth Avenue in a Hell's Kitchen striving to be known as Clinton.
But boldest of all was its promise: that it would push midtown's frontier westward and revive a lagging neighborhood.


SUNDAY, August 14, 1994; The Lawn Museum
If mowing, fertilizing and aerating the grass don't wear you out, try the Mascaro/Steiniger Turfgrass Museum, which opens this month at Penn State in University Park, Pa.
The museum exhibits not lawns, but equipment.
Among the highlights are:
A Toro tractor similar to one Arnold Palmer rode in old Penzoil television commercials.


If You Film It There, the Tourists Will Surely Come
FILMING OF "THE BRIDGES OF Madison County," starring Clint Eastwood, will not start until the beginning of September, but already the denizens of Madison County, Iowa, have their doors, hearts and tills open.
The best-selling novel on which the film is based has been a boon for this quaint and stately region of south central Iowa, which has come to enjoy a cult popularity heretofore reserved for Graceland and the grassy knoll.
But with the arrival of Hollywood, the residents of Winterset (pop. 4,200), the county seat, are looking forward to a further economic boom.
Given the experiences of other small towns that have served as locations for movies like "A River Runs Through It" (Bozeman, Mont.) and "Field of Dreams" (Dyersville, Iowa), Winterset can only hope that tourists will come with cameras, maps and money long after the production's last Winnebago has fled down Route 169.


Finnish Folk Music With a Texas Twist
IN 1971 Philip Page, a lifelong resident of Austin, Tex., heard a band from Finland called Wig-Wam.
He caught Finnish fever, later moved there and founded a company, Hoedown, to export Finnish music.
"They needed me, and I needed them," he said.
"The Finns are very reserved and don't like to promote themselves; they just want to play their music. I saw an opportunity to make something happen."
On Wednesday night at The Fez, two bands will be playing together as the Finnish Fever Tour '94: the Maria Kalaniemi Band and JPP.
Ms.
Kalaniemi is on her first United States tour, and JPP (Jarvelan Pikkupelimannit, which means Little Fiddlers of Jarvela) on their second.


The Inside Story


Coming Soon to East 15th Street: A Kosher Youth Hostel
As a center of Jewish culture, New York City attracts hundreds of Jewish youths from across the United States and around the world every year.
Feeling that there is a need to give the youths a more fulfilling experience during their stay, Rabbi David A. Cohen, president of the Jewish Youth Renaissance in Midwood, Brooklyn, plans to open the first Kosher youth hostel in the city.


In Osaka Bay, Spectacular Effects On a Human Scale
IT MAY FINALLY HAVE HAPPENED an airport that is as important a piece of monumental architecture as the great train stations.
That it should have been built in Japan, a country that never had any great train stations to speak of and where civic pride in transportation has always been a matter of efficiency, not monumentality, merely adds a level of paradox to this unusual project, which would have been startling enough anywhere.
For the new Kansai International Airport, scheduled to open Sept. 4, was built on a 1,300-acre man-made island two miles out in Osaka Bay.
It was designed by Renzo Piano, the Italian architect who first came to public attention through his design, with Richard Rogers, for the Centre Beaubourg in Paris.
The airport has been somewhat controversial as a work of engineering, given that the island took five years to construct, ate up at least $4 billion of the project's total $14 billion cost, and as soon as it was finished began to sink.


Yesim A. Akun, Michael Roth
Yesim Ayse Akun, a daughter of Handan Akun of Istanbul, Turkey, and the late Dr.
Faruk Akun, is to be married today to Michael David Roth, a son of Joan and Irving Roth of Trenton.
Rabbi Bernard Perelmuter is to officiate at the Mill Race Inn in Holland, Pa.
The bride, 26, graduated from Smith College and received a master's degree in international finance from Brandeis University.
She is a securities analyst at Lehman Brothers in New York.
Her father was the head of the industrial engineering department at Istanbul Technical University, where her mother retired as an instructor of English language and literature.


Bookshelf
LIFELINES: A Poetry Anthology Patterned on the Stages of Life.
Selected and introduced by Leonard S. Marcus.
Dutton. $15.99. (Ages 12 and up) A collection of some 80 poems, mostly American, many contemporary, addresses the life cycle from birth to death.
Interesting biographical sketches of the poets.
EVE AND HER SISTERS: Women of the Old Testament.
By Yona Zeldis McDonough.
Illustrated by Malcah Zeldis.
Greenwillow. $15. (Ages 5 and up) Here are large, primitive-style portraits of 14 memorable women from Eve to Esther, and stories of their lives and deeds.


Aug. 7-13; Another Round in the Telephone Wars
FIRST came telephones and telephone books, and then came unlisted numbers.
Soon, if Nynex has its way, there will be a new twist: the company will deliver taped messages to unlisted numbers.
And there will be another service that lets people with unlisted numbers block the unsolicited messages.


CRIME BILL DISCORD GROWS AS CLINTON AND G.O.P. CLASH
President Clinton and Congressional Republicans stepped up their fighting over the scope of any resurrected crime bill today.
Mr.
Clinton insisted that central elements of the bill that was defeated by the House in a procedural vote on Thursday remain intact, while the Republicans called for a major overhaul.
In tense tussling over how to reshape the bill, the two sides clashed in particular over its assault weapons ban.


Black American Artists In Paris and Beyond
Sites in Paris and Nice identified with black American writers and artists will be the focus of a tour offered Sept. 16 to 29.
The tour, called Black Paris Plus, will include three walks designed for the group by Dr.
Michel Fabre, author of "The Unfinished Work of Richard Wright," who also founded the African-American Studies Center at the Sorbonne.
Dr.
Fabre has planned walks through Montparnasse and the Latin Quarter in Paris and on the Riviera, visiting sites linked to Wright, other writers, like Langston Hughes, Countee Cullen and James Baldwin, the entertainer Josephine Baker, the jazz saxophonist and clarinetist Sidney Bechet and others.
Visits to clubs, museums and the Casino at Monte Carlo are also scheduled.
The tour has been organized by Accent Tours of New York, in conjunction with the Concorde Group, a New York travel consulting company.
Denine Rodney, vice president of Accent, who is to accompany the tour, said that Professor Fabre would take part in some part of the visit to Paris.


Susan Karpp, Mark Shapiro
Susan Paula Karpp, a lawyer, and Dr.
Mark Shapiro, a gastroenterologist, are to be married today at the Oyster Bay (L.I.) Jewish Center.
Rabbi David F. Nesenoff is to officiate.
The bride, a daughter of Anne and Murray Karpp of East Norwich, L.I., graduated from Cornell University and received an M.B.A. and law degrees from New York University.
She is to join the New York law firm of Schulte Roth &amp; Zabel in October.


Trumps, Shmumps: I'll Play My Unicorn
IN this age of digitalized diversions, Morgan Schweers's favorite pastime is playing cards.
"It provides a kind of relaxed and friendly chance to socialize that you can't have with electronics," said Mr.
Schweers, a 25-year-old computer programmer from Sunnyvale, Calif.
But few card players would recognize the game Mr.
Schweers plays.
Instead of kings and queens, his cards are decorated with blood-curdling leviathans like Lord of the Pit, Forcefield and, his personal favorite, the Icy Manipulator.


Opposition Rises to 42d St. Trolley, Calling It a Streetcar Named Trouble
A flier headlined "Save the M-42 crosstown" warns bus riders that the planned 42d Street trolley would eliminate one of the city's oldest bus routes.
Fears that it would divert traffic onto congested side streets have caused Murray Hill and Tudor City neighborhood groups to consider a lawsuit.
As the trolley plan moves closer to reality -- in June the City Council authorized a $750,000 engineering study and Mayor Giuliani supports the idea -- a variety of critics are seeking ways to stop the project.
Their basic quarrel: Since the route is already covered by mass transit (the M-42 and M-104 buses and the Grand Central-Times Square subway shuttle and the No. 7 line), why spend an estimated $135 million for yet another system?


U.S. Officials Urge Caution On Arms Pact
Clinton Administration officials expressed caution today about the accord that United States negotiators reached with North Korea to settle the dispute over its nuclear program, saying that North Korea has a lot to do to win the diplomatic recognition promised in the agreement.
The officials also said that major differences remain that could derail the agreement, in which the United States said it was prepared to establish closer diplomatic and economic ties in exchange for North Korea's promise to freeze its nuclear program and to stop reprocessing nuclear fuel into weapons-grade material.


Christine B. Ball, Peter S. Fearey
Christine Bower Ball, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Stephen F. W. Ball of West Lebanon, N.H., was married yesterday to Peter Senior Fearey, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Morton Fearey Jr. of Wilton, Conn.
The Bishop of Newark, John S. Spong, performed the Episcopal ceremony at the Church at Point O'Woods on Fire Island, L.I.
Mrs.
Fearey, 24, and her husband, 26, graduated from Dartmouth College.
She is studying for a master's degree in education at Lesley College, and in September she is to begin teaching the second grade at Buckingham, Browne &amp; Nichols, a school in Cambridge, Mass.
Her father is the vice president of finance and administration at the Whitman Communications Group, a commercial printing and graphics company in Lebanon, N.H.


Amy E. Collini and Brian J. Kelly
Amy Elizabeth Collini, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
William R. Collini of Sparta, N.J., was married there yesterday to Brian John Kelly, a son of John P. Kelly of Rochester, Mich., and the late Mary L. Kelly.
The Rev.
M.
Paul Daly performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at Our Lady of the Lake Church.
Mrs.
Kelly, 25, graduated from the University of Michigan.
She received a law degree from the Syracuse University College of Law and in the fall is to become an admissions recruiter in Cleveland for the law school.
Her father is a urologist in Newton, N.J.


Roseann DeJoseph, Thomas Cavallaro
Dr.
Roseann Judith DeJoseph, a dentist in Huntington, L.I., was married yesterday to Thomas James Cavallaro, a senior financial analyst at The New York Times Company in New York.
The Rev.
Francis Black performed the ceremony at St.
Helen's Roman Catholic Church in Howard Beach, Queens.
The bride, 28, will be known as Dr.
DeJoseph Cavallaro.
She graduated from Adelphi University and received a D.D.S. degree from the State University at Stony Brook, L.I.
She is the daughter of Leona DeJoseph of Howard Beach and the late Joseph DeJoseph.
The bride's father was a production manager at Jonathan Logan, the women's clothing manufacturer, in New York.


Fairness and the Law On Domestic Violence
Re: the recent article "Tougher Laws on Domestic Violence Facing Vote": How about balanced and fair laws that respect the basic tenet of due process?
Nowhere in the debate does the present abuse of the existing laws come under discussion.
Especially as it relates to the use of the present statues as a weapon by one side or the other to "get even" in relationships, especially when one party feels the divorce agreement-settlement was unfair.


Reviving a True Classic on West 42d Street
ONE DOES NOT SIMPLY VISIT THE NEW Amsterdam Theater.
One journeys there.
Yes, it can be reached easily enough, through an entrance in the base of a small office building at 214 West 42d Street, just west of Times Square.
Yet in the ripe lusciousness of its ornament, the sinuous twining of its floral forms, the generosity of its public rooms and the sheer spectacle of its volume, the 91-year-old Art Nouveau landmark is far removed from the tattered, brazen, razor-edged city outside.
Few people, however, emerge from the long-deserted playhouse without thinking that this distance ought to be bridged, that there must a way to restore the cavernous ruin to the enchanted garden it once was.


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: August 14, 1994
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
26
THE CLIENT, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $6.99.) A young boy learns a deadly secret.
2
7
WITHOUT REMORSE, by Tom Clancy. (Berkley, $6.99.) John Kelly tries to rescue prisoners held in North Vietnam.
3
8
A CASE OF NEED, by Michael Crichton writing as Jeffery Hudson. (Signet, $6.99.) A 1968 novel about the death of a surgeon's daughter.
4
4
FORREST GUMP, by Winston Groom. (Pocket, $5.50.) A slow-witted man makes his way through three decades of American history.
5
9
THE SHIPPING NEWS, by E. Annie Proulx. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $12.) A man mourns his adulterous wife in Newfoundland.
6
18
CLEAR AND PRESENT DANGER, by Tom Clancy. (Berkley, $6.99.) The C.I.A.'s Jack Ryan fights drug lords in Colombia.
7
3
SACRED CLOWNS, by Tony Hillerman. (Harper Paperbacks, $6.99.) Two Navajo tribal policemen and a web of politics and murder.
8
4
A SIMPLE PLAN, by Scott Smith. (St. Martin's, $5.99.) Madness besets a man who plans to pocket a fortune on which he stumbled.
9*
3
POT OF GOLD, by Judith Michael. (Pocket, $6.99.) A mother wins $60 million in a lottery.
10
3
FINNEGAN'S WEEK, by Joseph Wambaugh. (Bantam, $6.50.) A San Diego cop tracks a crime that results in horror south of the border.
11
3
GUARDIAN, by John Saul. (Fawcett, $5.99.) A single mother versus a stalking, unseen killer.
12
3
SNAGGED, by Carol Higgins Clark. (Dove/Warner, $5.50.) While in Miami, Regan Reilly contends with a variety of crimes.
13
12
PLEADING GUILTY, by Scott Turow. (Warner, $6.99.) A lawyer pursues his firm's missing partner and a multimillion-dollar fund.
14
2
THE HORSE YOU CAME IN ON, by Martha Grimes. (Ballantine, $5.99.) A British sleuth and a case of murder and mayhem in Baltimore.
15
2
LOVE BEYOND REASON, by Sandra Brown. (Warner, $5.99.) A woman is tempted by the brother of a man who abused her late sister.
16*
103
A TIME TO KILL, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $6.99.) Racial tensions during a trial.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
NonFiction
1
31
CARE OF THE SOUL, by Thomas Moore. (Harper Perennial, $12.) Everyday spirituality.
2
562
THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $10.95.) Inspiration.
3*
15
MAMA MAKES UP HER MIND, by Bailey White. (Vintage, $10.) Life in a Georgia town.
4
13
LISTENING TO PROZAC, by Peter D. Kramer. (Penguin, $12.95.) Mood-changing medications.
5
14
GIRL, INTERRUPTED, by Susanna Kaysen. (Vintage, $10.) A young woman's mental illness.
6*
31
WHERE ANGELS WALK, by Joan Wester Anderson. (Ballantine, $10.) Stories about angelic intervention in human affairs.
7*
78
I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS, by Maya Angelou. (Bantam, $4.99.) The poet's depiction of her childhood and adolescence.
8*
12
REENGINEERING THE CORPORATION, by Michael Hammer and James Champy. (Harper Business, $13.) Business innovation.
9
4
A BOOK OF ANGELS, by Sophy Burnham. (Ballantine, $10.) Encounters with celestial beings as recorded in the past and present.
10
4
O.J.
SIMPSON: American Hero, American Tragedy, by Marc Cerasini. (Pinnacle, $4.99.) The life of the legendary football player who has been accused of murder.
11*
148
A YEAR IN PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Vintage, $10.) A sojourn in the south of France.
12*
41
THE TAO OF POOH, by Benjamin Hoff. (Penguin, $9.) Taoism a la A.A. Milne.
13
5
STAR TREK MEMORIES, by William Shatner with Chris Kreski. (Harper Paperbacks, $6.99.) A memoir by the man who played Captain Kirk.
14
62
THE SILENT PASSAGE, by Gail Sheehy. (Pocket, $5.50.) Menopause and today's women.
15*
11
FORTUNATE SON, by Lewis B. Puller Jr. (Bantam, $5.99.) The autobiography of a Marine general's son who was mutilated in Vietnam.
16*
19
YOUNG MEN &amp; FIRE, by Norman Maclean. (University of Chicago, $10.95.) An account of a disastrous fire in a Montana forest in 1949.
17*
1
FALLEN HERO, by Don Davis. (St. Martin's, $4.99.) The life of O.J. Simpson.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Advice, How-To and Miscellaneous
1
178
THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE, by Stephen R. Covey. (Fireside/S&amp;S, $12.) Principles to practice in the pursuit of success.
2
3
EAT MORE, WEIGH LESS, by Dean Ornish. (Harper Perennial, $14.) Counsel from a physician about diet and nutrition.
3
11
RAND MCNALLY ROAD ATLAS. (Rand McNally, $8.95.) The 1994 edition of a guide to the United States, Canada and Mexico.
4
40
WHAT TO EXPECT WHEN YOU'RE EXPECTING, by Arlene Eisenberg, Heidi E. Murkoff and Sandee E. Hathaway. (Workman, $10.95.) Advice for parents-to-be.
Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending July 30, at 3,050 bookstores plus wholesalers serving 38,000 other retailers, statistically weighted to represent sales in all such outlets nationwide.
An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.


U.S. Going for the Gold With Only Itself to Beat
One more listless half did not prevent the United States from achieving a 39-point blowout and moving within one victory of the gold medal tonight at the world basketball championships.
To the Americans' surprise, they will not find Croatia awaiting them Sunday in the final.
After the United States pulled away from Greece early in the second half for a 97-58 victory, Russia stunned the defending Olympic silver medalists by 66-64, silencing the large, flag-waving, whistle-blowing Croatian crowd and shattering the dream its team had of winning the silver for its late captain, Drazen Petrovic.


SUNDAY, August 14, 1994; The Bee Crisis
It doesn't seem like a high-anxiety occupation, but beekeeping isn't what it used to be.
Beekeepers are worried about the loss of a Government honey subsidy, about the world's lowest tariff on honey (2 percent) and about bees being killed by pesticides or bee trucks overturning.
Nor are they the only ones concerned.
Farmers are worried about having fewer bees to pollinate their crops.
The feral bees are dying and the beekeepers are going out of business.
New York State had 115,000 colonies five years ago and now has about 55,000.
California farmers had to truck in half a million hives from other states this year to pollinate the almond crop.


John J. McCabe; Businessman, 72
John J. McCabe, an entrepreneur who founded the first company to transport horses by airplane, died on Wednesday in Winthrop Hospital in Mineola, L.I.
He was 72 and lived in Garden City, L.I.
The cause was heart failure, said his sister, Teresa Crowe.


Bilingual Ballot Law Fails to Help Chinese-American Voters
Two years after the passage of Federal legislation requiring bilingual ballots for Chinese-American voters in parts of Manhattan, Brooklyn and Queens, the city has failed to comply with the law, citing the inability of its printers and aging voting machinery to handle the task.
The city has been able to print sample ballots in Chinese, provide interpreters at polling station, and translate job titles, party titles and proposals on ballots to help the city's growing population of Chinese-American voters.


BEHIND THE WHEEL: Honda Passport; An Isuzu, Alias Honda, Travels Incognito
PASSPORT pictures are notorious, right?
As often as not, they make you look like somebody else, and that is definitely the case with the Honda Passport, a new entry in the rapidly growing sport utility field.
In photos and in the flesh, the Passport looks just like an Isuzu Rodeo, a fact that is not so surprising when you realize that is just what it is.


What's All the Rhubarb?
To the Editor:
Charles A. Sullivan suggests that your Authors' Queries are "bogus" and asks Book Review readers to write with evidence that can prove him wrong.


In Europe, Dollar Dipped, But Rates Still Favorable
WHAT a pain: You start planning a European vacation in the winter, when the dollar has one value; you get to Paris or Rome or Madrid in the summer and the dollar is worth something different.
True, sometimes it is worth more.
Last summer, for example, American visitors were pleasantly surprised.
But not this year.
It's blues time again for the ol' greenback.
The odd thing is that around two million Americans come to Europe every year no matter what's happening to the dollar.
If they're rich, they don't worry about the exchange rate.
If they're on a tight budget, they still have to look for bargains.
In the end the difference between well-heeled travelers and others is far wider than any swing in the dollar.


Streetscapes/34 Gramercy Park East; The City's Oldest Elevator System Is Being Replaced
THE Society for the Preservation of Old Elevator Systems -- if there is one -- had better move fast, for the oldest operating elevator system in New York City is about to be replaced.
The co-op at 34 Gramercy Park East is tired of the fuss and bother -- the clanks and wheezes and the leisurely pace -- that go with its 111-year old Otis hydraulic elevator and this month started a $700,000 project to replace the pistons and pulleys that run its two vintage cabs up and down, very slowly.


Bowe Hits Kneeling Mathis for 'No Contest'
They needed the wisdom of Solomon tonight.
But in boxing, the State Athletic Control Board had to do.
For Riddick Bowe violated one of boxing's canons: He hit a man when he was down.
And while the shot knocked out Buster Mathis Jr., it also led to the board coming up with the unusual, but probably logical, ruling that the fight was "no contest."


G.O.P. Split Offers Hope To Democrats
"The only option for us is to kill the President's bill," said Daniel R. Coats of Indiana.
"I hope there will be a cease-fire, a white flag raised and no more ad hominem attacks," said William S. Cohen of Maine.


Access to Financial Statement
Q I am a shareholder in a Mitchell-Lama co-op where the board and the management give out very little information.
It is now three years since I have received a certified copy of the annual financial statement.


Driver Arrests Rise Sharply In Crackdown
The number of people arrested for driving with suspended licenses has more than doubled during the last few years, police records show, and more drivers who have had their licenses suspended hundreds of times have been taken off the streets in police sweeps, including two men last week who had well over 200 suspensions each.
In 1993, 8,300 drivers with multiple suspensions were arrested, up from 3,346 the previous year, the police said.
In 1991, there were 3,280 arrests.
The number of drivers picked up so far this year is not yet available.


About Long Island; The Spirit Behind North Shore University Hospital
IF a hospital can have a family tree, Jan Senecal is North Shore's acorn.
"From her the hospital grew," said Dr.
David Cooper, associate chairman of the department of medicine at North Shore University Hospital in Manhasset.
"Since she hired the first people who ever worked here, indirectly everyone was appointed through her."
The petite Ms.
Senecal -- she is shorter than 5 feet -- was the first employee hired at North Shore.
"You know how on your paycheck you have a number?" Dr.
Cooper said.
"Well, hers is No. 1."


How Did Dick Ravitch Get Into This Mess?
In this, his first taste of labor relations, baseball-style, Richard Ravitch must wonder if he has walked into a Greek tragedy.
Or comedy.
After all, major league baseball's capacity for wounding itself in the foot with ill-timed work stoppages is enough to make anyone in the game wonder whether to laugh or cry.
And there were undoubtedly such disparate reactions on Friday when the players made good their threat to strike in response to the owners' insistence on a salary cap.


UNDER WRAPS
As a native of Teheran, I envy Tara Bahrampour for having the opportunity to visit the country where she was raised (Hers: "Under Wraps," July 10).
But she fails to identify the matter-of-fact attitude of her female relatives in Iran as the coping mechanism it is.
Yes, they live under difficult conditions, but by engaging in denial, they are able to lead a relatively normal life.
Downplaying the potential for danger helps us keep our sanity.
RAYMOND IRYAMI Great Neck, L.I.


Catherine Snook, Steven Branda
Catherine Anne Snook and Steven Michael Branda, who are to begin studying for doctorates in genetics at Yale University in September, were married yesterday in Burlington, Vt.
The bride's father, the Rev.
Dr.
John B. Snook, a United Church of Christ minister, officiated at the First Congregational Church.
The bride's uncle, the Rev.
Lyman R. Hartley, a Presbyterian minister, took part in the ceremony.
Mrs.
Branda graduated from Vassar College.
She and her husband, both 25, were laboratory technicians until recently.
She worked at Rockefeller University in New York and he at the Albert Einstein College of Medicine in the Bronx.


Defecting Cuban Finds Invisible Barrier Tallest
The leap to what is perceived as freedom, to a life beyond abject poverty, is not as easy as one would think.
The last time Richard Matienzo tried, nine months ago in Ponce, Puerto Rico, he could not make his legs carry him across the invisible border.
He was supposed to defect from Cuba with a teammate from the national basketball team, Andres Guibert.
Matienzo's father, Julio, had flown in from Philadelphia.
Julio Matienzo defected from Cuba in 1980, when Richard was 11.
The son cried when he saw his father, but the emotional tug of war was then temporarily won by those he would have left behind.
His mother.
His brother.
Two sisters.
A young son and his pregnant girlfriend, who would soon give birth to a second boy.


Sports of The Times; Baseball Is Dead Issue; Get a Life
HERE'S the best thing we can do about this baseball strike: We can permit ourselves another day or two to wallow in self-pity, a lost weekend of the soul.
And then we can get on with our lives.
I personally plan not to dwell on vanished baseball in the coming weeks and months and maybe even years.
They got themselves into it; let them get themselves out.


Word for Word/The World of Game Shows; That's Right, Reader: You've Chosen 'Signs of Global Lunacy' for 500
EVER since the rigging of TV quiz programs in the 1950's prompted wide public outrage and a Congressional investigation, it has been clear that Americans take the video frivolity of game shows quite seriously.
As it has turned out, so has the rest of the world.
Just how avidly they are watched around the globe has now been demonstrated by Anne Cooper-Chen, an Ohio University journalism professor who in 1985 embarked on a nine-year worldwide study (often with video camera for taping off hotel-room TV sets) to document the wheel-spinning, brain-teasing, celebrity bantering, contestant humiliations and attendant nonsense.


Setting Their Sights on Broadway


Take-It-or-Leave-It Health Votes
The health care bill introduced in the House by a bipartisan group of conservative Democrats and moderate Republicans is a disappointment.
It falls far short of universal coverage and goes only partway toward creating competitive health care markets that might control costs.
The bill offered by the majority leader, Richard Gephardt -- the only other bill that has a chance to pass -- is also badly designed: it could eventually destroy private insurance and put everyone's health care under a Medicare-like program subject to the whims of Congressional committees.


FALLING FOR IT
Tierney forgets to mention that Skaggs's latest hoax on the sale of dog meat is based on a cruel practice that does indeed exist in Korea where, every year, millions of dogs and cats are slaughtered and marketed as "health" food.


Manager's Profile; Robert H. Steers
Robert H. Steers Fund: Cohen &amp; Steers Realty Shares; $369 million in assets.
Comanager since 1991 inception. (Sponsor: Cohen &amp; Steers Capital Management, New York.)
Born: March 9, 1953; Port Chester, N.Y.
Education: B.A., economics and finance, Georgetown; M.B.A., George Washington.
Last vacation: One week in March with family at Sea Island, Ga.
Fund performance: Year, through July: +7.1% (Standard &amp; Poor's 500-stock index: +5.2%); three years, annualized: +18.5% (+8.8%).*
REIT market view: (self-rating; = most bullish).
REIT pick: Developers Diversified Realty, which owns shopping centers mainly in the East and Midwest, because it has "a relatively high-quality portfolio and strong management."
Current strategy: "To take advantage of growth opportunities in the real estate industry, primarily through rising rents and occupancy rates and acquisitions."  *Source: Morningstar Inc.


What's Wrong With a Voluntary Health Plan
To the Editor:
Many in the debate about health care reform and opponents of the employer mandate have argued that large numbers of small businesses that provide no health insurance would voluntarily do so if insurance reform simply made health benefits accessible and more affordable.


Allison G. Bailin, Jeffrey D. Karpf
Allison Greer Bailin, the daughter of Cynthia Quint of Agoura, Calif., and Howard Bailin of Los Angeles, was married last evening to Jeffrey David Karpf, the son of Henry and Beverly Karpf of Smithtown, L.I.
Rabbi Elliott T. Spar officiated at the Hotel Bel-Air in Los Angeles.
Mrs.
Karpf, 25, graduated from the University of California at Berkeley and received a master's degree in education from Stanford University.
She is an English teacher at Tuckahoe (N.Y.) High School.


Editors' Note
An article on page 9 in today's Arts and Leisure section about plans to produce a film based on the book "The Bridges of Madison County" reported that, as of last week, a director had not been chosen and one of the major roles had not been cast.
On Friday, after the section was printed, Warner Brothers said Clint Eastwood would be the director and Meryl Streep would play the role of Francesca.


Cooling Summer Days With Fresh Fruit Ice Cream
WHEN you live in the country, you shop from catalogues.
Along with a compost bin and a door mat, a new ice cream maker arrived the other day.
It was not the fancy one that costs $400, but a more modest version, priced in the middle two figures.
It cracks along for half an hour or so and switches itself off when the ice cream is done.


Students: Take Note
To the Editor:  The "cute" approach to describing movie triangles in geometric classifications resulted in blatant mathematical errors and ideas that might mislead high school and college students  [ "Sometimes, Three Is the Loneliest Number," July 31 ] .
For example, contrary to what is implied in the illustrated sidebar accompanying the article, the third angle of an isosceles triangle is not necessarily smaller than the two equal angles.
The third angle can be larger than each of the equal angles; it can even be larger than the sum of the two equal angles.


BEST SELLERS: August 14, 1994
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
3
THE GIFT, by Danielle Steel. (Delacorte, $15.) A woman's casual visit to a small town changes the lives of many of its inhabitants, as well as her own.
2
2
10
THE CHAMBER, by John Grisham. (Doubleday, $24.95.) A lawyer represents a racist who is on death row for his part in a 1967 bombing in Mississippi.
3
3
24
THE CELESTINE PROPHECY, by James Redfield. (Warner, $17.95.) An ancient manuscript, found in Peru, provides insights into achieving a fulfilling life.
4
4
105
THE BRIDGES OF MADISON COUNTY, by Robert James Waller. (Warner, $16.95.) A photographer and a farmer's lonely wife in Iowa.
5
5
8
POLITICALLY CORRECT BEDTIME STORIES, by James Finn Garner. (Macmillan, $8.95.) Classic tales respun to avoid offending current sensibilities.
6
6
4
EVERYTHING TO GAIN, by Barbara Taylor Bradford. (HarperCollins, $24.) A woman tries to cope after an act of violence destroys her perfect family life.
7
7
18
THE ALIENIST, by Caleb Carr. (Random House, $22.) A journalist and a psychologist track down a murderer in turn-of-the-century Manhattan.
8
10
8
THE CROSSING, by Cormac McCarthy. (Knopf, $23.) A young American comes of age traveling with a she-wolf into Mexico's mythic sierra.
9
8
2
DISNEY'S THE LION KING, adapted by Don Ferguson. (Mouse Works, $6.98.) The coming of age of animal royalty, told in words and pictures.
10
9
3
UNDUE INFLUENCE, by Steve Martini. (Putnam, $22.95.) A defense attorney finds himself caught in a web of murder and deceit within his own family.
11
12
16
REMEMBER ME, by Mary Higgins Clark. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $23.50.) After an estranged couple reconcile, they find themselves haunted by a mysterious force.
12
11
3
PLAYING FOR THE ASHES, by Elizabeth George. (Bantam, $21.95.) A case involving arson, infidelity, cricket and murder in the English countryside.
13
14
14
INCA GOLD, by Clive Cussler. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $24.) Dirk Pitt contends with a ring of thieves for possession of ancient artifacts in the Peruvian Andes.
14
12
THE DAY AFTER TOMORROW, by Allan Folsom. (Little, Brown, $24.95.) A young doctor stumbles into a tangle of international conspiracies.
15
13
7
THE WATERWORKS, by E.L.
Doctorow. (Random House, $23.) Life in the New York City of 1871 as witnessed by a jaded newspaperman.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Nonfiction
1
1
66
EMBRACED BY THE LIGHT, by Betty J. Eadie with Curtis Taylor. (Gold Leaf Press, $16.95.) A woman's near-death experience.
2
2
8
THE AGENDA, by Bob Woodward. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $24.) The inner workings of the White House during the first year of the Clinton Administration.
3
4
34
THE BOOK OF VIRTUES, by William J. Bennett. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $27.50.) Moral stories adapted from the Greeks, the Bible, folklore and elsewhere.
4
5
23
MIDNIGHT IN THE GARDEN OF GOOD AND EVIL, by John Berendt. (Random House, $23.) The mysterious death of a young man in Savannah, Ga.
5
3
5
MOON SHOT, by Alan Shepard and Deke Slayton with Jay Barbree and Howard Benedict. (Turner, $21.95.) How Americans reached the moon in July 1969.
6
7
3
MOTHERLESS DAUGHTERS, by Hope Edelman. (Addison-Wesley, $23.) The experiences of women after the deaths of their mothers.
7
6
17
SAVED BY THE LIGHT, by Dannion Brinkley with Paul Perry. (Villard, $16.) An account of two near-death experiences by a South Carolina businessman.
8
12
31
SOUL MATES, by Thomas Moore. (HarperCollins, $25.) A psychotherapist discusses love and relationships.
9
9
9
LIFE OF THE PARTY, by Christopher Ogden. (Little, Brown, $24.95.) A biography of Pamela Harriman, the United States Ambassador to France.
10
10
15
REBA: My Story, by Reba McEntire with Tom Carter. (Bantam, $22.95.) The autobiography of the country singer.
11
16
98
WOMEN WHO RUN WITH THE WOLVES, by Clarissa Pinkola Estes. (Ballantine, $23.) How myths and folk tales can enable women to understand their psyches.
12
14
7
DAVE BARRY IS NOT MAKING THIS UP, by Dave Barry. (Crown, $20.) A collection of humor pieces by the Pulitzer Prize-winning columnist.
13
1
THE CATCHER WAS A SPY, by Nicholas Dawidoff. (Pantheon, $24.) The life of Moe Berg, big-league catcher, O.S.S. agent, lady's man and freeloader.
14
1
THE TRIBE OF TIGER, by Elizabeth Marshall Thomas. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $20.) The nature and culture of cats.
15
15
2
GAL: A True Life, by Ruthie Bolton. (Harcourt Brace, $19.95.) A black woman recalls her troubled childhood in Charleston, S.C.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous
1
1
16
IN THE KITCHEN WITH ROSIE, by Rosie Daley. (Knopf, $14.95.) Recipes by Oprah Winfrey's cook.
2
2
64
MEN ARE FROM MARS, WOMEN ARE FROM VENUS, by John Gray. (HarperCollins, $23.) Ways to improve communication and relationships between the sexes.
3
3
16
MAGIC EYE II, by N.E.
Thing Enterprises. (Andrews &amp; McMeel, $12.95.) A second collection of designs.
4
4
30
MAGIC EYE, by N.E.
Thing Enterprises. (Andrews &amp; McMeel, $12.95.) Designs in color that take on new qualities when scrutinized at length.
Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending July 30, at 3,050 bookstores plus wholesalers serving 28,000 other retailers (gift shops, department stores, newsstands, supermarkets), statistically weighted to represent sales in all such outlets nationwide.
An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
And Bear in Mind (Editor's Choices of other recent books of particular interest) THE BIRD ARTIST, by Howard Norman. (Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, $20.) An adulterous affair and a murder propel this tragic novel of a hamlet in Newfoundland, where everybody knows everybody and the weather is unspeakable.
BY THE GRACE OF GUILE: The Role of Deception in Natural History and Human Affairs, by Loyal Rue. (Oxford University, $27.50.) A professor of religion and philosophy argues that deceit, including self-deceit, is evolution's way of keeping us going in a universe that doesn't give a hoot.
THE CORRESPONDENCE OF WALTER BENJAMIN, 1910-1940, edited by Gershom Scholem and Theodor W. Adorno. (University of Chicago, $45.) Selected letters of an international icon of high culture whose foreshortened life lent glamour to his notoriously difficult thought.
THE EVOLUTION OF RACISM: Human Differences and the Use and Abuse of Science, by Pat Shipman. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $23.) A thoughtful study of evolution's employment to abet or oppose racism; not all the bad guys meant ill, and the good guys sometimes fought dirty.
JOURNALS, by Bertolt Brecht. (Routledge, $39.95.) Twenty years after their publication in German, these journals offer a fascinating document of the years between 1938 and 1953 as seen first by Brecht as a comfortable exile from Hitler's Germany, then as a prestigious beneficiary of the East German state.
LOUISIANA POWER &amp; LIGHT, by John Dufresne. (Norton, $22.) Mr.
Dufresne's first novel, replete with funny lines and plot twists that always lead somewhere, concerns an orphan's efforts to escape a family curse.
Lots of luck, orphan!
ROOMMATES: My Grandfather's Story, by Max Apple. (Warner, $19.95.) An enthralling novelistic memoir of the infinitely durable Herman (Rocky) Goodstein, who at 93 accompanied Mr.
Apple to college.
SHEAR, by Tim Parks. (Grove, $21.) An eerie, engrossing suspense novel about responsibility; its hero, a smug geological consultant, tragically complicates his life through sexual adventure.
THESE SAME LONG BONES, by Gwendolyn M. Parker. (Houghton Mifflin, $21.95.) With an unusual combination of lush metaphor and narrative restraint, this first novel spins a tale of race and power as a black businessman struggles to transcend his daughter's death.
TURKISH TRADITIONAL ART TODAY, by Henry Glassie. (Indiana University, $65.) The modernizing Turkish republic of this century cared nothing for the nation's traditional arts, but they survived and prospered regardless, as witness this splendid, richly illustrated examination by a distinguished folklorist.
WAR IN ITALY, 1943-1945: A Brutal Story, by Richard Lamb. (St. Martin's, $23.95.) The painful story of Italy after the fall of Mussolini, a land characterized for two years by enslavement, betrayal and mass murder, ravaged by Fascist thugs, the Germans and the Allied armies.


Electronic Access to S.E.C. Filings
To the Editor:
Paul L. Suh's comment that "the S.E.C. has preferred to let Mead or Disclosure make large amounts of money for providing electronic copies of public filings" ("The S.E.C. and Public Filings," Letters, July 17), suggests that he is misinformed on how electronic filings are obtained.
Disclosure Inc. obtains electronic Edgar filings from the regulated disseminator -- Mead -- at rates established by the Securities and Exchange Commission.
These rates are charged to all subscribers to Edgar services and were implemented so that a level playing field would be maintained and so that no one subscriber would gain any advantage in price or access to data.


Daisies and Sunflowers Make the Scene
ONE day while looking at a beautiful field of golden flowers and not sure what they were, I queried a knowledgeable botanist at my side.
The response was that it was probably some kind of daisy, but "I don't do composites."
The reply was in jest, of course, but underneath was a modicum of truth.
How sad to eliminate a whole group of wonderful plants.


In the End, Dionysus Taking a Spring Break
As skeptics chorused that Woodstock '94 could never live up to the storied original, promoters insisted that all they wanted was to throw a huge rock-and-roll party and see who came.
Some predicted wilted flower children.
Others expected misguided youth.
What they got was Woodstock as spring break.
Legions of shirtless young men coursed over the festival grounds, their backward baseball caps proclaiming their devotion to Boston College, the University of Georgia and Co-Ed Naked Lacrosse.


Suburban Expansion Fed By an Influx of Minorities
After decades in which America's cities worried primarily about white flight, cities are now facing the increasingly rapid departure to the suburbs of middle- and working-class minority members.
No longer the contained, homogenous "Leave it to Beaver" bedroom communities of the 1950's, the suburban destinations of minorities now constitute a broad patchwork that includes inner suburbs, large suburban cities, office parks, retail centers, even rural territory, demographers say.


Cleared by the U.S., 800 Are Trapped in Haiti
The people at the safe house were broken, maimed, grieving and in hiding, afraid of being dragged away and killed.
But their papers, as one refugee said with a bitter smile, were in perfect order.
Willie Jean-Baptiste, dressed in his best clothes in case this was the day he finally got to flee to the safety of the United States, adjusted his tie with a disfigured hand that he said had been pounded repeatedly with a pistol butt.


Toronto Journal; With Her Songs, Eskimo Bares Her People's Pain
Her Inuit name is Uuliniq, meaning "scarred from burns." The name could also describe her people, Canada's 35,000 Eskimos, caught between their traditional self-sufficient world and the pressures of an industrial civilization.
Susan Aglukark, 27, has found success as a singer in Toronto.
But she was born in Arviat, formerly Eskimo Point, on the northwest coast of Hudson Bay.
Not that she has ever slept in an igloo.
Frankly, she said, she never wants to "because it's not something we grew up with."


Economic Calendar
Listed below are the scheduled release dates for major economic indicators this week.
Monday  Industrial Production . . .
July  Capacity Utilization . . .
July  Tuesday  Housing Starts and Permits . . .
July  Wednesday  None  Thursday  Weekly Jobless Claims  Merchandise Trade . . .
June  Friday  None


Bridge
If a player lands in a doubled contract with five trumps in the combined hands, one would normally assume that he has had an accident: apparently, the bidding has gone off the rails.
That was not true, however, on the diagramed deal from the Cavendish Pairs played in May.
North and South were Chris Compton of Austin, Tex., and Joe Silver of Montreal.
When his partner opened one no-trump, showing 15 to 17 points, South expected to reach a slam.
His first move was two diamonds, a game-forcing Stayman action that has been out of fashion since transfer bids became prevalent.


Let Us Also Decry the Violence Abortion Does; Different in Europe
To the Editor:
Anthony Lewis wonders why extremist tactics against abortion occur in this country and yet are absent in "'overwhelmingly Catholic countries where abortions are lawfully performed" (column, Aug. 1).
If he examined the different legal and political climates in those European countries and that prevailing here, he would find sharp differences.


Equity Issues This Week
The following equity and convertible debt offerings are expected this week:
Accustaff Inc., Jacksonville, Fla., an initial public offering of 2 million shares.
J.
C.
Bradford &amp; Co.


Flags and Pride at the Pakistan Day Parade


Class AA Starting Staff Bolsters Future for Mets
Jason Isringhausen had heard about the pitching staff at the Mets' Class AA affiliate in Binghamton, N.Y., before the organization promoted him from Class A ball six weeks ago.
He had heard about the talent.
He had heard about the success.
And he had heard, of course, about Bill Pulsipher, perhaps the brightest pitching prospect in the Mets' minor league system today.
He had heard what everyone else had heard about Pulsipher, the hard-throwing left-hander.
He had heard that Pulsipher is crazy.


Accounts
*
Smith Barney Inc., New York, to McCann-Erickson New York, to handle its account, previously at Ogilvy &amp; Mather New York, after a review that also included Publicis/Bloom and Young &amp; Rubicam New York.
Billings were estimated at $10 million to $20 million. *
New Plan Realty Trust, New York, to Waring &amp; LaRosa, New York, to handle advertising for the company's factory outlet centers, previously at Baron &amp; Zaretsky Advertising, New York.
Billings were estimated at $3 million to $5 million.


Under the Bougainvillea, A Litany of Past Wrongs
To understand what drove the massacres of hundreds of thousands of Tutsi in Rwanda, one need only listen to Francois Karera, a senior politician in the former Hutu-dominated Government, who says the killings were justified.
"The Tutsi are originally bad," said Mr.
Karera, who as the Prefect of greater Kigali, the capital, was chief administrator for 937,000 people.
"They are murderers. The Tutsi have given the white people their daughters. Physically they are weak -- look at their arms and their legs. No Tutsi can build; they are too weak. They just command. The others work."


Judging Would-Be Legends
It got the job done, but this was not a memorable United States team, no Dream Team, not in performance, style or grace.
Upon reflection, several of its players wished it had never been so dubbed.
Derrick Coleman, who had better get used to name changes as the Nets are discussing a switch to, yes, Swamp Dragons, thinks the team should have been allowed its own identity.


Corrections
A picture essay in Sports yesterday, about major leaguers who have hit at least 50 home runs in a season since 1961, omitted a player in some editions.
Willie Mays hit 52 home runs in 1965.


Aide Is Seen As Successor To Altman
With Deputy Treasury Secretary Roger C. Altman clinging to his post, Administration officials said today that an early favorite to replace him was Frank N. Newman, the Under Secretary of the Treasury for Domestic Finance.
Treasury Secretary Lloyd Bentsen has not begun a formal search for a replacement for Mr.
Altman, who damaged his credibility with his Congressional testimony on Whitewater, but Mr.
Newman is the official most frequently mentioned in the White House and the Treasury Department, said the officials, who insisted on anonymity.


Endorsement For Health Bill
The nation's largest lobby of small-business owners announced its support over the weekend for the health care plan put forth Thursday by Representative Jim Cooper, Democrat of Tennessee, and nine other conservative Democrats and Republicans.


Clubs Stand to Lose More Than They'll Save
On an industry-wide basis, the 28 major league clubs will lose more money in lost gate receipts, concessions and parking ($300 million) than they will save in players' salaries they don't pay ($260 million) if the strike wipes out the rest of the season.
The strike-forced cancellation of the third full slate of 14 games yesterday, bringing to 42 the number of games missed out of 669 that remained on the schedule when the players walked out last Friday.
The National and American Leagues are expected to announce today that all games are canceled until further notice.


Let the Birdies Sing: Major Price Captures P.G.A.
In the final major championship of the year, the 1994 golf season snapped into vivid focus at Southern Hills Country Club today.
The state of the game is this: there is Nick Price and there is everybody else.
It was the original Dream Team against Angola.
Any Super Bowl with Buffalo.
Secretariat at the Belmont.
It was Nick Price, doing what he wanted when he wanted and how he wanted, winning by six strokes over Corey Pavin in the P.G.A.
Championship and standing head and shoulders above anybody in the game.


The British Who as History: 30 Years of Live Performance
There is a simple formula for making documentaries about pop groups: Intercut interviews of band members with performance scenes; arrange the clips chronologically, and -- presto! -- instant rockumentary.
"The Who: 30 Years of Maximum R&amp;B," part of WNET's "In the Spotlight" pop-music series, follows the formula, but adds a twist.
It attempts to portray not the story of the Who, but the history of this seminal British band's live performances.
Nearly 20 years before the rise of the music video, the Who was turning rock-and-roll into drama with exploding flash pots, flamboyant performance techniques and outrageous mod costumes (frilly shirts, flared pants, two-tone shoes, jackets with five-inch side vents).
However, over the course of the documentary's 15 live clips spanning the band's 30-year history, Pete Townshend's guitar-bashing turns from an angry response to a routine one; Roger Daltrey's stage presence becomes a function of the size of the circles he can twirl his microphone in; the bassist John Entwistle's movements narrow to just his hands and lips, and Keith Moon's face slowly disappears behind a growing stack of drums until he vanishes altogether. (Mr. Moon died of a drug overdose in 1978.)


Dealing With Sex Offenders
It was a genuine tragedy when 33-year-old Jesse Timmendequas talked 7-year-old Megan Kanka into entering his house in Hamilton Township, N.J., one day last month.
Mr.
Timmendequas had been convicted twice for sexually assaulting young girls, and had served six years in a facility for sex offenders.
Once Megan was in the house he strangled her to death and raped her.
Small wonder that the angry residents of Megan's town and much of New Jersey's political leadership want to crack down on sex offenders who have served their time in jail and been released back into the community.
Proposals range from requiring released sex offenders to register with the police departments of the towns they settle in, to requiring that they report their whereabouts every 30 days, to making them spend the rest of their lives in prison unless they can convince officials that they have been rehabilitated.
Under one proposal, the police would be alerted and asked to notify neighborhood residents of a sex offender's presence.


When Age and Dance Enter a Happy Marriage
When Martine van Hamel left American Ballet Theater in 1991, audiences lost a ballerina of exquisite musicality, technical skills that won her a gold medal in the demanding international ballet competition in Varna, Bulgaria, and nearly 30 years of experience with major international companies.
When Sabine Kupferberg reached 40, she decided she was tired of performing and moved over to coaching with the Nederlands Dans Theater, where she had danced for 15 years.
This week Miss van Hamel and Miss Kupferberg return to the stage at the Jacob's Pillow Dance Festival in Becket, Mass., for performances with the Nederlands Dans Theater 3, familiarly known as N.D.T.3.
The brainchild of Jiri Kylian, the choreographer and director of the Nederlands Dans Theater, the troupe is a company of four dancers who made names for themselves but then arrived at an age considered old for ballet.
There tends to be more leeway for modern dancers.
Ballet today, though, requires a level of pyrotechnical skill that is beyond the reach of most dancers in their 40's and older.
But experience burnishes and deepens performing skills.
And so Mr.
Kylian, who founded the company in 1991, invited choreographers to create pieces tailored to those dancers' well-honed gifts.
It was "an idea" as much as a company, he said in a statement at the company's first performance, a project that would make use of "the specific quality and understanding of the interpreter at this very point of his or her life, not before and not after."


Japan Official Forced to Quit Over Remark
One of Japan's top officials was forced to resign today after causing a political firestorm by saying that Japanese aggression in World War II actually benefited Asia.
It was the second resignation of a Cabinet member in three months for making embarrassing comments about the war.
Shin Sakurai, a member of the Liberal Democratic Party and the minister in charge of environmental affairs, offered his resignation.
He had said at a news conference on Friday that, rather than seeking to conquer Asia, Japan had liberated the countries that it attacked from Western colonialism.
He added that the benefits of this policy were evident today in the high literacy rates throughout East Asia.


SEOUL OFFERS HELP ON NUCLEAR POWER TO NORTH KOREA
President Kim Young Sam of South Korea today formally offered to supply North Korea with modern nuclear power plants if the North will open its nuclear program to international inspections.
The offer of light-water reactors, made in a modestly conciliatory speech this morning, came two days after the United States and North Korea agreed on measures to settle the nuclear issue, and could be a major step toward realizing that goal.


A Breakthrough on Korean Arms?
Nuclear diplomacy between the U.S. and North Korea made promising gains in an accord reached Friday in Geneva.
The agreement not only assures that a temporary freeze in the North's nuclear program will remain in place until talks resume in September but also sketches a road map to a lasting solution.
It will take more hard work by negotiators to work out the details and leave Korea nuclear-free.
But the agreement is an encouraging sign that North Korea is putting the brakes on its nuclear program even under its new leadership.


For Thompson, Trouble on Slide but Titles in Pool
On May 31, Jenny Thompson broke her left forearm so badly that she needed a titanium plate and seven screws to keep it in place.
Tonight, she completed a storybook comeback by qualifying for the United States team for the world swimming championships three weeks from now in Rome.
Thompson is a 21-year-old Stanford University senior from Dover, N.H.
As a world-class swimmer since 14, she has achieved almost everything possible in the sport.
She holds the world record of 54.48 seconds for the 100-meter freestyle.
She has won two Olympic gold medals and 11 previous national titles.
She was the 1993 United States swimmer of the year.
And much more.


Kinder and Gentler Moscow Emerging Nicely, Thank You
"Do not spit out bones and other such things onto your plate."
"Do not describe your illnesses at the table."


Let Us Also Decry the Violence Abortion Does
To the Editor:
The violence that brutally erupted in the fatal shooting of Dr.
John Bayard Britton and James H. Barrett at the abortion clinic in Pensacola, Fla., is highly repugnant, reprehensible and has rightly met widespread condemnation.


Senate Now Has Main Role on Health
Predicting the course of the health care bill has become a minor industry in the nation's capital, but rarely have its prospects been more difficult to read.
Just 86 days before the midterm elections, nobody knows when the Senate will finish its work or when the House will begin.


No Headline
"People tell me that there are more important problems than etiquette. But just  because our lives are so hard doesn't mean we don't need good manners." -- YELENA ILINA, creator and host of a Moscow television show that teaches etiquette.  [ A7:5. ]


Minor Discord Amid the Nostalgia-Trip Harmony
Bob Dylan played Woodstock '94 tonight, 25 years after he avoided the first Woodstock festival.
Except for only two recent songs, Mr.
Dylan and his four-man band played a set they could have performed at the original festival: one masterpiece after another from the 1960's.
It wasn't 25 years too late.
"All Along the Watchtower" -- a song about claustrophobia, commercialism and unknown portents -- mutated to fit the last day of the gigantic festival.
Others, like a blistering "Highway 61," sounded like greetings and dour warnings from one generation to the next.


Lighthouses


MacNamara Splits To Form New Shops
The principals of two New York agencies that merged in 1992 have quietly split up and switched partners to form two new shops.
The former executives of MacNamara, Klein &amp; Solin, which had 38 employees and billings of $61.5 million, said on Friday that they had mutually decided six months ago to "unmerge" their operations, which were united when MacNamara, Clapp &amp; Klein combined with Solin Associates.


Mission Complete, Giants Head Home
The way the story goes, it was the day before the Giants would play San Diego in the American Bowl, and the New York coaching staff had a golf outing with some officers from the United States Army.
One of them, a colonel, was a big Giants fan and told the coaches he could not wait to see Jeff Hostetler play.
Well, uh, sir, the coaches told him, Hostetler isn't with the team anymore.
Of course the quarterback was let go by Coach Dan Reeves, one in a series of his decisions that at the time was controversial but has turned out in the Giants' favor.


Market Place; Delhi's Shareholders Want Gas Company Auctioned
At first glance, shares of the Delhi Group, the natural gas unit of the USX Corporation, seem cheap.
The natural gas business is consolidating at lightning speed, with players paying huge premiums to gobble up rivals and gain market share.
And analysts describe Delhi's assets, which include pipelines that weave a lucrative web through prime oilfields in Texas and Oklahoma, as choice.


West Side Flimflam
To the Editor:
I read with concern that New York City may need $200 million more to balance the 1994-95 budget (editorial, July 29).
This is of interest in view of the proposal to tear down the Miller Highway, 59th Street to 72d Street on the West Side, which has just been renovated at a cost of $87 million, and to rebuild it for $200 million!


'Phreakers' Take a Swipe At Turnstiles and Nynex
Rich the Rebel is a man obsessed with ways to steal phone calls.
Dr.
Who will not rest easy until he has decoded the magnetic strip on the New York State driver's license.
And for others in the community of Dr.
No, Malice and Walking Owl, cracking the code on the Transit Authority's new Metrocard may be only a few swipes away.


Debt Sales This Week
The Treasury's schedule of financings this week is confined to the bills market, beginning with today's regular weekly auction of new three- and six-month bills.
On Thursday, the Government will auction one-year bills.
Traders said that by the close of the New York cash market on Friday, the rate on the outstanding three-month bill was 4.35 percent, a six-month bill was at 4.90 percent and a one-year bill was at 5.29 percent.


Boardroom Tactics Utilized In the Battle Against Crime
It is 8 A.M. and Jack Maple, a Deputy New York City Police Commissioner, and Louis R. Anemone, one of the department's super chiefs, are facing a room full of commanders of precincts and detective squads.
One by one, the commanders -- mainly captains, lieutenants and sergeants -- have been rising to report on crime in their neighborhoods and what they have been doing about it.


Let Us Also Decry the Violence Abortion Does; Clinics Under Siege
To the Editor:
In the aftermath of the tragic murders of Dr.
John Bayard Britton and James H. Barrett, apparently at the hands of the anti-choice zealot Paul J. Hill, in Pensacola, Fla., we must inform New Yorkers that the potential for similar violence exists at women's health care clinics in our area.


Prevention of Atomic Smuggling to Be Discussed
Chancellor Helmut Kohl plans to send an envoy to meet with President Boris N. Yeltsin to discuss ways to prevent an illegal trade in bomb-grade nuclear materials that have been linked to Russia, German officials said today.
Concern about the extent of black-market trade in plutonium, the most toxic and potentially destructive materials known to exist, mounted this weekend after the Bavarian police acknowledged that they had found a large amount of plutonium 239 in the baggage of a flight from Moscow at the Munich airport on Wednesday.


Ancient Sport Becomes a Modern American Trend


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-7  A GESTURE FROM SEOUL  After Washington and Pyongyang signed an agreement on nuclear issues, South Korea offered the North modern nuclear power plants if it will open its nuclear program to international inspection.
A1


Play Ball! Live Ball! Breathe Ball!; With Baseball Heroes Off the Job, Young Fans Keep the Game Going Themselves
Maybe with Major League Baseball on strike, Will Krahe can catch up on his sleep.
No more struggling out of bed at 6:30 A.M. to watch last night's highlights on ESPN.
No more fighting to keep his eyes open until the last out of the Mets game on television tonight.
No, thanks to his heroes' walking off the job, 8-year-old Will has a lot more time now, but happily enough, that also means he'll have more time than ever to play baseball.
It seems as if Will is always playing baseball.
For children who dream of the major leagues, that's what the dream is all about: playing the game forever.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
The proliferation of desktop publishing has brought a new growth industry, the counterfeiting of virtually undetectable fraudulent checks, and banks and law enforcement officials say the cost to the economy could reach $1 billion this year.
Those who carry out this check fraud are using the same inexpensive personal computers that transformed the way millions of businesses produce newsletters and advertising.
The criminals feed their computers images of good checks drawn on good accounts.  [ Page A1. ]


Planned Airport Rail Can Use Little-Known East Side Terminal
To the Editor:
The new light rail link planned by the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey for La Guardia and Kennedy International Airports is the most important economic development in the New York metropolitan area in decades.
It should not be derailed by a poorly thought out Manhattan terminal on the site of the former Alexander's department store at Third Avenue and 59th Street.


Tenants Press for Easier Eviction of Drug Dealers
When Ronald Ward moved his family into the Howard Houses in Brownsville, Brooklyn, more than 30 years ago, the public housing project had no swimming pool, no playgrounds and no handball courts.
And for years the park that now occupies a spot in the middle of the complex was nothing more than a patch of dirt.
But despite the addition of these amenities to the 14-building project over the years, the quality of life there has declined considerably, residents say.
And that is because it has been invaded by a small-scale, but very destructive drug trade.


Real Mexican Food Doesn't Clog Arteries
To the Editor:
The expose by the Center for Science in the Public Interest, a nutrition advocacy group, of fat-laden Mexican dishes as exemplified in popular mainstream Mexican-American restaurants is worthwhile.


Dolphins Express Interest in Sanders
The Miami Dolphins officially joined the DEION SANDERS sweepstakes yesterday when Coach DON SHULA said he would welcome the addition of Sanders to his roster.
Sanders, a cornerback and outfielder for the first-place Cincinnati Reds, has been shopping his football services since being waived and declared a free agent by the Atlanta Falcons in the off season.
Sanders, who was born in Fort Myers, Fla., had said he won't play football until the baseball season is over, but because of the players strike, that may be sooner rather than later.


Toby Rowland, 77, a Producer And London Theater Executive
Toby Rowland, an American-born theatrical impresario and theater executive who was prominent in London, died on Tuesday.
He was 77 and lived in Sussex, England.
He had cancer, said The Times of London, which called him "the only American to have spent the last 40 years at the very peak of theater management" in London.


Abroad at Home; A New Mideast Landscape
By the end of 1996, Secretary of State Warren Christopher said, it is "entirely possible" that Israel will be at peace with all its neighbors.
"It would have seemed visionary," he said, "but not at the pace at which things are going."
In a conversation in his office, the Secretary was strikingly upbeat on the possibility of peace between Israel and Syria, for a generation the bitterest of enemies.
On a Middle East tour from which he had just returned he again shuttled between Jerusalem and Damascus, Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin and President Hafez al-Assad.


For Rison, Golden Opportunities in Fall After a Summer Worth Forgetting
Falcons receiver Andre Rison believes he and his new coach, June Jones, have a bond that will allow them both to soar high this season.
After an acrimonious contract dispute last season, Rison found himself in then-coach Jerry Glanville's ever expanding doghouse.
And Jones, working as Glanville's offensive coordinator, was always in the expansive shadow of the man in black.


Rising Rates: Jarring Truth
The unexpected rises in interest rates in Italy and Sweden last week resulted from special factors in those countries, but they still served as a jarring reminder to West European financial markets that a long period of declining rates is drawing to an end.
Italy's decision on Thursday to push its discount rate up half a point, to 7.5 percent, and Sweden's move earlier that day to raise its benchmark lending rate by half a point, to 8 percent, sent European stock and bond markets tumbling on Friday and threw currency markets into turmoil.


Monet's Fixation on the Rouen Cathedral
By the time Claude Monet set up his easel beside an open window opposite Rouen Cathedral one chilly morning in February 1892, he had long demonstrated his fascination with painting the same subject over and over again, each time under different light or weather conditions.
At 52, he had already made series of studies of haystacks, the Seine, the Thames at Westminster, poplars and the Gare St.-Lazare in Paris.
And in the two decades before his death in 1926, he dedicated himself almost entirely to the water lilies in his beloved garden at Giverny.


In 'My Fair Lady,' Audrey Hepburn Is Singing at Last
"My Fair Lady," a confection of a film, had a touch of bitterness to the taste when it was made in 1964.
Julie Andrews created the role of Eliza Doolittle on Broadway, but the film role went to Audrey Hepburn.
Miss Hepburn, who had warbled sweetly in "Breakfast at Tiffany's," expected to sing her way through the great Lerner and Loewe songs, but her voice was dubbed.
Miss Andrews got her own back when she won the Oscar for best actress for "Mary Poppins" that year.
And now Miss Hepburn will get a little justice as well.
In the course of restoring "My Fair Lady," two film conservators have discovered some of the vocal tracks she recorded in pre-production and, using a little sleight of hand, have rescued two of the recordings from oblivion, "Wouldn't It Be Loverly" and "Show Me." And when the fully restored film is shown for the first time at a benefit at the Ziegfeld Theater in Manhattan on Sept. 19, the Hepburn version of "Wouldn't It Be Loverly" will play as the final credits roll.
The first public screening is on Sept. 21.


In Last-Minute Rites, Salinas Weds Democracy


Dream Team Ends Its Sequel Predictably
They saved their best for last, but it wasn't quite enough to dispel all thoughts that the world has moved closer to the United States.
Not that much closer.
Probably not close enough be a serious threat at Atlanta in 1996.
Just small steps in the right direction.
Throughout the world basketball championships, which concluded here today with a 137-91 United States thrashing of Russia at the Skydome in the gold-medal game, there were signs.
Maybe the best was the gleam in Sergei Belov's eyes when Russia's coach said of the National Basketball Association millionaires: "They are human. Top-notch professionals, but definitely human."


'Roseanne': Out on a Limb Again
Most people won't recognize the cast of "She TV." And its focus on comedy for women is probably not something network research would find a crying need for.
But ABC is willing to take a chance on the program, starting Tuesday, mainly because of who is producing it.
When hourlong dramas predominated network television programming and pundits were predicting the imminent death of the sitcom a decade ago, Marcy Carsey and Tom Werner -- two young former network program executives -- persuaded a reluctant NBC to devote half an hour each week to a family sitcom starring Bill Cosby.


El Salvador Hasn't Purged Itself of War Crimes
To the Editor:
In "Dealing With War Crimes" (editorial, Aug. 4), on Rwanda, you cite recent experience in El Salvador as a model, where, in your view, the "sacrifice of justice to promote social peace can be morally justified."
What the Salvadoran experience demonstrates is that there is no substitute for a people coming to terms itself with a painful period of state-sponsored violence.
Just like individuals, growth cannot be forced on a society from without.


From the Senate, the Sonorous and the Silly
It is a hot Friday night and the United States Senate is working itself into a sweat over children.
Or, more precisely, how soon private insurers should be required to make preventive services for children a standard benefit in any health policy they sell.
"From the teachings that I got from the earliest age in the church that I was taken to by my parents," Senator Donald W. Riegle Jr., Democrat of Michigan, declares, "I think I remember as vividly as anything the notion in the Bible of the teachings that Jesus said, Let the little children come unto me."


CHRONICLE
Interior Secretary BRUCE BABBITT got away from the heat in Washington and went right up to a blazing 1,300-acre wildfire in California over the weekend.
Mr.
Babbitt joined the Tahoe Hotshots, an elite group of firefighters, on Saturday morning and worked a 12-hour shift with them in steep, rocky terrain, The Associated Press reported.


After an Illegal Blow, It's No Contest for Bowe
At ringside, it sounded like a debate among Talmudic scholars.
But it was merely a boxing argument, filled as it was with "on the other hands" and "what-ifs" and left-right-left interpretations of the rules.
In the confusion Saturday night, Riddick Bowe was awarded a no-contest decision against Buster Mathis Jr. -- "awarded" because Arthur Mercante, the 74-year-old referee, ruled that Bowe had deliberately hit Mathis after he was already down on one knee in the fourth round.


Staten Island Fears Crime, But Congress Isn't Helping
While waiting for a haircut and shave at Colombo's Barber Shop on Forest Avenue in Staten Island, Lou DiMasi got up from his chair and displayed the reasons he moved out of Brooklyn more than a decade ago: a one-inch scar from a .22-caliber bullet on his left calf and a neat welt on his arm from a razor-blade attack in high school.
Now, after 12 years on Staten Island, he has begun to see the ominous signs he saw in Brooklyn: the spread of graffiti, the menacing youths hanging out on the corner, the creeping deterioration of neighborhoods that used to be nice.


Essay; Why the Rush?
Democrats accuse Republicans of delaying crime and health bills to make President Clinton look bad.
But the truth is Democrats are rushing to judgment to avoid having to heed the voice of the people in an election only 12 weeks away.
The crime bill, temporarily stymied by the gun lobby, is far from dead.
That is not merely because a President and a majority leadership can use puissant patronage -- and a reprise of last year's "Don't kill my young Presidency" -- to snatch back the votes of enough of the 58 recalcitrant House Democrats to save the party from gridlockjaw.


Suddenly, at Saratoga, Charge of the Horse Owners
Race-horse owners fired the opening salvos today in a battle against the owners of race tracks for a louder voice in the racing business and a larger share of the revenue.
They warned the tracks that they owned the talent part of the business, namely the horses, and said they would sue if necessary to win control of property rights to television images of their horses in broadcasting and simulcast betting.


Minor League Manager Fined for Mooning
The manager of the Bellingham Mariners was suspended and fined for mooning an umpire during a Northwest League baseball game last week, the league president, BOB RICHMOND, said Saturday.
MIKE GOFF pulled the top of his pants down at home plate while protesting a fair-ball call on a hit by the Southern Oregon Athletics on Tuesday night in Medford, Ore.
The incident was shown on ESPN on Wednesday night.


Sports of The Times; Is Mike Conducting a Strike?
Driving here from the airport yesterday afternoon, I thought about all of the television trucks, with their miles of cables, descending on Tim McCarver Stadium and preparing for a national broadcast of a minor league game: the Memphis Chicks versus the Birmingham Barons.
The major league players strike was little more than 48 hours old, but television, eager to fill valleys of air time, had found its Mr.
Clutch.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Press; The Boston Herald, an aggressive tabloid, sets out to prove that there is life after ownership by Rupert Murdoch.
PATRICK J. PURCELL has an idea for his newspaper.
"If we're a tabloid," he said, "let's be a real tabloid with a personality and a feistiness that will make people more interested."
Mr.
Purcell's ideas are quite influential at The Boston Herald, the tabloid in question, because he owns it.
He bought it six months ago from Rupert Murdoch, his old boss.
Mr.
Purcell, 46, had been publisher of The Herald and of The New York Post and was president of Mr.
Murdoch's News America Publishing Inc.


With Flexibility, the Orion String Quartet
The principal charm of the Mostly Mozart concert on Thursday evening at Avery Fisher Hall was the understated but crucial flexibility that the Orion String Quartet brought to its collaborations with Anne-Marie McDermott, the pianist, and Richard Stoltzman, the clarinetist.
Both musicians approach their work with an energy and spirit that keep their performances involving.
But that aside, they seem to live at different ends of the interpretive spectrum.
Ms.
McDermott tends to work within conventional notions about Classical style, where she finds sufficient leeway to make her case.
In a consistently graceful account of Mozart's Piano Quartet in E flat (K. 493), she exploited the breadth of the music's possibilities, sometimes giving the piano line an almost vocal shape and coloration and sometimes playing with a more aggressive pianistic sparkle.
The Orion players matched her approach move for move, particularly in the finale, where the interplay between lines is strongest and where the character of the music is the most changeable.


The Cold War and Its Unanswerable Questions
The Cold War A History  By Martin Walker 392 pages.
A John Macrae Book/Henry Holt &amp; Company. $30.
The cold war was an ideological war, a weapons war and an economic war.
It lasted longer than World War I, World War II and the Korean and Vietnam Wars combined.
Now that only one of the adversaries remains a superpower, Western historians are warring over several theoretical questions: When did the cold war actually begin?
Was the Soviet Union alone responsible or should some of the blame be shared by the United States?
Can any American Administration take credit for "winning" the cold war?
Was the cold war avoidable or were the United States and the Soviet Union, in the phrase of the disarmament expert Paul C. Warnke, two apes on a treadmill?


In Prom Dispute, a Town's Race Divisions Emerge
This two-stoplight town is America's latest civil rights crucible, a speck on the map between Atlanta and Birmingham that has been riven by racial tension in the six months since a white high school principal threatened to cancel the prom to prevent interracial dating and was accused of telling a mixed-race student that her birth had been a mistake.
The challenge of Hulond Humphries, the 55-year-old principal, to the inexorable tide of social integration here and his disputed exchange with the student, 17-year-old Revonda Bowen, have uncovered deep racial divisions long hidden in Wedowee, a rural hamlet known for the easy friendships among its 800 residents and for the huge bass in its local lake.


For Young Catholics, 2 Days of Faith and Music
The gathering on the grassy slopes of St.
Joseph's Seminary here this weekend had many of the trappings of a rock concert, but with a distinctly religious touch.
The crowd was mostly young, the music too loud to talk over, and there were lines for the bathrooms, telephones and concession booths.
But the songs spoke of faith in Jesus, and the memorabilia for sale included holy cards, T-shirts with the Virgin Mary's image, and sweat shirts and water bottles celebrating the scheduled visit by the Pope here in the fall.


Lamenting Petty Politics, Clinton Pushes Crime Bill
In a mournful plea to a nation he said was "coming apart at the seams" over violence, President Clinton took to the pulpit at a suburban church today, briefly lamented the petty politics that he said had stalled his crime package in the House and asked for prayers that he and Congress would do God's work in keeping families and children safe.
And on television, his top aides and allies excoriated Republicans who blocked the $30 billion crime measure in the House last week, bluntly asserting that they were in league with the gun lobby to keep assault weapons on the nation's streets.


Tough Leader Wields the Ax at Scott
The two brass ornaments that decorate the desk of Albert J. Dunlap are circling sharks.
A pouncing brass lion rules his conference table.
And a brass eagle stoops to its prey in his reception room.
"I like predators," said Mr.
Dunlap, the chief executive of the Scott Paper Company, fixing an office visitor with steely blue eyes.
"I like them because they live by their wits."
To be sure, the 57-year-old turnaround specialist, who recently announced the biggest corporate revamping in Scott's history, has acquired a few predatory nicknames himself.
When asked about them, he smiled, paused and said: "On the whole, I prefer to be called Rambo in Pinstripes rather than Chainsaw. That makes me sound like a serial killer, don't you think?"


A First-Place Team Looking for Handout
In the humid confines of what is surely the ugliest stadium in North America, Claude Brochu, the president of the Montreal Expos, ponders the essential contradiction of his team: with the second-lowest payroll it is in first place in the National League East with the best record in baseball.
"We're living a miracle now," Brochu said Thursday, molded into a contoured yellow plastic seat inside empty Olympic Stadium.
"But we have no margin for error. If we make mistakes, we can't buy ourselves out."


Bosnian Army and Serbs Agree to End Sniper Fire in Sarajevo
The Government and leaders of the Bosnian Serbs signed an agreement today to end the sniper fire that has killed thousands of people, including hundreds of children, in Sarajevo.
The accord, which was to go into effect within 24 hours, was reached in negotiations led by United Nations officials, who are trying to reduce the tensions that have risen since the Bosnian Serbs rejected an international peace plan.
United Nations officials said that a 24-hour grace period was built into the agreement so that each side could inform its sharpshooters along the front line.


World Economies


In Boat Races, Dragons Roar and Tradition Lives
Poised at the prow of a Chinese dragon boat, Jack Ribeiro beat the drum yesterday to set the pace for his team.
Synchronized by the thundering drumbeats, the 20-member crew paddled furiously in swift, short strokes.
The team members' low grunts were buried by the splashing of foamy white waves on the lake in Flushing Meadows Corona Park in Queens.
Three slim teakwood boats -- decorated with dragon heads at the prow and dragon tails at the stern and painted in the traditional colors of gold, green, blue and red -- roared toward the finish line in the Greater New York Championship Race of the Chinese Dragon Boat Festival.


Train Wreck in Caucasus
A passenger train smashed into a parked freight train on a stretch of track where the signals were broken, killing 12 people and injuring 20, officials said today.
The accident occurred Saturday.


Chrysler Aims at the Baby Boomers
Advertising in the Brooks Brothers catalogue.
Test drives around Frank Lloyd Wright buildings.
Talk of having the "best darn turn signals in the business."
It's all part of a forthcoming effort by the Chrysler Corporation to sell its new compact Cirrus sedans to those car buyers who have most emphatically abandoned the Big Three -- affluent baby boomers with a taste for oxford shirts, fine architecture and high-quality Japanese cars like the Honda Accord and Toyota Camry.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Will Court TV further exploit the Simpson trial? And why didn't GM publicly mourn Dinah Shore?
BY popular demand -- if two postcards and a letter scribbled in crayon indicate public interest -- it is time again to pose 20 questions about advertising and marketing.
*If state lotteries were required to disclose the odds against winning in as detailed a fashion as, say, automobile dealers are required to disclose terms of car leases in print advertisements, would anyone still play?


New Breed of Check Forgers Exploits Desktop Publishing
The proliferation of desktop publishing has brought a new growth industry, the counterfeiting of virtually undetectable fraudulent checks, and banks and law enforcement officials say the cost to the economy could reach $1 billion this year.
Perpetrators of this fast-growing kind of check fraud are using the same inexpensive personal computers with sophisticated graphics capabilities that transformed the way millions of legitimate businesses produce newsletters and advertising.


Centralization Is Often Best, Cortines Says
Responding to a City Hall proposal to dismantle much of the headquarters of the New York City Board of Education, Chancellor Ramon C. Cortines argued yesterday that the board's central administration often plays an indispensable and cost-effective role in the school system.
In a report that offered his most detailed statement to date on how the system should be governed, Mr.
Cortines also warned that efforts by Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani and his advisers to bring the board under tighter mayoral control could hurt the education of the city's children.


Leon Goldsworthy; Australian Naval Officer
Lieut.
Comdr.
Leon Goldsworthy, a specialist in the disposal of enemy explosive devices from Australia who helped the American Navy during the invasion of the Philippines in World War II, died on Aug. 7 in South Perth, Australia.
He was 85.
Commander Goldsworthy was Australia's most highly decorated naval officer officer in that war, The Times of London said last week.


Woodstock: Music Fades and Muddy Trek Begins
The 25th anniversary Woodstock celebration wound down today in a sea of mud and trash and amid evidence of anarchy.
Security deteriorated and some emergency medical workers compared the scene to a war zone.
But the promoters pronounced the event a huge success.
Thousands of people, hauling rain-sodden bedding and wearing garbage-bag ponchos, found themselves forced to stand in a mile-long line for hours before they were able to board shuttle buses that took them to parking lots as far as 30 miles away.
Many set out on foot.
Some found their cars stuck in the mud at the parking lots and paid local residents as much as $100 to pull them out with tractors.


After 25 Years, the Music Was Still Free


METRO DIGEST
BREATHING NEW LIFE INTO RESEARCH ALLEY
Since 1876, when Thomas Edison opened the Menlo Park laboratory where he invented the electric light and the phonograph, the marriage between science and business has found a home in New Jersey.
For all the continuing breakthroughs by the 125,000 scientists and engineers working in the state, though, one question stands out: where are dynamic new enterprises growing up locally to take advantage of the inventions born in New Jersey labs?
At least one group -- the David Sarnoff Research Center in Princeton -- is trying to fill the void.
A1.
WOODSTOCK '94 WINDS TO A MUDDY CLOSE
The 25th anniversary Woodstock celebration wound down in a sea of mud and trash amid evidence of anarchy.
Security deteriorated, and emergency medical workers compared the scene at times to a war zone.
But the promoters pronounced the event a huge success.
A1.


From India, With Stops On the Way
XLNC, which performed on Thursday night at S.O.B.'s with the singer Bindu, is probably the first contemporary Indian bhangra band to perform to an integrated audience in New York.
It's surprising that it has taken so long, considering that the hybrid called bhangra, a mix of harvest festival music from Punjab in Northern India and reggae, rap, techno and club music, actually comes from England.
Like hip-hop, bhangra has become a way for a minority culture -- in this case, Indians born in Britain -- to find identity and empowerment through its own music.
XLNC (pronounced "excellency") is among bhangra's youngest upstarts.
On Thursday, its dance music, powered by the adrenaline tempos of the two-headed dholak drum and the larger, congalike dhol drum, insured that the dance floor remained a sea of waving arms and airborne dollar bills the entire night.
Harbajan Singh Talwar and Dave Singh sang mostly in Punjabi, but also in Hindi and English, closing almost every song with rousing chants of "Hey!" Mr.
Talwar, in particular, had a resonant voice that soared majestically over the band's good-time grooves.
Two keyboardists mixed the traditional and the modern, playing everything from repetitive house-music riffs to spiraling flutelike melodies.


A Siberian Railroad, From 'Hero' to Disaster
It has been exactly two decades since they came here by the thousands, traveling across Siberia by rail, bus and even on foot to help forge the last great link in the proletarian paradise.
Idealistic young Communists rising one final time to a challenge from the Soviet leader Leonid I. Brezhnev, they cast their personal lives aside and dedicated themselves to creating the Baikal-Amur Mainline: the BAM, as it has always been called.


Brooklyn Philharmonic Announces New Season
The Brooklyn Philharmonic is to give the premieres of two new Philip Glass works, the Symphony No. 2 and Six Etudes, in the first of the five theme weekends that make up its 1994-95 season.
Other topics to be explored during the season are transcendentalism in American music, different ways of looking at Bach and musical responses to life in Weimar Germany and in the Soviet Union under Stalin.
Each concert is preceded by a lecture or a recital.
The orchestra, facing demographic changes and a dwindling audience in Brooklyn and increased competition for its Manhattan audience, began reconsidering its programming three seasons ago, when Dennis Russell Davies became principal conductor.
Last season, the orchestra reconfigured its programs more radically, settling on concrete themes and expanding on them in chamber music performances, discussions and multi-media presentations.
As a result, ticket sales increased by 47 percent, said Joseph Horowitz, the orchestra's executive director.


Finley Predicts Owners Will Give In
CHARLES O. FINLEY predicts baseball owners won't let the strike last more than another week because they can't afford it.
"There's a few clubs that have been sold recently or purchased for $100 million, $125 million, $150 million," said Finley, who owned the A's in Kansas City and Oakland from 1960 to 1981.
"When they pay that much money those guys are leveraged to the hilt, and they have to make those payments. I foresee enough owners to be concerned about making payments on their clubs that they're going to have to give in at the end. They've done it so many times before."


Encore for City Center's Encores Series
City Center plans to bring back Encores, its runaway hit series of musicals in concert version, in the 1994-95 season.
Performances by four major American dance companies and a troupe from Spain that performs what might be described as the Spanish forerunner to Broadway musical theater are scheduled as well.
This year's musicals will be chosen by a panel of what Judith Dakin, the executive director of City Center and the producer of Encores, affectionately describes as a committee of "musical theater nuts." There are to be three productions, each performed four times in the spring, accompanied by Rob Fisher's Coffee Club Orchestra.
Walter Bobbie, a Tony Award nominee this year for his direction of "A Grand Night for Singing," has been named artistic director of the series.


CHRONICLE
It is not often that Physics Today prints love letters, which may be why this month's issue is generating unusual attention.
The letters, with more to come in the September issue, were written by ALBERT EINSTEIN to Mileva Maric, a physics student whom he met when they were classmates at Swiss Polytechnic in Zurich.


Wild-Card Owners Do Dealing of Their Own
Baseball and its peculiar, self-destructive way of conducting business is predictable.
What, it's 1994?
It must be time to hold another image-destroying work stoppage.
But once in a while something that seems like a wild card is thrown out, threatening the pathetically preordained.
Such as when Peter Angelos, George Steinbrenner, Jerry McMorris, owners all, seemed to break from management's position even before the players went on strike after games played last Thursday.


Corrections
The Metropolitan Almanac in the Weather Report yesterday misstated the hour of Saturday's highest temperature in some editions.
It was 1 P.M., not 1 A.M.


TRANSACTIONS
Football  National Football League  DENVER BRONCOS -- Signed Leonard Russell, running back, to a one-year contract.
Released Robert Delpino, running back.
NEW ORLEANS SAINTS -- Claimed Patt Evans, tight end, off waivers from the Kansas City Chiefs.
SAN FRANCISCO 49ERS -- Waived Anthony Bell, linebacker; Tim Burton, tight end; and Darrel Crawford, linebacker.
Signed Darin Jordan, linebacker.
College
CATAWBA -- Announced the resignation of J.D. Haglan, football coach, effective Dec. 31.
TULANE -- Dismissed Thaddaeus Prosper, defensive tackle, and Brent Barrington, tight end, from the football team for breaking team rules.


Bury Their Hearts at Wrigley
A few years after a ship carrying her and her dreams from Italy docked at Ellis Island, Carmella Hartigan attended her first major league baseball game and fell in love with America for good.
Ever since that sun-splashed Chicago Cubs game in 1925, the national pastime of her adopted country has helped her through the Great Depression, wars and the sorrow of burying a husband and then a son in the 1960's, when "the bottom just fell out."


Parking Rules
Because of the Roman Catholic feast of the Assumption of the Blessed Virgin, alternate-side street cleaning regulations will be suspended in New York City today.
Other regulations will remain in effect.


More Rwandans Flee to Zaire as French Prepare to Leave
Rwandans are continuing to flee from the French security zone in Rwanda across the border here into Zaire in spite of efforts by the French, the United Nations and international relief agencies to persuade them to stay in their own country.
There was a steady movement of refugees along the 80 miles of twisting, rocky road from Kibuye, at the northern end of the French safe haven, to Bukavu.
There were reports that at least as many people were moving toward Bukavu along the hard-surfaced road from Gikongoro.
Most are peasants, uncertain of what lies ahead but convinced that if they stay behind, they will be killed by the new Government in Rwanda.


Bury Their Hearts at Wrigley
A few years after a ship carrying her and her dreams from Italy docked at Ellis Island, Carmella Hartigan attended her first major league baseball game and fell in love with America for good.
Ever since that sun-splashed Chicago Cubs game in 1925, the national pastime of her adopted country has helped her through the Great Depression, wars and the sorrow of burying a husband and then a son in the 1960's, when "the bottom just fell out."


Spinoffs Giving Research Alley Industrial Base
Since 1876, when Thomas Edison opened the Menlo Park laboratory where he invented the electric light and the phonograph, the marriage between science and business has found a home in New Jersey.
Color television, the videotape recorder and liquid crystal displays were all invented at RCA's research center, while AT&amp;T Bell Laboratories created everything from the transistor to the laser.
Today, what might be called Research Alley -- the Route 1 corridor from New Brunswick to Princeton -- is the core of the nation's greatest concentration of corporate research and development.


Jessie Sumner, Fervent Enemy Of Roosevelt in House, Dies at 96
Jessie Sumner, an Illinois Republican who was the first woman elected to a county judgeship in her state and a conservative member of Congress from 1939 to 1947, died on Wednesday in Iroquois Memorial Hospital in Watseka, Ill.
She was 96 and lived in nearby Milford.
The cause was congestive heart failure, said Donna Rae Mann, Miss Sumner's assistant.


Results Plus
AUTO RACING  Martin Drives Thunderbird to Victory  Mark Martin and his Ford Thunderbird were a flawless combination yesterday at Watkins Glen, N.Y., during a dominating victory in the Bud at the Glen stock car race.
"We didn't have any trouble anywhere at all," Martin said after winning from the pole for the second straight year on the 2.45-mile, 11-turn road course.
It was Martin's first victory of the season and 13th of his Winston Cup career.
Martin led 75 of the 90 laps and handily fought off a late challenge from Ernie Irvan, winning the battle of Thunderbirds by 0.88 seconds -- about four car lengths.  (AP)
Unser Leads Sweep by Penske Team: Al Unser led a Team Penske sweep of the first three positions in the Miller Genuine Draft 200 at Lexington, Ohio, by capitalizing on a penalty against Paul Tracy, who finished second.
The third Penske team member, Emerson Fittipaldi, who won the race in 1992 and 1993, was third.
Tracy, who had led all but one lap, was penalized by CART officials for passing Gordon under a yellow caution flag on lap 53.  (AP) Schumacher Wins in Hungary: Michael Schumacher drove a near-flawless race to win the Hungarian Grand Prix in Mogyorod, his seventh victory of the Formula One season yesterday.
Schumacher, in a Benetton, sailed through 77 laps on the 2.46-mile Hungaroring circuit in 1 hour 48 minutes 00.185 seconds at an average speed of 105.237 miles an hour.
The 25-year-old German led for all but nine laps, crossing the finish line 20.8 seconds ahead of the Williams Renault driven by his chief rival, Damon Hill. (AP) GOLF  Jacklin Takes Rain-Shortened Seniors  Tony Jacklin, just five weeks removed from his 50th birthday and playing on a sponsor's exemption, shot a four-under-par 68 yesterday and won the Senior PGA Tour's rain-shortened First of America Classic in Grand Rapids, Mich.
The event was shortened to 36 holes when rain washed out Saturday's round.
Jacklin beat Dave Stockton by one stroke in only his fourth start on the Senior Tour.
His round included an eagle on the 513-yard, par-5 13th hole at Egypt Valley Country Club. (AP) Will Gets Help in Victory: It was Maggie Will's victory, but Jill Briles-Hinton couldn't help but think it was also her loss.
Briles-Hinton bogeyed the final hole of regulation to allow Alicia Dibos and Will into a playoff, then three-putted the first playoff hole for another bogey.
Will took advantage of her largess, dropping a 15-foot birdie putt on the second playoff hole to win the inaugural Children's Medical Center L.P.G.A.
Classic at Beavercreek, Ohio.
Will trailed Briles-Hinton, a non-winner in eight years, by two strokes as she teed off on the final hole.
Briles-Hinton hit a 6-iron into the right bunker and ended up with a bogey.
Will hit to 24 feet of the pin and sank a twisting putt for birdie.  (AP)
TENNIS  Frazier Defeats Friend in Slims Tourney  Amy Frazier defeated a childhood friend, Ann Grossman, by 6-1, 6-3 yesterday to win the Virginia Slims of Los Angeles in a baseline struggle of little-known Americans.
Frazier's fifth career title and first this year was worth $80,000, her biggest payday in four years as a pro.
The victory by the 21-year-old Frazier completed her best week in a major tournament.
She didn't drop a set in six matches, including victories over sixth-seeded Anke Huber and a quarterfinal upset of top-seeded Conchita Martinez. (AP) Goldstein Wins Another Title: Second-seeded Paul Goldstein of Rockville, Md., defeated No. 13 Jan-Michael Gambill of Colbert, Wash., 6-0, 6-4, 6-3, to win the United States Tennis Association national boys 18 championships in Kalamazoo, Mich.
Goldstein became the only player ever to win three consecutive national boys titles.
He has earned a wild card in the main draw of the United States Open, which begins Aug. 29.
In boys 16's, second-seeded Mike Russell of Bloomfield Hills, Mich., defeated top-seeded Kevin Kim of Fullerton, Calif., 6-1, 6-1. (AP)


Leo Burnett Chosen For Disney Project
The Walt Disney Company has hired Leo Burnett U.S.A. to handle an undisclosed marketing project for its Walt Disney Attractions division, which oversees the Disneyland and Walt Disney World theme parks.
Greg Albrecht, a spokesman for Walt Disney World in Orlando, Fla., and Wally Petersen, a spokesman for Burnett in Chicago, confirmed a report of the assignment last week in The Chicago Tribune, but both declined to comment further.
As for The Tribune's report that the assignment could foreshadow Disney's hiring of Burnett to handle a theme parks account, Mr.
Albrecht called that "pure conjecture."


Selling Growth Drug for Children: The Legal and Ethical Questions
The companies that make and market a genetically engineered drug face charges that they have crossed legal and ethical lines in promoting their product, in the process tainting trusted relationships between doctors and patients, and parents and school systems.
The drug is Protropin, a genetically engineered version of human growth hormone made by Genentech Inc. that can make some short children grow taller than they otherwise would.
A Federal grand jury in Minneapolis this month indicted a doctor, David R. Brown of Minneapolis, on charges that he had received $1.1 million in kickbacks to prescribe the drug.


Patents; A 3-D Sound System May Make the Noises in Interactive Games Seem More Lifelike
IF virtual reality means creating false environments so compelling that the brain thinks they are authentic, then the soundtrack should be just as convincing as the images.
Applying that approach to making its interactive computer games more true to life, the 3DO Company last week patented software for a three-dimensional sound system.
The software controls the playback of recorded sounds to give them the same fluctuations in timing, pitch, volume and filtering that a listener hears in sounds that occur around him or her.
With the software, the noises made by a moving object in a computer game will sound through earphones as if they were coming from different places around a room.


Fed Looks At Growth And Risk
Alan Greenspan, the chairman of the Federal Reserve Board, is a man in the difficult position of trying to tiptoe as close as possible to a line he cannot see and must not cross.
Mr.
Greenspan wants the economy to grow as near as possible at the level that economists call its maximum sustainable capacity -- that is, the greatest growth that does not produce inflationary pressure as factories pile on overtime and bid up the prices of raw material.


Let Us Also Decry the Violence Abortion Does; Is Congress Caving In?
To the Editor:
With floor debate on health care reform having begun in Congress, I am disturbed about reports that some members of Congress want to banish reproductive health care, especially abortion, from the national guaranteed benefits package.


Latins Join in New Effort to Get Haitian Leaders to Step Down
With most Latin American nations opposing a United States military invasion of Haiti, Venezuela is planning to send a group of regional foreign ministers to Port-au-Prince next week to try to persuade the country's military rulers to step down and go into exile.
"We call it a Latin American solution for a Latin American problem," Venezuela's Foreign Minister, Miguel Angel Burelli Rivas, said of a proposal that won wide support at a meeting of regional foreign ministers in Bogota, Colombia, last week.


Dividend Meetings


Jets' Glenn Big Part of Eagle Offense
If there is ever a time for a rookie to make mistakes, it's the preseason.
Good thing for Jets cornerback Aaron Glenn, the team's 1994 first-round draft pick, because he made a mammoth miscue every time he got an opportunity to field a punt in the Jets' 34-24 victory over Philadelphia Saturday night.
He now has two games to correct the problem before the regular season starts for the Jets (1-1).


INSIDE
Health in Senators' Hands
With the House sidelined by the crime bill, the action on the floor of the Senate this week should say a lot about the shape of and the prospects for health legislation.
Page A12.
Race Resentment Surfaces
Ever since a high school principal threatened to cancel the prom because of interracial dating, race relations have not been the same in Wedowee, Ala.
Page A10.
Harsh Voice of the Hutu
A man who has spent years in government in Kigali weaves a tale of years of bitterness and a thirst for revenge to justify the slaughter of the Tutsi people of Rwanda.
Page A6.
Price Wins P.G.A.
Title
Nick Price, the British Open champion, became the first man in 12 years to win consecutive major golf tournaments by winning the P.G.A.
Championship.
SportsMonday, C1.


Setbacks? Just Routine on the Farm
It has not been an easy summer for David Rothermel.
Chemical weed killers flopped, he had to dismiss an employee in a pay dispute and vandals damaged his irrigation system.
It did not help that the company he hired to make sure two strains of seed corn were properly bred to each other did not live up to its contract.
Worse, there has been too little rain.


Dow Drops 8.42 Amid Uncertainty on Fed
The stock market closed mixed yesterday amid unusually high levels of uncertainty as to what the Federal Reserve Board's interest-rate setting committee will do today.
A fifth increase in interest rates by the Fed's Open Market Committee would be sure to slow the economy further, perhaps bolstering bonds and strengthening the weak dollar.
But it would also weaken corporate profits and thus hurt stocks, at least for the short run.


Lowe's Cos.(LOW,N) reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Password Follies of 1994: When 'Open, Sez Me' Doesn't Work
"NOTICE," says the manual.
"If you forget the password, you must take your computer to an authorized service representative for replacement of the component that stores the password." What the manual does not say is what happens if your computer forgets the password, or, worse, makes up a new one without telling you about it.
The original password went back five years, to the days when the machine was hot and sexy.
Today no thief would waste the muscle power to carry such a relic away, but the password remained.
So the computer always began the day with a minimalist white-on-black Password: prompt, and I always responded by typing half a dozen characters carefully chosen for their personal unforgettability.


U.S. Shoe Corp.(USR,N) reports earnings for Qtr to July 30


BOXING: Only Gloves in Breland's Future Are in Class; The Ex-Champion-Turned Teacher Has No Desire to Go Back in the Ring
On any Tuesday night, peer into a ninth floor room all the way in the back of the Better Bodies Cross-Training Center on West 19th Street in Manhattan, and you will see the tall, slender young man with long, wiry arms teaching a boxing for fitness class.
The class, with its pads and gloves, plastic jump ropes and exercises in technique, is routine.


Woodstock's Aftermath: Myths and Garbage


Treasury Bill Rates Rise; Trading Dull
Prices of Treasury securities were mixed and little changed yesterday ahead of today's meeting of the Federal Reserve's Open Market Committee, which will consider another rise in short-term interest rates.
The 30-year bond was unchanged, trading at a price of 9931/32 to yield 7.50 percent, while rates in the shorter bill market were higher as investors moved to the sanctuary of money market funds to await the Fed's next move.
Prices and yields move in the opposite direction.


People
*
Douglas Atkin was named to the new position of executive vice president and strategic planning director at Wells Rich Greene BDDP, New York.
He was previously planning director and management director at Collett Dickenson Pearce, London. *
Joel Portugal, a founder and partner at Anspach Grossman Portugal, New York, will leave the corporate identity and consulting company after 25 years, effective Aug. 31.
Mr.
Portugal, 58, has relinquished his duties as president and chief executive to Jim Johnson, who joined from Siegal &amp; Gale, New York.


Patterns
Italian Invasion
For some 500 years, Italians have been discovering and rediscovering America.
The latest landing is by three fashion companies eager to expand their global successes to these shores.
Marzotto, Maska and Max Mara have had limited distribution in the United States but are now gearing up for major expansion.


WHITE HOUSE TRIES TO WIN 8 CONVERTS ON THE CRIME BILL
The White House dangled the prospect of concessions on the crime bill before both Congressional Republicans and Democrats today, but by day's end it could not report a single new ally in its struggle to revive the troubled measure.
Even as President Clinton boosted the pressure by enlisting the assistance of relatives of crime victims, his aides were beginning a series of delicate calculations toward a formula that, without costing any votes already in hand, could win the eight converts needed to turn last Thursday's defeat on a procedural House vote into triumph.


Corrections
An obituary last Thursday about Buff Donelli misstated his overall record as football coach at Columbia University from 1957 through 1967.
It was 30-67-2.


Chief Resigns At Blue Cross Of New York
In an action that startled state officials, G. Robert O'Brien, a veteran insurance executive who was hired last year to help restore the finances of Empire Blue Cross and Blue Shield, is resigning as head of the state's largest health insurer effective Sept. 1, Empire said yesterday.
Mr.
O'Brien, who is taking a job with a private home-care service company, picked "an awkward time" to resign his post as president and chief executive of Empire, said Philip Briggs, chairman of Empire Blue Cross.
Mr.
Briggs added that it would be difficult to find a strong replacement for Mr.
O'Brien at a time when many of Empire's problems have continued to worsen.


Disney Saves Virginians From More Sprawl; Mixed Media's Magic
To the Editor:
William Styron fears the potential trivialization of the slave experience in Disney's proposed Virginia park (Op-Ed, Aug. 4).


Billy Wilson, 59, Director and Choreographer
Billy Wilson, the director and choreographer of "Bubbling Brown Sugar" and other Broadway musicals, died on Sunday at St.
Vincent's Hospital in Manhattan.
He was 59 and lived in Teaneck, N.J.
The cause was AIDS, said his daughter, Alexis Wilson.


Making Mondays Full of Song


Dominance by U.S. Is Merely a Memory
If there were any lingering notions that American golf might salvage a vestige of its former pre-eminence this year, they were erased this past weekend in the P.G.A.
Championship coronation march of Nick Price of South Africa.
His compelling and dominating parade to his second straight major championship provided an exclamation mark to the theme that had been taking shape throughout the 1994 season.
And that theme is that American golf just got Grand Slammed.
Never before had the United States failed to produce a single winner in one of the major championships.
It would be stretching it to say that this is like the State of Texas not producing a single all-America football player, but the stretch would only be a slight one.


Defendant in Scholar's Killing In Crown Hts. Set Free on Bail
In a closed hearing in Atlanta last week, Lemrick Nelson Jr. was released on $25,000 bail and permitted to drive back to the New York area with his mother to face charges that he killed a Hasidic scholar in Crown Heights two years ago, his lawyer said yesterday.
Mr.
Nelson, 19, who was held on Rikers Island during his first trial in the killing, will surrender to the authorities in Federal District Court in Brooklyn tomorrow, the lawyer, Arthur Lewis Jr., said.


Chess
One of the three winners in the International Chess Federation's championship quarterfinals, just finished in Sanghi-Nagar, India, was Gata Kamsky of Brooklyn, who came from behind to defeat Vishwanathan Anand of India.
Anand, who was widely favored, started out well, but was caught up by a hard-fighting Kamsky, who won both tie-break speed games after struggling to a 4-to-4 tie in the regulation series.
The two other winners were Boris Gelfand of Ukraine over Vladimir Kramnik of Russia, 4 1/2 to 3 1/2, and Valery Salov of Russia over Jan Timman of the Netherlands, also 4 1/2 to 3 1/2.
In the semifinals, scheduled for Sanghi-Nagar in February, Kamsky will be paired with Salov and Gelfand with Anatoly Karpov, who holds the FIDE version of the championship.


Industrial Production Rises 0.2%
Despite lower output of motor vehicles and electricity, American industry raised production for the 14th consecutive month in July, Federal Reserve statistics showed today.
Today's report and one due out Tuesday on July housing starts will be the final pieces of national economic data before the Federal Reserve's chief policy-making body, the Federal Open Market Committee, meets to weigh the evidence for further increases in short-term interest rates.


Republicans Meet Their Man; Pataki Delivers His Bare-Bones Message: I'm Not Cuomo
The Republican clambake was a big success, and the reason was the tall man, somehow both elegant and awkward at once, who shook nearly every hand here.
He leaned way over to sign his name, in blue marker, to a woman's T-shirt.
"With your help, we're going to win," George E. Pataki, the Republican designee for governor, said again and again.
"So he's our man?" one Republican asked a friend. "Is he a sharp guy?"


The Senate Helps on Bosnia
Spurred by the Senate, President Clinton has finally promised to promote the Bosnian policy he claims to have favored all along.
He has set a late October deadline for the Bosnian Serbs to accept unconditionally the latest international peace plan.
If they refuse, Mr.
Clinton says, he will ask the United Nations Security Council to lift the perverse arms embargo against the Bosnian Government.
The embargo has unfairly frozen a huge imbalance in favor of the Bosnian Serbs.
At the start of the war, Serbian forces seized heavy weapons from the old Yugoslav Army's Bosnian storage depots.
Then they used these weapons to besiege refugee-crammed cities like Sarajevo and Gorazde.


14 Detained In Bid to Bar Cuban Exodus
In a demonstration that it is serious about discouraging unauthorized immigration from Cuba, the Federal Government has detained 14 men it suspects of smuggling aliens or hijacking boats from Cuba.
The detentions came as 371 Cubans landed in Florida over the weekend, the largest three-day total since the Mariel boatlift in 1980, said a Coast Guard spokesman, Chief Warrant Officer Dan Waldschmidt.
During the 1980 exodus, about 125,000 Cubans came here in a five-month period.


Corrections
An article on July 27 about a lesbian teacher in Hemet, Calif., misstated the stance the German pastor Martin Niemoller took toward the Nazis.
Mr.
Niemoller was an early opponent of Hitler; he was reproaching the silence of people in general when he said, "Then they came for me, and by then there was nobody left to speak up" (a quotation the teacher has mounted on a rainbow flag).


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  PRAGMATISM DEFINES GIULIANI'S STRATEGY
By bucking his own party's leadership to support President Clinton's crime bill, Mayor Giuliani has embraced a strategy that, for a Republican in a Democratic city, may well prove far more successful than partisanship: pragmatism.
News analysis, B3.


Nassau County Board Approves Tough Security Law for A.T.M.'s
Two years after New York City enacted the toughest law in the nation on security systems at automated teller machines, Nassau County today adopted a similar measure.
The Nassau law, passed unanimously by the county's Board of Supervisors, requires that surveillance cameras be installed at each doorway of A.T.M. locations, providing close-up views of all who enter and leave and that the sites be equipped with high-tech magnetic locks that will provide access only to card holders.


Libertarians Rejoice Over Stern's Defection
To the Editor:
Re your Aug. 5 news article on Howard Stern's aborted bid for New York's gubernatorial nomination: Libertarian Party leaders such as ourselves are neither "in the lurch" nor "bitter" at Mr.
Stern's resignation.
Only those few who backed a self-promoting shock jock, caring little for the right of the people to live free of governmental interference, are distraught because the man on whom they pinned their hopes for 15 minutes of fame has ditched them.


True Rulers Of World Show Their Faces
THOUGH humans assume without question that their species dominates the world, by most objective measures the palm goes to the ants.
Humans dwell complainingly in a quite narrow range of climates; ants live without demur at every extreme, in tundra and rain forest, in swamp and desert, deep beneath the earth and in the topmost trees.
Humans the world over are much the same, and apart from some trivial variations in hair and skin color it is as hard (taxonomically speaking) to tell one from another as it is with peas in a pod.
But the tribes of ants vary so riotously that the largest known species is 40 times the size of the smallest.


Securities Industry Backs Continuing Broker Training
After more than four years of debate, a committee composed of representatives from the securities industry and the leading commodity and stock exchanges disclosed a program yesterday intended to improve the skills of brokers, traders and other financial professionals.
The proposed program, to raise the level of service provided to investors, is much less rigorous than one suggested by the National Association of Securities Dealers in 1990, which would have subjected securities professionals to a competency test every three years.


Athletic Director Changes Jobs
DEBBIE YOW resigned as athletic director of Saint Louis University yesterday to accept the same position at the University of Maryland, where she received a five-year contract.


Kmart's Net Continues Its Tumble
For the seventh consecutive quarter, the Kmart Corporation has reported a decline in profits caused by continuing problems in its core discount store business.
Even though the second-quarter results came in yesterday below analysts' expectations, Wall Street bid Kmart shares up slightly.
The stock rose 25 cents yesterday, to $17.125, on the New York Stock Exchange.


Reassuring Non-Nuclear Nations
What security assurances should the United States offer to countries like North Korea if they give up their efforts to acquire nuclear weapons?
Will the U.S. refrain from using nuclear threats against them?
Will it press the United Nations to come to their aid if they are threatened by other nuclear powers?
These questions need to be addressed in the Administration's review of nuclear policy now nearing completion.
Finding the right answers could prove critical to current efforts by the Clinton Administration to curb the spread of nuclear arms in Korea and elsewhere.


Bid Raised In Deal for Cyanamid
The American Home Products Corporation added $500 million to its takeover bid for the American Cyanamid Company yesterday, saying it is willing to pay $100 a share, instead of $95, if its offer is accepted immediately.
The $9 billion cash offer expires at the end of business today, and is only good if American Cyanamid, a maker of vitamins and vaccines, agrees to a friendly merger.


No Headline
"He's been a sad figure for the last several years -- by all reports an alcoholic, dreaming the dreams of his youth without a hope of support. A whisky-swilling Communist who doesn't believe in God isn't much use to any Islamic government." -- VINCENT CANNISTRARO, former C.I.A. official, on Carlos the Jackal.  [ A1:2. ]


Jordan Out for at Least a Week
MICHAEL JORDAN, injured Friday night while diving awkwardly for a fly ball during a game, received news that was more good than bad yesterday after undergoing X-rays and magnetic resonance imaging and was told to come back in a week.


Excerpts From the Senate Debate on the Mitchell Health Care Legislation
Following are excerpts from the Senate debate on health care overhaul involving Senate Bob Packwood, Republican of Oregon; Senator George J. Mitchell of Maine, the Democratic leader, and Senator Phil Gramm, Republican of Texas, as recorded by The New York Times:
PACKWOOD We've had the -- the Finance Committee bill, correct me if I'm wrong, the Finance Committee bill on the floor of the Senate for two weeks.
Or we've had -- let me amend that, we've had the Mitchell No. 1 proposal on the bill -- on the floor -- for two weeks.
Is that -- is that?


Market Place; Sherwin-Williams smoothly improves its performance.
WATCHING paint dry, of course, is the classic line about the ultimate in boredom.
But at the Sherwin-Williams Company, the nation's largest paint producer, drying paint is a precious sight -- and many on Wall Street agree.
They are recommending the stock as one expected to outpace both a sluggish market and a sluggish building supply sector.
Just as the company advertises that its paints are impervious, the stock seems to be as well.
The company has had 17 steady years of rising earnings, a balance sheet that is almost debt-fee, and a share price that has increased by 14 percent a year for the last decade -- with no signs of slowing.
This translates into low risk but solid returns.


A Storyteller With a Fresh Voice
Dance has not dealt much with social issues of the times, at least directly, with the exception of AIDS and black roles in white-defined society.
And it is only recently that choreographers have begun to address those issues with much sense of philosophical distance.
Ron Brown is one such choreographer, however, and his new "Dirt Road," presented on Friday night in the Studio Theater at the Jacob's Pillow Dance Festival, is an impressive mix of theatricality and probing, humane intelligence.
The eveninglong modern-dance piece is essentially a series of duets and a few solos danced to a powerful collage of gospel and popular music, muted city sounds and occasional slivers of recorded text.
The dancers whip, wheel and bob in space, often moving and gathering along a loosely maintained diagonal.
At times, these lithe young bodies suddenly curl into themselves and the dancers shuffle across the stage like old men and women, infirm and ready to take their knocks, but poignantly hopeful.


Teheran Journal; Satellite Dishes Adding Spice to Iran's TV Menu
It is prime time on Thursday night, the start of the Iranian weekend, and the three Government-run channels have lined up the hottest programs of the week.
On Channel One, a mullah, seated in a garden, is giving a talk on the proper way to pray.
"Never pray on a bed with a spring mattress," he intones.
"You move around too much."


Finding Elusive Factors That Help Wire Up Brain
THE human brain is a natural wonder that boggles the mind.
It is built of a hundred billion nerve cells sheathed and nourished by a trillion supporting cells.
And projecting from every neuron is a delicate communications cable called an axon that splits and branches and splits again, like the crown of a great spreading oak, allowing that one nerve cell to cry out through synaptic conduits to a thousand others of its kind.
All told, there are more synaptic connections encased within a single skull than there are stars flung across the universe.
Neuroscientists who study the developing brain have long sought to understand just how that extraordinary neuronal circuitry gets wired up in the first place.
They have struggled to identify the signals responsible for axonal guidance -- for steering the tender and tentative axon of a young nerve cell through the pandemonium of the growing brain and over to its appropriate target.
Once the tip of the axon has found its correct resting spot, it can begin forming synaptic linkups with as many neurons in the neighborhood as it needs to contact to get its message across.
And only with its axons in place can a brain begin to register the world around it: to see, to think, to feel, to know itself.


Court in Canada Approves Liquidation of Life Insurer
A Canadian court granted an order yesterday allowing regulators in Canada to proceed with the liquidation of the Confederation Life Insurance Company, Canada's fifth-largest life insurer, which also operated in the United States.
The court's order, which was not contested by the company, leaves open questions about the way American, Canadian and British regulators will handle the various parts of Confederation, which is based in Toronto.


Shape of a Halo Around a Galaxy Hints at Dark Matter
GIVEN that stars, gas and dust almost surely account for only a small fraction of the total mass of the universe, astronomers are desperately seeking the rest of the universe, the invisible missing mass known as dark matter.
Their search has so far brought a fitful mix of contradictory findings.
True to form, in recent weeks the widening search for dark matter has taken one tentative step forward, and perhaps one backward.


Maverick Mayor
By bucking his own party's leadership to support President Clinton's crime bill, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani has embraced a strategy that, for a Republican in a prevailingly Democratic city, may well prove more successful than partisanship: pragmatism.
Mr.
Giuliani angered some fellow Republicans in Washington by defecting and, worse still, by sharing a platform with the President over the weekend.
But he may well have enhanced his political standing at home by supporting a Congressional grab bag that seems to offer something for every ideology, from banning assault weapons to expanding capital punishment.
And, it could bring hundreds of millions of dollars to his city.


Germans Suspect Russian Military In Plutonium Sale
The German authorities said today that the suspected smuggler of weapons-quality plutonium arrested after flying in from Moscow last week had delivered the first part of what was to be a shipment of four kilograms in a $250-million deal that almost certainly involved members of Russian security services.
Undercover investigators negotiated with three members of a criminal group -- two Spaniards and a Colombian who had lived for a long time in Moscow -- and arrested them after receiving the first shipment before any money changed hands, the German authorities said today.


On Liking Women
To the Editor:
In your July 29 news article on the sexual harassment suit against Baker &amp; McKenzie, a lawyer not involved in the case offers that "if your idiosyncrasy is liking women, everybody says, 'That's the way he is.' " But wouldn't a man who truly likes women conduct himself in the opposite fashion?
TIMOTHY J. HANLEY  New York, Aug. 5, 1994


Review/Fashion; Exotic Swimsuits That Shape the Body
Romancing the swimsuit has helped Gottex build its position as a world power in beach clothes.
The company sells to 62 countries and is a major supplier to such diverse stores as Saks Fifth Avenue and Bloomingdale's in New York, Neiman Marcus in Dallas, Galeries Lafayette in Paris and Harrods in London.
The company is known for exotic swimsuits that adapt print motifs and stylistic details from ancient and far-flung cultures.
It also borrows from artists past and present.


Clinton Wants to Strengthen Global Pact on Air Pollution
The Clinton Administration has concluded that the 1992 treaty to reduce the threat of global warming needs to be strengthened and that in any case the United States may already be doing too little to comply with it.
While that first conclusion pleases many environmentalists who are worried about possible changes in the world's climate, both it and its corollary are also likely to put pressure on the Government to take stronger steps to reduce emissions of certain gases, particularly those from gasoline combustion in automobiles.


Guns Don't Belong in the Emergency Room
To the Editor:
Violence in the emergency department setting has been escalating in recent years.


A Judith Weir Opera In Which Truth Is Harmful to Health
"Blond Eckbert" is more interesting to think about than to experience firsthand.
Short and inscrutable, with music that is neither terribly old nor terribly new, Judith Weir's new piece at the Santa Fe Opera presents us with people we don't know much about doing things we don't quite understand.
Her source is the late-18th-century tale by Ludwig Tieck.
Eckbert and Berthe, man and wife, are visited by their friend Walther.
To entertain him, Berthe tells of her childhood flights, first from her home, then from an old woman in the forest.
She takes from the old woman a magic bird laying jewels as eggs.
She returns home, finds her parents dead, marries Eckbert.


Baby Killed As Gunmen Fire at House
A 1-year-old boy having his diaper changed by his mother was shot to death early yesterday morning in the family's house in Queens Village, which had been the target of repeated complaints from neighbors about raucous activity and drug dealing.
The boy, Alonzo Soares, was struck in the head and pronounced dead on arrival at Mary Immaculate Hospital in Jamaica, Queens, said Lieut.
Vito R. Spano, commander of the 105th Precinct detective squad.
At the moment of the shooting, he was being changed by his mother, Karine Torres, who was not injured.
The boy's uncle, Arturo Soares, was treated for a minor gunshot wound to the arm and released, Lieutenant Spano said.


Old Friend Can Offer New Kinds Of Help
SIDEKICK has been around since 1984, among the first T.S.R.'s for DOS P.C.'s running non-GUI's on A.C. or D.C. at 4 or 5 m.p.h.
That's the way we used to talk back then, and some of us still do.
Sidekick was an early terminate-and-stay-resident program, allowing personal computers to keep two programs, Sidekick and whatever else, in memory at the same time in the days before the machines were powerful enough, and ran software versatile enough, to do that routinely.
In the midst of word processing or spreadsheeting, and you could call up Sidekick with a keystroke or two to check a name or address, make a note, or perform a calculation.
You could do any of those things without first saving your principal work and making a formal exit from the other program.


Woodstock Pay-TV Sales Appear Short of Hopes
It appears that fewer than 1 percent of the 24 million cable television subscribers who were offered the live, pay-per-view coverage of Woodstock '94 ordered it.
Final figures will not be in for several days, but an informal survey of cable companies around the country indicates that sales lagged behind those for popular championship prize fights -- and even behind some other music events, like the Rolling Stones' "Steel Wheels" tour and the Judds' farewell performance.


Corrections
An article yesterday about a cease-fire agreement in Bosnia described the Clinton Administration's policy on Bosnia incorrectly in some editions.
President Clinton announced last week that he would press the United Nations to lift the internationial arms embargo against Bosnia's Muslim-dominated Government if the country's Serbian nationalists did not make peace by the end of October.
Mr.
Clinton did not say he would support Congressional moves to violate the embargo unilaterally.


E-Z Serve Corp.(EZS,A) reports earnings for Qtr to June 26


Galileo Craft, Most Direct Observer, Finally Reports on Comet
DIGITAL data representing the first direct image of Comet Shoemaker-Levy 9 slamming into Jupiter reached Earth from the distant spacecraft Galileo over the weekend, and scientists were anxiously waiting yesterday for computers to translate the data into a picture.
Dr.
Robert T. Mitchell of the Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, Calif., who heads the Galileo scientific team, said that by sampling data transmitted earlier by Galileo, his group had already verified that at least one image of the impacts had been captured.
A complete image of the blazing death of Fragment W was being reconstructed yesterday.


Wing-tsit Chan, 92, Professor And Scholar of Asian Philosophy
Dr.
Wing-tsit Chan, a leading scholar of Asian philosophy who taught at Columbia University, died on Friday at Braddock Medical Center in Pittsburgh, where he had lived since 1966.
He was 92.
Dr. Chan died of natural causes, said his son Lo-Yi.


Filene's Basement Corp.(BSMT,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to July 30


Moore Lost for Up to 8 Weeks With Broken Wrist
Rob Moore relished his new role as the Jets' big-play receiver.
But he couldn't sleep Sunday morning.
It wasn't because he was thinking of the 50-yard play he had collaborated on with Boomer Esiason only hours earlier.
Moore couldn't sleep because of the pain.
The Jets disclosed today that Moore had broken his left wrist while diving for an end-zone pass in the Jets' 34-24 victory over the Philadelphia Eagles on Saturday night, and that he could be out for as long as eight weeks.


Executive Changes
COLUMBIA TRI-STAR MOTION PICTURE COS., Culver City, Calif., named Sidney Ganis president of worldwide marketing.
HAMILTON STANDARD, Windsor Locks, Conn., a unit of United Technologies Corp., appointed Raymond P. Kurlak president.


Sports of The Times; I Could've Been a Left Fielder
A BASEBALL scout talking one day in Dodger Stadium with Curt Flood, then a Cardinals' center fielder, pointed up to the stands.
"There's about 40,000 men up there who think they could be where you are right now, but every one of them has a reason why he's not," said the scout.
"They usually give one of four reasons: 'My mother bought me a violin,' or 'The coach didn't like me,' or 'I hurt my arm trying to learn how to throw a curveball,' or . . . "


Officer's Harassment Suit
A 24-year-old police officer charged yesterday that a sergeant threatened to throw her off a roof after she complained that he had sexually harassed her last year.
"All it takes is one push," the officer, Tracey Bowden, quoted her supervisor, Sgt.
Steven Daley, as saying in a lawsuit filed in Federal Court in Manhattan yesterday.


Murder and Madness On the Way to Nowhere
Aguirre  The Re-creation of a 16th-Century Journey Across South America  By Stephen Minta  Illustrated. 244 pages.
Henry Holt &amp; Company. $20.
As fans of Werner Herzog's hallucinatory 1972 movie "Aguirre, the Wrath of God" -- a German movie, subtitled in English, about the Spanish conquest of Peru -- will recall, Don Lope de Aguirre was a 16th-century megalomaniac and renegade who set out on a doomed expedition through the jungles and mountains of Peru to find the mythical gold-rich realm of El Dorado.
It was an expedition that would end in murder and madness, an expedition that would come to embody the cruelties of imperial conquest and presage nationalistic struggles for liberation.


At Tokyo Shrine to War Dead, a Ritual Persists Despite All
The scene this morning at the Yasukuni Shrine, the austere religious monument to Japan's war dead, was reassuringly familiar.
There were most of the same rightists, organized crime groups and aged soldiers in old uniforms who parade defiantly every year to mark the anniversary of Japan's surrender in World War II.
And once again, declaring that Japan's aggression was just, they posed sternly like extras in a samurai drama for the throngs of photographers and the curious.
But the very ordinariness of one aspect of the ritual this year is what made it unsettling to some Japanese.
As usual, a handful of conservative Cabinet ministers defied a high court ruling by openly worshiping at the Yasukuni Shrine, which at one time was at the heart of Japan's fanatical Emperor worship.


Consolidated Stores Corp.(CNS,N) reports earnings for Qtr to July 20


Boards Back Macy-Federated Plan
The boards of Federated Department Stores Inc. and R. H. Macy &amp; Company gave their formal approval yesterday to a merger between the two department store operators.
But the two companies did not make any announcement because their lawyers were still hammering out differences over the interpretation of technical details before executives sign the agreement.
None of the differences are expected to derail the merger, however, representatives for the companies said yesterday.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; A study shows that celebrity endorsements of products can help a company's stock price. A little.
IS signing stars as shills for products worth the often considerable cost and the headaches they sometimes cause?
A new study comes to the intriguing conclusion that celebrity endorsements offer tangible, measurable benefits, albeit small, in at least one realm.
The study examined 110 instances of companies signing stars to pitch their wares during a 12-year period, from Paula Abdul for Diet Coke, L.A.
Gear and Reebok to Bruce Willis for Seagram's wine coolers.
It concluded that celebrity endorsements could improve the performance of the stock of a company that was spending money to hire a star.


INSIDE
New Stats in Baseball
Although the average annual salary for a major league baseball player is a hefty $1.2 million, far more than half of the players earn less than that.SportsTuesday, page B11.
Elusive Key to Brain Wiring
A hundred-year search culminates in the discovery of a key factor that directs the earliest development of the brain's extraordinary circuitry.
Science Times, page C1.
A Void at Empire Blue Cross
An insurance executive who was hired last year to help restore the finances of Empire Blue Cross and Blue Shield, New York's largest health insurer, is resigning.
Page B1.


Foreman Group Files Lawsuit
Representatives of GEORGE FOREMAN and Top Rank filed a lawsuit in Nevada State Court yesterday seeking an injunction to prevent the World Boxing Association from sanctioning any heavyweight championship fight in this country other than Foreman and MICHAEL MOORER.
The suit also seeks to enjoin Moorer along with his promoters and manager from participating in any heavyweight fight until their contractual agreement with Foreman has been honored.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt *
Federal Farm Credit Bank is selling $435 million of one-year bonds due in 1995 through Goldman, Sachs &amp; Co.
The noncallable bonds carry an interest rate of 5.70 percent and are priced at par.


On My Mind; The President and the Mayor
This fellow Giuliani is a strange duck.
How long does he think his Republican Party will let him get away with rushing to help Bill Clinton just as it is about to slaughter his Presidency on the crime bill?
Did he think the party would just forget with the morning dew?


This Time, Mexicans Hope Votes Will Count
In the last presidential campaign, in 1988, Agustin Olivera organized several bellicose anti-Government rallies in his hometown of Santo Domingo Petapa in the southern state of Oaxaca.
"There was really a lot of anger in the streets at the fraud we saw coming," said the 38-year-old father of three.
"There wasn't much faith in the electoral process either."


Mitchell Announces Plan to End G.O.P. 'Filibuster' on Health Bill
After Republicans blocked all votes on health insurance legislation today, Senator George J. Mitchell called it a "filibuster" and said he would hold the Senate in session 24 hours a day, starting on Tuesday, until the Republicans backed down.
Mr.
Mitchell, who has never forced an all-night session in his six years as majority leader, said that if no votes on amendments were allowed on Tuesday, "the Senate will remain in continuous session thereafter, through the evening, through the night."


Disney Saves Virginians From More Sprawl
To the Editor:
I must weigh in with a few observations that most writers about the site for the Disney Company's proposed historical theme park in Virginia have missed.
Many seem to be under the impression that the Manassas battlefield, five miles from where Disney plans to build, lies in the middle of pristine land.
It does not.


Europe Uniting in Building Arms
Italy, France and Britain, each needing a new destroyer for its navy, set aside tradition for common sense last month and agreed to build the warships together.
They awarded contracts that could run as high as $12 billion to a consortium of shipbuilding, electronics and armaments companies from the three nations.
"It will allow all three countries to benefit from better economies of scale as well as from pooling the technologies of three highly industrialized countries," Italy's Defense Minister, Cesare Previti, explained.


Cruising Takes On New Image
As darkness enveloped the riverfront, the teen-agers began gathering.
They were driving souped-up junkers, pickups, vans and motorcycles.
They had come to the big city from the small towns and hollows of West Virginia, Kentucky and Ohio, places with no cable and only four television channels that manage to penetrate the hills if they are lucky.
They had six-packs in the back seat, and rap and country on the stereo.
It was Saturday night, and they were looking for action -- romance, sex, a drag race.
There was talk of a fight.


Corrections
An article in Business Day last Tuesday about trading in the credit markets misstated the issue date for three-month and six-month Treasury bills auctioned on Aug. 8.
The bills were to be issued on Aug. 11, not Aug. 14.


Spending in Crime Bill: Prevention or Just Pork?
At the suggestion of the Rev.
Calvin O. Butts, the pastor of the Abyssinian Baptist Church in Harlem, the anti-crime bill that the Clinton Administration is trying to rescue designates $40 million for academies that help violent or troubled young people.
New York City would probably get about $2 million from this crime-prevention program, one of dozens in the $33 billion bill that Republicans are attacking as frivolous spending.


Don't Be Seduced by Medisave
Medisave, the proposal for medical savings accounts, is a bad idea that has crept into the health-care bills proposed by the Democratic leadership in the House and by Bob Dole, the minority leader, in the Senate.
Medisave would allow people to save money by purchasing health insurance policies with very high deductibles and then invest the savings in tax-free accounts.
Advocates say Medisave can help control health-care costs through consumer choice rather than heavy-handed government regulation.
Catastrophic coverage requires consumers to pay ordinary medical bills out of pocket, leaving insurance to pick up only large bills that exceed an annual threshold of, say, $3,000.
That, according to advocates, will compel consumers to monitor physician and hospital fees carefully.
But what advocates do not say is that Medisave would hurt the poor and the chronically ill and inadvertently disrupt private insurance markets.


Review/Fashion; Glamour in the Sun and Later
Glamour is a word on the lips of just about everybody in the fashion world these days, and few designers can deliver glamour better than Richard Tyler.
Rock stars and movie actresses discovered him when he started in Los Angeles, and the resort collection he showed last week in New York carried more than a whiff of Hollywood.
Models with red lips and flowing hair tripped through his showroom on high-heeled sandals, wearing snug-fitting suits with no blouses, knitted tube dresses that clung to the body, jackets sheltering the briefest of shorts and, in case you didn't get the message, a red suit totally covered with sequins.


Burundi Is Said to Rebuff U.N. Effort to Restore Calm
The United Nations, anxious to head off a repeat in Burundi of the carnage that swept neighboring Rwanda, has been rebuffed by military officials and the leaders of various factions in its initial effort to calm the increasingly tense political and ethnic situation here.
According to officials familiar with the negotiations between United Nations representatives and Burundi officials, Burundi's various factional leaders over the weekend rejected a United Nations proposal to deploy a peacekeeping force across this tiny country to monitor the situation and calm tensions between the Hutu majority and the Tutsi minority.


Stewart Information Services Corp.(STC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


By Design; Body Enhancers
Not since the 1950's have designers dared to suggest that women constrict their bodies in anything resembling a corset.
But in recent months, young women who grew up wearing a minimum of underwear have discovered the figure-enhancing possibilities of push-up bras.
Karl Lagerfeld went a bit further in his fall haute-couture collection for Chanel and brought back long-line bras.
Then bras and corselets of every description turned up in the resort and holiday shows, worn both as underwear and outerwear.


Police Kill Carjacker After Chase
A gunman accosted and shot a woman in her home here last night, then kidnapped her and sped off in her green Ford Bronco, the authorities said today.
The brazen abduction ended minutes later when the Bronco crashed and the man was shot and killed by pursuing police officers.
The episode was one of the more violent of the scores of carjackings that have plagued northern Essex County in recent years.
Most of the vehicles have been stolen from parking lots in suburban malls or from curbside or driveways, when the owners were not present.
In most cases, teen-agers use the stolen cars for joy-riding or taunting police officers.
Seldom have the thefts lead to gunfire.


Gensia
Shares of Gensia Inc., a developer of treatments for cardiovascular and other diseases, rose sharply yesterday after the company reported that a quarterly loss would not be as bad as Wall Street had expected.
Its second-quarter loss rose to 61 cents a share from 59 cents a year earlier, but analysts had been bracing for a deficit of as much as 62 cents.


Results of Biopsy Show Simpson To Be Cancer-Free, Doctor Says
O.
J.
Simpson, who had a biopsy taken of lymph nodes from under his arm last week, does not have cancer, his doctor said today.
Mr.
Simpson, who has been in custody for nearly two months on charges that he murdered his former wife, Nicole Brown Simpson, and a friend of hers, was hospitalized Thursday for the test after complaining of enlarged lymph nodes and night sweats.


Elusive Truth and a Touchy Subject
"Sex, Lies and Harassment" purports to be an investigation into how the famous 1991 Clarence A. Thomas-Anita F. Hill affair changed attitudes and raised perplexities about sexual harassment.
But this edition of "American Justice" turns out to be mainly a recapitulation of the front-page charges and denials, not excluding the references to pubic hair on a Coke can, for their own entertaining sake.
If you are willing to settle for that, it's a lively hour.
Credit for the peppiness goes to the allies and antagonists of Ms.
Hill, who devour the camera.
The most voracious is Camille Paglia, scourge of her sister feminists, who calls the treatment of Justice Thomas "obscene," "totalitarian," "a massive injustice." She is seconded by David Brock, author of "The Real Anita Hill," a bible of the pro-Thomas cadre.
Catharine MacKinnon, the law professor known for her philosophy that sex is war by other means, and Ellen Bravo of the Association of Working Women maintain that Ms.
Hill is a heroine for her time.


Ross Stores (ROST,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to July 30


Giuliani's Crime Strategy
In backing the President on crime, Mayor Giuliani has a strategy that for a Republican among Democrats may prove more successful than partisanship: pragmatism.
Page B3.


Hoax Charges Face Mother Of Slain Boy
Michelle Lodzinski, the mother of a 5-year-old boy whose disappearance and death three years ago are still unexplained, was arrested today on charges of lying in January about being kidnapped at gunpoint by two F.B.I. agents.
Ms.
Lodzinski, 26, was charged in a two-count Federal indictment with making false statements to the Federal Bureau of Investigation and with fraudulent misuse of a Government seal.
She was charged with having bogus F.B.I. business cards printed that bore the name "Michael C. Seigricks."


If You Schedule It, They Will Come


When Mexican Voters Talk to Pollsters
To the Editor:
Your Aug. 10 news article on the Mexican election, in which an American pollster attacks the methodology of street interviewing, quotes him as saying "that isn't polling and I wouldn't dignify it with that term."


Moonlighting Plus: 3-Job Families on the Rise
When Robin Thornburg lost her job as a $25,000-a-year paralegal, she was scared.
Her husband, David, an office clerk, made barely enough to cover the groceries and the rent on their $700-a-month apartment in Arlington, Va.
So, she is trying to make up the lost income by working two jobs -- as a full-time clerk for a loan company and a part-time bookkeeper for a company that rents out bodyguards.
"It kind of stinks, the two of us having so many jobs," said Mrs.
Thornburg, who earns $600 a week, more than matching her former pay, but must work 55 hours to do it.
"You argue about money and about hours, and on top of everything, we are both trying to get through college. We go different ways too much."


S. Williamson, 64, Head of Foundation Serving New Jersey
Sheila Campbell Williamson, the founding director of the Community Foundation of New Jersey in Morristown, died on Sunday at her home in Short Hills, N.J.
She was 64.
The cause was cancer, her family said.


Ducks Sign Defenseman
Defenseman OLEG TVERDOVSKY, the second overall pick in the National Hockey League draft earlier this summer, signed a three-year contract with the Anaheim Mighty Ducks yesterday.
Financial terms were not announced. (AP)


How a Movie Satire Turned Into Reality
No one ever said Oliver Stone shrank from controversy.
But even the 47-year-old director, who is not above a little shrewd self-promotion, seems amazed at the stir his newest movie, "Natural Born Killers," has created, and it hasn't even been released yet.
"I began this film as a satire; I wanted to have some fun," Mr.
Stone said of the film, which seems plucked directly from today's insanely violent headlines.
"It was before the Menendez brothers, before the Bobbitts, before Amy Fisher and Joey Buttafuoco, before the O. J. Simpson case. Well, it's not so much satirical now, but reality-based. It's eerily happening."


Haiti's Poor Love Aristide, but They Don't Expect Him
The people of the slums still love the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide, but more as a saint locked in stained glass and history than as a man who will ever come home to lead them again.
The exiled Haitian President drew many of his votes and much of his power from the seemingly endless rows of narrow concrete-block shacks that make up the vast slums of Cite Soleil and La Saline, ugly places with pretty names.
He walked like a savior through them, and the people painted his name, his face and his symbol, a tiny red rooster, on the pitiful little homes.


CHRONICLE
Rabbi MARC SCHNEIER could hardly have conjured up more fitting sound and light effects for the dedication on Sunday of the Hamptons Synagogue in Westhampton Beach, L.I.
As if on cue, the heavens opened at just the right moment.
"I said in my remarks that no man has done more to memorialize the victims of the Holocaust than Steven Spielberg," he said of the director of "Schindler's List."


Thinking Machines To File for Bankruptcy
The Thinking Machines Corporation, the financially troubled supercomputer maker that has been scrambling to find a big investor or buyer to keep it afloat, said yesterday that it would seek Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection as early as today.
The company laid off off 140 of its 425 employees yesterday and said it planned further layoffs soon.
It also said it would try to sell rights to its technologies, while maintaining a small organization to provide service and support for its 112 supercomputers in use around the world.


CHRONICLE
STEVE POWERS, 60, a former reporter for Fox 5 News on WNYW-TV, filed a $2 million lawsuit against the station yesterday, charging that he lost his job because of age discrimination.
Mr.
Powers, who had been with the station since 1980, seven years before it was acquired by Fox, was notified in October 1992 that his contract would not be renewed, and he left in December 1992.
The station had the right to cancel his contract, he said, but not because of his age.


Humana Unit Rejected for Florida Area
Humana Inc. said yesterday that it had been denied accreditation for a health maintenance organization it operates in South Florida, and it acknowledged that a separate health care program it operates for elderly people throughout the state was being investigated by the Health Care Financing Administration, a Federal agency that regulates Medicare and Medicaid programs.
Humana, based in Louisville, Ky., said its South Florida H.M.O., with 330,000 members in Broward, Dade and Palm Beach counties, had been denied accreditation by the National Committee for Quality Assurance, an industry oversight group.


Do as the Indians Do, Not as the Owners Want
Owners covet cost control, it seems, almost as passionately as they want a hitter who can slug 40 home runs or a pitcher who can win 20 games.
Some, obviously, prefer cost control over a hitter who can slug 40 home runs or a pitcher who can win 20 games.
The Cleveland Indians decided a few years ago to try for both.
Now, in the early days of a potentially season-ending strike that is all about cost control, the Indians have an answer to their club mates' problems.


Hazardous Electrons Linked to Sun's Cycles
IT has long been known that high-speed electrons trapped in orbit by the Earth's magnetic field pose a hazard to the electronic devices aboard spacecraft.
Yesterday scientists at Los Alamos National Laboratory in New Mexico disclosed that they have identified the villain: the Sun.
The discovery is certain to prompt design changes in future spacecraft, a spokesman for the laboratory said.


Palestinians in Gaza Arrest 13 Militants After Attacks on Israelis
Palestinian security forces arrested at least 13 Muslim militants in the Gaza Strip today, and Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin warned that Israel might reconsider the expansion of Palestinian self-rule unless serious efforts were made to curb anti-Israeli attacks in areas under Palestinian control.
The arrests, the firmest action by the Palestinian authorities against the militant Islamic movement Hamas, followed two roadside ambushes in the Gaza Strip on Sunday in which an Israeli was killed and six others were wounded.


BASEBALL: The Oldest Rookie; Joe Ausanio Savored His One-Month Walk in the Sun
Not counting the Chicken, a crowd of 7,666 packed quaint Cooper Stadium Sunday on a cool night in Columbus, Ohio.
The fans' ovation was polite and genuine when the right-handed reliever's name was announced in the ninth inning.
He struck out a catcher from the Richmond Braves named Eddie Perez, earning his 11th save without giving up a hit.
The Clippers won, 6-3, and just like that Joe Ausanio was back in the minors.
Until last Thursday, Ausanio had been the Yankees' capable middle reliever.
Then he was sent back to Columbus after a one-month stay in the majors.
A career minor leaguer, Ausanio, 28, had waited seven years for his dream.
And for four weeks, he threw a baseball as if he had always belonged in the big leagues.


U.S. Judges Warn of Health Lawsuits
The top policy-making body for the Federal courts has expressed concern that health care bills pending in Congress would generate a flood of litigation by people trying to enforce new rights to medical benefits and insurance payments.
The judges said they were worried that many of those disputes would end up in Federal courts.


Q&amp;A
An Oceanic Puzzle
Q.  How cold does it get at the Equator in the middle of the ocean?


A Chinese Bias Against Girls Creates Surplus of Bachelors
In the free markets of the new China, young men are coming to realize that there is something even more precious than a new car, an electronic pager or a Swiss-made watch.
And that rare commodity -- an unmarried woman -- is becoming harder and harder to find.


In Strike, Two Sides And Two Sets Of Numbers
Richard Ravitch, the owners' chief labor executive, has used the figure so often during the owners' labor dispute with the players that $1.2 million has become indelibly imprinted on the minds of fans, who would rather hear baseball people talk about 61 and .400.
In his comments about the clubs' quest for cost control, Ravitch has used the average salary of $1.2 million to show how well off the players are and how well off they would continue to be under the limit the owners want to place on salary payrolls.


Cason Unit's Officials Join With Biederman
In another change involving what was formerly AC&amp; R Advertising, the executives of an operating unit of Cason Wenman Nightingale in New York, said yesterday that they had joined Biederman, Kelly &amp; Shaffer of New York as an independent agency within that agency.
William Nightingale, 63, former president of Cason Wenman, becomes chairman of the new shop, called Cason Nightingale Advertising.
Angela Cason, 33, former executive vice president and creative director, becomes president and creative director. (The third principal of Cason Wenman, David Wenman, 55, formerly executive vice president, left in April.)


Lobbyists Are the Loudest In the Health Care Debate
The telephone callers to Senator John B. Breaux, a Louisiana Democrat and an influential voice in the debate over health care, are stacked up like planes over National Airport.
"Senator Breaux's office. Can you hold?"
The Senator's phones are ablaze from dawn until well past dark, with the answering machine collecting at least 200 more messages overnight.
Clogged phone lines are one price that Mr.
Breaux and some of his fellow legislators pay for staking out an independent position on what many say is the most heavily lobbied issue in the nation's history.


Wall Discovers Other Victories After the Records and Medals
Anita Nall had it all.
In the spring of 1992, at age 15, she was a world-record-breaking swimmer.
Less than five months later, she won a gold, a silver and a bronze medal at the Barcelona Olympics.
That winter, she became sick.
She had no energy, she was always tired.
It took almost a year and a half to learn that her trouble came, not from mononucleosis or anemia or worse, but from an iron deficiency.
Now, three weeks after she turned 18, Nall feels good again.


Disney Saves Virginians From More Sprawl; The Lesson of Elvis
To the Editor:
William Styron questions whether Disney can devise exhibits and visuals that depict the complexity of the slavery experience (Op-Ed, Aug. 4).
He asserts that "to present even the most squalid sights would be to cheaply romanticize suffering."


Lightning Strikes Twice


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League  SEATTLE MARINERS -- Signed James Rowson, outfielder, and Eric Clifford, pitcher.
National League


Much Ado In Death Of a Rodent
THESE are dog days.
Books on dogs their secret lives, their not-so-secret smarts -- turn their authors into stars.
Movie star dogs rate their own feature stories.
Heroic dogs make the evening news.
And who can forget Taro, who ushered in the year of the dog when he was released from death row in one of Christie Whitman's first official acts as Governor of New Jersey?
But if all dogs go to heaven, rats are quite another story.
Rats are vermin.
Varmints.
Living hell.
People simply hate rats.


Pataki's Grim Statistics Collide With the Facts
Senator George E. Pataki's campaign against Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo is based on the premise that, as he often puts it, Mr.
Cuomo "has made us No. 1 in all the wrong categories." In virtually every public appearance, and in a television commercial, Mr.
Pataki says: "We are No. 1 in tax burden in America. We are No. 1 in spending in the country. And the inevitable result: we are No. 1 in job losses in America."
But government statistics show that none of those claims is true, although Mr.
Cuomo may not take much solace from the facts.


Subway Car Derails in Brooklyn, Injuring 11 Passengers
A car in a southbound B train derailed and slammed into a concrete tunnel wall in the Sunset Park section of Brooklyn yesterday morning, injuring 11 people and shutting down service on two lines through the evening rush hour.
None of the injuries were serious, although the car, which derailed after passing over a switch, was mangled and ripped open when it hit the wall.


Arson Experts Support Defendant in Retrial of Supermarket Fire
In a day of sometimes rancorous testimony in a Brooklyn courtroom yesterday, two arson experts supported a defendant's claim that he was not guilty of setting a Brooklyn supermarket blaze that killed six firefighters despite his 1980 conviction in the case.
A retired fire marshal testified that before the 1980 trial, he had told prosecutors that he thought the defendant was the "wrong man." But, he said, the man was tried anyway and convicted of helping set the 1978 fire at a Waldbaum's supermarket in Sheepshead Bay.


One Back Appears, Another Vanishes
On the Giants' first day back at practice after flying home from Berlin late Sunday night, the story at the Meadowlands was about a running back who finally showed up and another who did not.
While running back Jarrod Bunch, the team's last unsigned player, participated in some running drills after ending his holdout and signing a one-year contract earlier today, the Giants' star running back, Rodney Hampton, was absent.
At first, nobody seemed to know why.


Torstar Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Whatever Happened To Those Rivalries Beyond the Sidelines?
The Chicago Bears were 12-3, were a Super Bowl favorite and were playing at home in the National Football Conference championship game against the San Francisco 49ers.
This was the 1988 National Football League season.
It was snowy and frigid at Soldier Field.
Bears Weather.
That afternoon, the 49ers produced one of the most impressive road playoff victories in league history, executing a 28-3 victory en route to the last of three Super Bowl titles won by then 49er Coach Bill Walsh.
And the icy cold outside barely matched the stone-cold, post-game glare of then Bears Coach Mike Ditka.


On the Morning After, Memories and Debris of Woodstock '94
On the morning after, the myth-making (and the cleanup) began.
Bleary-eyed survivors of the 25th anniversary of Woodstock, plastic bags on their feet and mud caked on their scalps, today staggered away from a Catskills farm that appeared to have been hit by a hurricane, and began weaving tales about the most wonderful weekend of their lives.
On hillsides strewn with garbage and abandoned tents, beside a creek bed littered with lawn chairs, underwear and rotting scraps of food, men and women packing up after the three-day festival, and even scavenging in the litter, pronounced their Woodstock the biggest, the wildest, the one with the most births.


Corrections
An article on Friday about the indictment of Representative Walter R. Tucker 3d of California on Federal charges of extortion and filing false income tax returns misstated the number of counts against him.
He was charged with 10 counts, not 8.


Longtime Executive Leaves Cable Channel
Ruth L. Otte, who for many years was one of the few women to head an American television network, is leaving Discovery Communications Inc., where she has overseen the Discovery Channel and the Learning Channel since 1986.
The announcement was made yesterday by John S. Hendricks, founder and chief executive of the company, which is based in Bethesda, Md.
The new president and chief operating officer of the advertiser-supported cable channels will be Gregory B. Moyer, 41, currently head of programming and worldwide development for the channels.


New Understanding of How a Protein Runs Amok
IN an important discovery about the nature of mysterious disease agents called prions, researchers have reproduced a crucial step in the infection process in the test tube.
This test tube assay may help resolve critical questions of public health, such as whether the "mad cow" disease that has affected English cattle can be transmitted to beef consumers.
Prions are the causative agent of several diseases that attack the brain, such as kuru and Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease in humans, scrapie in sheep and bovine spongiform encephalopathy (mad cow disease) in cows.


Correction
An editorial on Saturday misstated the number of new police officers provided for in the Administration's crime bill as 800,000.
The bill provides $9.5 billion to be spent over six years for hiring new police officers; the bill's proponents say that will pay for 80,000 to 100,000 new recruits.


Haiti Refugees And U.S. Force Clash in Cuba
In a sign of rising tensions at an American naval base in Cuba holding Haitian refugees, 20 United States military police officers and 45 Haitians were injured in a four-hour melee involving hundreds of refugees on Saturday, the Pentagon said today.
Two of the 20 American troops who were injured by rocks, bottles, cans and tent stakes thrown in the fight remain hospitalized with cuts and bruises, said a Pentagon spokesman, Col.
Doug Kennett.
All the injuries, including those to the 45 Haitians, were minor, Colonel Kennett said.


CHRONICLE
JAMES CAAN, the actor, entered a rehabilitation center last month to overcome a drug habit, his publicity agent, Paul Bloch, announced yesterday in Los Angeles.
Mr.
Bloch told The Associated Press that Mr.
Caan "voluntarily entered a drug rehabilitation program at an undisclosed location."


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-9  MYTHICAL TERRORIST ARRESTED  The man known as Carlos, an international terrorist blamed for many murders in Europe, was arrested in Sudan and flown to France to be tried for crimes there.
A1


Viacom Is Quiet on Sale of Garden
A deadline for bidders seeking to acquire Madison Square Garden from Viacom Inc. passed yesterday without any indication about who might have acquired the glitzy property, or how much they paid to get it.
Indeed, people close to the bidding process said yesterday that it might be some time before the winner was identified, because the bids were likely to be quite complex, and consequently would require careful analysis.


Twins Pitcher Injured in Crash
Minnesota Twins pitcher PAT MAHOMES was knocked unconscious and trapped in his Jeep after it rolled over on a bridge in downtown Minneapolis early yesterday, the police said.
Mahomes sustained head injuries and his condition was upgraded from serious to satisfactory by mid-afternoon, according to the Hennepin County Medical Center.
Mahomes, who was alone, was traveling at "a fairly high rate of speed" when his vehicle crossed the center line, hit a guard rail and rolled over, a police spokeswoman said.
He was not wearing a seat belt and was trapped until police were able to get him out.


In Death, a Young AIDS Victim's Dream Is Realized


Goalie Grits His Teeth and Extends Rollers' Season
The New Jersey Rockin Rollers got a dramatic performance from goaltender Daniel Berthiaume last night and clinched a playoff berth by defeating the St.
Louis Vipers, 6-5, before 11,621 spectators at Byrne Meadowlands Arena.
After jamming his right knee with only 3 minutes 30 seconds remaining in the contest and the Rockin Rollers clinging to a 6-5 lead, Berthiaume was forced to the bench and replaced by Brad Mullahy.
But Berthiaume, who made 33 saves, returned to the game with 9.9 seconds remaining as St.
Louis prepared to take a face-off deep in the New Jersey zone.


Observer; Heat of the Kitchen
A bunch of old-timers who had got into the Geritol the other night started arguing about which was the most brutal beating they had ever seen laid onto some poor, miserable, wretched President of the United States.
This was a natural outgrowth of somebody saying he had never seen a President subjected to abuse as cruel, unrelenting and bloody-minded as Mr.
Clinton is now undergoing.


Three Soloists Try to Play as One, or Maybe Two
Woodstock was not the only music festival rained on today, but since Caramoor has several outdoor concert areas, when rain threatened an afternoon concert in the Spanish Courtyard, the performance was moved to the tent-covered Venetian Theater.
The attraction was a new chamber collaboration by three players who are highly regarded soloists: the pianist Misha Dichter, the violinist Robert McDuffie and the cellist Ralph Kirshbaum.
This was the trio's second performance (their debut was in Aspen) and although they will maintain their solo careers, they are talking about performing regularly as the Dichter, McDuffie, Kirshbaum Trio.


Sage Technologies Inc.(SASZ,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


More Than 20,000 Stranded as B Train Derails in Brooklyn


Omnicom to Buy Stake in Fahlgren
The Omnicom Group said yesterday that it had agreed in principle to acquire a 5 percent equity stake in Fahlgren, an agency in Parkersburg, W. Va., that handles co-op accounts of franchisees of the McDonald's Corporation.
Omnicom will buy the stake as part of plans by top executives of Fahlgren to buy the agency back from its parent, the Interpublic Group of Companies, to resolve a conflict between McDonald's and the Burger King account at another agency owned by Interpublic, Ammirati &amp; Puris/Lintas.
Fred Meyer, chief financial officer at Omnicom, confirmed reports of the deal this week in Advertising Age and Adweek.
While "all the details are still being worked out," he said, "it's likely to be true."


Whitewater Whistle-Blower Is Put on Leave
An investigator at the Treasury Department agency who began the inquiry into a failed Arkansas savings and loan that has erupted into the Whitewater investigation was placed on paid leave today while she undergoes an internal review of her conduct, an agency official said.
The employee, L. Jean Lewis, was suspended along with two other investigators at the Resolution Trust Corporation, which, as the Federal agency managing the savings and loan bailouts, examines whether anyone is legally liable for the collapse of failed financial institutions, said Stephen Katsanos, the agency's spokesman.
But the reason behind the move was unclear, and Mr.
Katsanos, citing a concern for privacy, said he could not describe the accusations.


New Clue to Cause of Dyslexia Seen in Mishearing of Fast Sounds
RESEARCHERS say they have pinpointed a fundamental brain flaw that may be a major factor in the development of some forms of dyslexia, a learning disability that affects millions of Americans, schoolchildren and adults.
The new finding, published yesterday in the Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, suggests that dyslexia is at root not a visual or ordinary hearing problem, as many have thought, but a flaw in a specific brain circuit that handles rapidly flowing auditory information.
Although brain researchers familiar with the study praise it highly, most dyslexia experts have not had time to assess the new claims.


Revlon Withdraws Ads From Hearst
Revlon Inc. said yesterday that it had withdrawn advertising from Hearst Magazines because of unhappiness with the positions its ads had received.
But Hearst said the cosmetics giant had pulled out because of an article in the September issue of Esquire.
"Revlon will shift its advertising to a greater concentration in other magazines," said Allyn Seidman, a spokesman for Revlon in New York, because Hearst had discontinued a policy that rotated desirable positions in its magazines among cosmetics advertisers.


In the Name of Martha Graham, Genuine Radical
Several strong performances and a renewed sense of Martha Graham as a genuine radical were the hallmarks of a program offered by the Martha Graham Dance Company this afternoon at the Jacob's Pillow Dance Festival here.
Camille Brown stood out in "Diversion of Angels," set to music by Norman Dello Joio, dancing the maiden in red who represented erotic love to Graham.
Without losing the dance's quality of joyous abstraction, Ms.
Brown exuded warmth and charm as she shot out onto and about the stage in a performance of outstanding clarity and precision.
The strong lead cast also included Denise Vale and Peter London as the Couple in White, Miki Orihara and Mario Camacho as the Couple in Yellow, Martin Lofsnes as Ms.
Brown's partner and Gary Galbraith, Elizabeth Auclair, Kathy Buccellato, Rika Okamato and Myra Woodruff.


Russia Denies Nuclear Material Is Missing
Russia's Atomic Energy Ministry said today that there was no plutonium 239 missing from its inventory and no evidence that Russia was the source of any of the plutonium smuggled into Germany.
But the German Government immediately challenged the Russian denial, saying Bonn had clear evidence of Russian manufacture for some of the highly enriched, weapons-grade contraband.
Germany said three separate shipments of weapons-grade nuclear material from the former Soviet bloc had been seized within the last four months.
Last week in Munich, German officials arrested three non-Russian couriers on a flight from Moscow with what the officials said was 300 to 350 grams, or 10.6 to 12.3 ounces, of plutonium 239.
Conflicting reports have said the amount was as little as 7 grams and as much as 500 grams.


Tadiran Ltd.(TAD,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


UNR Industries(UNRI,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


In Days Leading to Travers, Watch for a Rabbit, a Bull and a Tabasco Cat (Oh, My!)
It was cloudy and chilly along the backstretch barns when Travers week dawned.
And there was Tabasco Cat pounding along the training track with Pat Day on his back and a "rabbit" trying to keep up with him in the fastest workout of the day as the Cat prepared for his return match with Holy Bull in the race of the summer and maybe the race of the year.
"That's it for him," said Wayne Lukas, who trains Tabasco Cat.
"He'll just gallop into the race. Pat and I were very pleased."


COMPANY BRIEFS
KNOGO CORP., Hauppauge, L.I., an electronic anti-pilferage and security devices concern, has agreed to the acquisition by Sensormatic Electronics Corp., Deerfield Beach, Fla., an electronic surveillance equipment concern, in a merger transaction through which Knogo's shareholders will receive $19 a share in Sensormatic stock and shares of a new corporation, Knogo North America Inc., consisting of Knogo's North American operations.


Paul Anderson Is Dead at 61; Was 'World's Strongest Man'
Paul Anderson, the gentle Georgia giant who overcame a childhood kidney disorder to win the Olympic gold medal in weight lifting as a super heavyweight in 1956 and then began a barnstorming evangelical career as "the world's strongest man," died yesterday at his home in Vidalia, Ga., where he had operated a home for juvenile delinquents for more than 30 years.
He was 61.
According to his staff, the cause of death was complications from a long series of illnesses that had plagued him since he underwent a kidney transplant in 1983.


Wide Range Of Price Cuts By Compaq
The Compaq Computer Corporation slashed prices across a wide range of products yesterday, firing the opening shots in what is sure to be a brutal price war this fall.
The cuts range from 11 percent to 22 percent and take effect immediately.
Price reductions were expected, analysts said, because Compaq has both a huge $2.2 billion in inventory, and profit margins well above its competitors.
Last month, Daryl J. White, Compaq's chief financial officer, told analysts that the company's gross margin of 26.5 percent allowed it room to lower prices and that Compaq could live with margins as low as 23 percent.
Compaq shares rose 25 cents yesterday, to $35.125, on the New York Stock Exchange.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
The two-earner family is giving way to the three-job marriage, as millions of Americans are pressed to take more than one job.
New Labor Department surveys show that seven million Americans work 15 million jobs.
Most multiple jobholders are married and, increasingly, nearly as many are women as men.  [ Page A1. ]


Complaint On Rating Rebuffed
WHEN two of the country's leading physics organizations published articles ranking rival journals by price and value, it was constitutionally protected free speech, a Federal judge in Manhattan ruled yesterday.
Commercial publishers had charged that the rankings constituted false advertising for the institutions' own nonprofit publications and were a "naked plug" for them.


Critic's Notebook; A Younger Generation Seizes a Portion of the Peace-and-Love Pie
Shoe-slurping mud.
Bad acid.
Jammed-up transportation.
Haphazard security.
Late sets.
True to its legendary trademark, Woodstock '94 was a big mess.
But after a few hundred thousand people recover from fatigue and hypothermia, the bigness will loom larger in memory than either the disarray or the corporate aura that hung over the festival from the beginning.
As it turned out, Woodstock '94 was not a larger version of a stadium concert but a generally benign, free-form party.
Though some people did stupid things -- the endless announcements about lost children were not gratifying -- the audience didn't riot, and the bands sounded good.


Presenting Becker, Agassi And a Bunch of Other Guys
"Who's that?" was heard as often as "good shot" today during the opening session of the Volvo International at the Connecticut Tennis Center.
And why not?
With most of the world's best men's players opting to play at the RCA United States Hardcourts Championships in Indianapolis this week, the Volvo has drawn only 6 from the top 20.


Disney Saves Virginians From More Sprawl; No Escaping History?
To the Editor:
William Styron, as a slave owner's grandson, seems to claim the right to tell us how best to confront the experience of slavery, invoking a "right of authenticity" (Op-Ed, Aug. 4).
He retells a story told to him by his grandmother about her two "sisters" (slaves she owned by deed) and the trauma of their separation when the Union Army invaded her plantation.
This authentic link to the past, he says, has haunted his life more profoundly than Disney can ever convey.


Yesterday's Sound and Fury
Though he came to personify terrorism in the 1970's, "Carlos the Jackal" spent most of the last decade drinking whisky in an apartment in downtown Damascus, living off his reputation as the Scarlet Pimpernel of international terrorism, intelligence officials said.
At the time of his arrest in Sudan, Carlos had become a pathetic relic of a bygone era, a burned-out Marxist-Leninist of no use to anyone, even the most radical of states that sponsor terrorism, according to past and present American intelligence officials.
Even in his prime, they said, he did not do half the things ascribed to him by Western intelligence services and the press.


Jerome Minskoff, 78, a Producer and Developer
Jerome Minskoff, a real-estate developer, theater owner and Broadway producer, died on Saturday in London.
He was 78 and had homes in Manhattan and London.
The cause was a heart attack, said his son, Steven.


Accounts
*
Mizuno U.S.A., South San Francisco, to Hyett, Broadbent &amp; Heimbrodt Advertising, San Francisco, to handle advertising for its sports and footwear division, previously handled in-house and on a project basis by various freelancers.
Billings were not disclosed.


Carlos the Terrorist Arrested and Taken to France
The international terrorist known as Carlos, an almost-mythical figure blamed for a string of bombings and killings across Western Europe in the 1970's and 1980's, was arrested in Sudan on Sunday and flown secretly to France today.
France's Interior Minister, Charles Pasqua, said Carlos, 44, a native of Venezuela whose real name is Ilich Ramirez Sanchez, would go on trial here for crimes committed in France.


KFC May Review Its International Job
The KFC fast-food chain said yesterday that it was considering placing in review its international account, with billings of $20 million, after naming Ogilvy &amp; Mather London to handle the creative portion of its account in Britain.
That account, with billings estimated at $8.5 million, had been handled by the London office of Young &amp; Rubicam Inc. for more than 15 years.
Steve Provost, a spokesman for KFC in Louisville, Ky., confirmed reports this week in Advertising Age and Adweek that the entire international account "may be in review, or just in certain markets."


Records Could Be Falling At Zurich's 5,000 Meters
How great is Noureddine Morceli, the Algerian world record-holder in the mile?
Can Bob Kennedy, the improving American distance man, challenge Morecelli in a race that has the depth of an Olympic final?
Both questions will be answered in Zurich tomorrow evening at the Weltklasse Meet, the premier trackand field event of the year.
Morceli and Kennedy are headliners in a 5,000-meter field that is so extraordinary it could overshadow the 100-meter showdown among Americans Carl Lewis and Leroy Burrell and the Olympic gold medalist, Linford Christie of Britain.


A Legend Is Leaving at Warner Records
The sequel to Woodstock is not the only page in music history being written this month.
In what will be the end of an era, Mo Ostin said today he would step down after 25 years as head of Warner Brothers Records when his contract expires on Dec. 31.
He will become a consultant to Time Warner Inc., the parent company.
Lenny Waronker, the president of Warner Brothers Records for the last 12 years, will become chief executive, continuing a management reshuffling that began last month at the Warner Music Group and that has brought new heads to all three divisions.
The group is made up of Warner Brothers Records, Elektra/East West and the Atlantic Records companies.


Invading Weed Makes a Bid To Become the New Kudzu
KUDZU, the Asian vine so fast-growing and invasive that people call it the plant that ate the South, has some saving graces: It controls erosion, for instance, and it provides forage for livestock.
Now comes what might be called Son of Kudzu, a nasty and equally aggressive invader from abroad with no apparent redeeming economic or social value.
Known variously as mile-a-minute weed, minute weed and tearthumb (for the backward-bending barbs on its stem), it grows at the rate of perhaps half a foot a day, forms tangled mats 20 to 25 feet high, overwhelms and kills other vegetation in its path and has been spreading rapidly from Pennsylvania into the upper South in the last decade.
In some of the parks of Washington, D.C., it has moved into areas where kudzu had been eradicated.


A $2.3 Billion Charge for Bell Atlantic
The Bell Atlantic Corporation joined the telephone industry trend of trimming costs and girding for intensifying competition yesterday, saying it would take a $2.3 billion charge against third-quarter earnings to write down the value of old equipment and cut its work force by 5,600 jobs, or about 7.7 percent.
The charge, equivalent to $5.20 to $5.25 a share, would result in a loss for the third quarter and the year, Bell Atlantic said.
Before the announcement, analysts had been projecting company earnings of 90 to 94 cents a share for the third quarter, which ends Sept. 30, and perhaps $3.56 a share for the full year.


Review/Fashion; The Dress Stars In the Getaway
Three major designers who have their roots in sportswear began showing their resort collections to small groups of retailers last week.
The up-close viewing demonstrated more clearly than a big runway show how dramatically sportswear is changing.
Sure, there are still pants, skirts and jackets around.
But the basis of the wardrobe has now become the dress.
It fits gently and easily, but still revealingly; adroitly placed tucksbring it closer to the body.
The dress is then combined with jackets, sweaters or tank tops.
The hem ends in the vicinity of the knees, where it flares.


Man Fatally Stabbed In Long Island Mall
A 19-year-old man was stabbed to death this afternoon in the Victoria's Secret store at a mall in Valley Stream after he and three companions got into a dispute with two other men, the Nassau County police said.
The altercation began with an exchange of words as the four men, employees of a nearby Kmart on Sunrise Highway, were walking in the food court of the Green Acres Mall on their lunch break, the police said.


Michael Jackson Accused in New Lawsuit
The stepfather and the younger sister of a 14-year-old boy who accused Michael Jackson of sexual molestation sued the singer today, charging him with inflicting emotional distress on the family and with fraud and negligence.
The suit, which seeks an unspecified amount of money, was brought on behalf of David Schwartz, the stepfather, and his 6-year-old daughter.
It contends that their "family life was devastated" as a result of Mr.
Jackson's "lavishing expensive gifts" on members of the Schwartz family and "sexually assaulting Schwartz's son despite Schwartz's best efforts to protect the minor child."


Sportmart Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Excerpts From the Senate Debate on the Mitchell Health Care Legislation
Following are excerpts from statements made yesterday on the Senate floor in the seventh day of debate over the health care bill, as transcribed by The New York Times from a broadcast on C-Span: STATEMENT BY SENATOR MURRAY
What is most troubling to me is some of the statements that I have heard about how bad Government is: Government has taken over everything, isn't that awful?


Deadline Passes on New Bid In Cyanamid Takeover Deal
Apparently betting that it can still make a better deal, the American Cyanamid Company let a 24-hour deadline pass yesterday without saying whether it would accept a sweetened $100-a-share takeover offer from the American Home Products Corporation.
By not acting on the offer, American Cyanamid apparently rejected the additional $500 million that American Home Products had promised Cyanamid's shareholders if the $100 offer was accepted by the close of business yesterday.


Masland Corp.(MSLD,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to July 1


Racquets but Not Bats Are Swinging in Bronx
Less than two weeks before the start of the United States Open professional tennis has come to another of the city's borough's, the Bronx.
The Bronx Pro Tennis Classic, which is being played this week in Crotona Park, is not one of those outer satellites for the truly undeveloped, but a bona fide challenger tournament, one step below the Grand Slam circuit and with a full $50,000 in prize money at stake.


The Joy of Noodles: An American Soba Master in Japan
IT is a sweltering day, and James Udesky, a relocated Chicagoan, is making soba noodles by hand in his cramped apartment.
He approaches the task in a manner befitting any soba master who has studied the art for more than 14 years, as he has.
Mr.
Udesky, 42, is universally acknowledged as a soba authority in Japan, a rare honor for a foreigner.
In 1988, he wrote "The Book of Soba" (Kodansha International), and he demonstrates the art each week in Keio, one of Japan's largest department stores, where he entertains his audience with quips in fluent Japanese.
He runs a thriving catering business preparing soba parties for groups, and he is about to begin writing another soba book.


Market Place; Long-term enthusiasm for Sony, despite a dull near-term outlook.
THE news will not be good for the Sony Corporation when it reports its first-quarter earnings tomorrow.
Analysts expect a replay close to the 33 percent drop in fourth-quarter earnings it reported in May.
The yen remains near post-World War II highs, and Japan's continuing trade surplus with the United States keeps it there.
Moreover, Japan and Europe are only slowly emerging from recession, and that means fewer cash registers jingling for Walkmen, compact disks and tickets to movies from Sony's Columbia Studios.


Glenz, a Jersey Native, Tries to Salvage Pride for State
David Glenz, New Jersey's premier golfer in the last decade, put himself in position today to end a long drought for New Jersey golfers in the Met Open.
Glenz, a two-time winner in this event, shot a four-under-par 67 to take a one-shot lead after today's opening round of the three-day, $75,000 tournament at the Ridgewood Country Club here.


Quixote Corp.(QUIX,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Two Votes for Quality Health Care
The Senate is poised to vote on two health-care items that will bear heavily on the quality of American medicine and on medical institutions in the New York City area.
Both items are in the health-care bill introduced by the majority leader, George Mitchell, and are expected to be the subject of early votes.
One item is a wholly justifiable tax on health insurance premiums that Mr.
Mitchell proposes to pay for training doctors and conducting medical research.
Republicans, in a blind anti-tax fervor, want to block this tax as well.
But that would greatly damage the research and training programs that have made American medicine the finest and most innovative in the world.


For Now, It's Take Me Out to the Byte Game
In Bill Konigsberg's world, Ken Griffey Jr. never went on strike, preferring instead to hit a home run in every game since the work stoppage.
"He's up to 46 now," Konigsberg said from behind his Packard Bell Force SX 16 computer.
"I may have to do something about that."
Roger Maris, beware: The rotogeeks are closing in, and the nation's sports pages are right behind.


G.O.P. ABANDONS DELAYING TACTIC ON HEALTH CARE
The Senate cast its first vote on national health insurance legislation tonight as Republicans suspended their delaying tactics and the Senate majority leader shelved his threat of 24-hour-a-day sessions.
Democrats promptly claimed an important success.
"It is a breakthrough," said Senator Edward M. Kennedy of Massachusetts.
"I hope we can put away the cots and the discussion of who's holding the institution up."


Despite Big Push, New Yorkers Snub Transit Card
Heralded as the wave of the future just a few months ago, electronic fare cards have not caught on with New York City subway riders as quickly as transit officials had hoped.
With sales lagging, transit officials have resorted to special discounts, promotions and a radio advertising blitz in recent days to persuade more New Yorkers to try the new Metrocards.
Subway officials have even tried handing out the cards free.


CHRONICLE
Senator NANCY LANDON KASSEBAUM, Republican of Kansas, is withdrawing from consideration as the chancellor of the University of Kansas.
In a letter sent yesterday to Frank Becker, the chairman of the search committee, she said: "I have decided to ask that my name not be considered for this position. I am aware that some in the academic community are concerned about my lack of a doctorate. I can appreciate that concern."


Jane Preddy; Architectural Historian, 59
Jane Preddy, an architectural historian specializing in theatrical architecture, died on Friday at St.
Francis Hospital in Poughkeepsie, N.Y.
She was 59 and lived in Wappingers Falls, N.Y.
The cause was injuries suffered in an automobile accident, said her son, Phil D. Carroll.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
The Federal Reserve lifted interest rates for the fifth time this year, prompting banks nationwide to raise their prime rates.
The Fed raised the Federal funds rate and the discount rate, both by a half point, and the stock and bond markets rallied.  [ Page A1. ]
Many high school economics teachers are unprepared to teach the growing number of business and economics classes.  [ B9. ] Companies
Kidder, Peabody's former chief executive may have violated New York Stock Exchange rules by not having a license to manage a brokerage firm for most of his tenure at the firm.  [ D1. ]
American Cyanamid failed to act on a $100-a-share offer from American Home Products.
By letting the deadline pass, American Cyanamid apparently bet it could make a better deal.  [ D1. ]
Leslie Fay's senior management and board were cleared in a report on an accounting fraud.
But the report criticized BDO Seidman, which had been the company's outside auditor.  [ D2. ]
Donna Karan said sales surged in the second quarter.
The company also said Citibank had extended a credit line.  [ D3. ]
Wal-Mart, Dayton Hudson and J. C. Penney posted higher quarterly profits, showing strength in retailing.  [ D3. ]
Kmart will sell majority stakes in three specialty chains through initial public offerings of stock.  [ D3. ]
Dickstein &amp; Company is seeking to solicit shareholders of Hill's Stores to support its bid for four seats on Hill's board.  [ D3. ]
Shares of Hewlett-Packard jumped after the company posted third-quarter earnings that were higher than expected.  [ D4. ] International
The United States and Japan signed a pact on patent policies.
The accord, the first the two nations have signed in more than a year, provides greater protection for American inventors.  [ D1. ]
A big Hong Kong developer has turned to highways and power plants in China and the Philippines.
Last month, the developer, Gordon Wu, opened China's first superhighway.
And work on a second highway starts in October.
With such plans, Mr.
Wu and his main company have won a reputation for boldness.  [ D1. ] Business Technology
'Buyer beware' was the motto of the F.C.C.'s auction of interactive television licenses.
Questions remain on the technology and what business model will work best.
Still, a number of bidders took an entrepreneurial leap of faith that if the Government was holding an auction, there must be something valuable for sale.  [ D1. ]
The F.C.C. expects to receive only about 60 percent of the $215 million in winning bids from its recent auction of licenses.  [ D4. ]
America Online says it is now the fastest-growing on-line information service, with one million subscribers.  [ D4. ] Markets
Treasury prices surged in response to the move by the Fed.
The yield on the 30-year bond fell to a two-week low of 7.37 percent.  [ D5. ]
Stocks rallied after traders, with some hesitation at first, welcomed the interest rate increase by the Federal Reserve.  [ D6. ]
The dollar made only modest gains against other currencies despite the rally in the bond market.  [ D14. ]
Crude oil prices tumbled amid concerns that higher interest rates will slow economic growth and energy demand.  [ D14. ]
Today's Columns Why does Sony's stock price remain high?
The company has been battered by a strong yen and by slow recoveries in Japan and Europe.
But investors are bullish.
One reason is the absence of a box-office flop at its Columbia studio.
Market Place.  [ D6. ]
A family-run public relations firm shows strong gains as it undergoes a transition at the top.
Advertising.  [ D17. ]


Mystery Writer's Hidden Mystery
For years Anne Perry has been a prolific and very successful author of exquisitely detailed mystery novels set in Victorian England.
She is a familiar figure to readers and booksellers here as well as in her native Britain, so much so that three million copies of her 19 novels are in print in the United States alone.
That is why it comes as such a shock to those who know her and those who read her that Miss Perry, who is 55 and lives with her mother in the tiny Scottish village of Portmahomack, has a hidden past as startling as anything in the most melodramatic mystery story.
Forty years ago, sent to New Zealand to recover from an illness, Miss Perry committed a murder.
Just 15, she served five and a half years in prison before changing her name and beginning a new life.


Britain's Rail Service Suffers as Signal Workers Strike Again
A strike by signal workers played havoc with Britain's railroads again today in the latest round of a 10-week-old labor dispute that has frustrated tourists and travelers and disrupted freight shipments.
Rail officials using supervisors said they had managed to keep one in three scheduled trains running so far during the 48-hour work stoppage that ended at midnight, but platforms in many London stations were all but deserted, as travelers sought other ways to get around the country.


Relax, Jones Takes Hip Problem in Stride
When a first-round draft pick with unlimited potential doesn't practice and skips a preseason game with an injury to the hip he fractured the previous season -- an injury that forced him to miss the last seven games of the season -- naturally, there is concern that something is amiss.
Marvin Jones wants everyone to stay cool and be patient.


14-Year-Old Convicted in Murder of Preschooler in Upstate Town
A Steuben County jury tonight rejected a defense built around an insanity plea and found Eric Smith, 14, guilty of murdering a 4-year-old Savona boy last summer.
The Steuben County District Attorney, John C. Tunney, had argued that the teen-ager's confessed killing of the boy, Derrick Robie, was a cold-blooded act that demanded a long prison term.


Ex-Kidder Chief Lacked Principal License
Michael G. Carpenter, the former chief executive of Kidder, Peabody &amp; Company, may have violated the New York Stock Exchange's rules by not having a license to manage a brokerage firm for most of his tenure there.
Mr.
Carpenter resigned on June 22, two months after the firm accused Joseph Jett, its head Government bond trader, of creating $350 million in phantom profits to inflate his bonus.


Vishay Intertechnology Inc.(VSH,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Ordonez Can Hold Everything Except His Family
This morning in Cuba, Lisa Maria Ordonez went to the visa office in downtown Havana, a trip she has made many times.
More than a thousand miles away, her husband, Rey Ordonez, waited in his New Jersey hotel room, hoping for good news.
They were both disappointed again.
It has been more than a year since Rey Ordonez, a gifted shortstop, defected while the Cuban national team was in Buffalo for a game.
In that year, he has been drafted by the Mets and moved quickly through their minor league system, arriving at the Mets' Class AA affiliate in Binghamton, N.Y., a little more than one month ago.


Brooklyn Census Count Missed Perhaps 1 in 5
To the Editor:
The three-judge panel of the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit deserves praise for ruling in favor of New York and other big cities on the flaws of the 1990 Census (front page, Aug. 9).


Recalling 3 Casualties of Summer '64
Some wounds never quite heal.
The murders of three civil rights workers in Mississippi in 1964, which seared the nation's conscience, are painfully evoked in tonight's edition of "Turning Point" on ABC.
The report by Don Kladstrup hurts not solely for its description of the violent deaths of three young men who had committed themselves to nonviolence, but also for what it brings back about the many decades when brutish forces ruled in much of the South.
It was Freedom Summer, when hundreds of college students went south to register blacks to vote.
Such efforts often meant beatings, jailings and worse, and nowhere was white resistance more determined than in Mississippi, which, as Mr.
Kladstrup recalls, "led the nation in racial violence, mysterious disappearances and lynchings." Bob Moses, a leader of the registration drive who is interviewed tonight, says he knew that if young whites were abused, the Federal Government would at last be forced to act: "We were swimming in violence."


Rampant Malpractice?
To the Editor:
Bob Herbert's Aug. 10 column states: "Scores of thousands of patients each year are left paralyzed, brain-damaged, blind or otherwise horribly disabled from malpractice."


Viking Office Products (VKNG,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to June 24


Corrections
An obituary on Aug. 8 about Dr.
George Sherman Avery Jr., a plant physiologist who headed the Brooklyn Botanic Garden from 1944 to 1969, misstated his age and the date of his death.
He was 91, not 92, and he died on Aug. 6, not Aug. 5.
The obituary also omitted his surviving great-grandchildren.
There are seven.


Dow Up 24.28 Amid Rate Rise Confusion
The financial markets, which have lobbied both for and against another interest-rate increase by the Federal Reserve Board, got what some traders wanted yesterday: a sharp boost in both the Federal funds rate and the discount rate by half a percentage point.
But after the Fed's move, the fifth such increase this year, other traders' heads turned continually in the space of half an hour yesterday.
Both stock and bond trends reversed field before turning up decisively by day's end in active trading.


International Controls Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Associated Natural Gas Corp.(NGA,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Dickstein Seeks Approval To Bid for Hill's Board Seats
Making good on a threat it made last week, Dickstein &amp; Company L.P. asked the Securities and Exchange Commission yesterday to allow it to solicit fellow shareholders of the Hill's Stores Company, a discount department store chain, to support its bid for four seats on the Hill's board of directors.
"I don't think you have a board that is particularly focused on the stock price," said Mark Dickstein, a principal in the investment firm, which specializes in investing in distressed and bankrupt companies.
Hill's emerged from bankruptcy protection last October.


Corrections
An article in Business Day yesterday about trading in the credit market misidentified the lead underwriter for a corporate debt issue by Aegon N.V.
The underwriter was J. P. Morgan Securities, not Morgan Stanley &amp; Company.


Whitaker-McGirt Rematch Set
They are billing the welterweight title rematch in Norfolk, Va., announced yesterday between PERNELL (SWEETPEA) WHITAKER and JAMES (BUDDY) McGIRT as "The Final Say." But not everyone agrees with the label.
"I don't know why they call this 'The Final Say,' " BOBBY GOODMAN, McGirt's promoter, said of the fight scheduled for Oct. 1 at Norfolk's Scope arena.
"It should be called 'the Payback.' "


Hewlett-Packard Earnings Push Stock Price Up $8.50
The Hewlett-Packard Company reported earnings today that were higher than Wall Street estimates, sending its stock price soaring.
Hewlett-Packard attributed the strong results primarily to growth in computer sales and rapid market acceptance of new products.
Shares of Hewlett-Packard jumped $8.50, to $87.625, in heavy trading on the New York Stock Exchange.
Analysts said investor sentiment had been very bearish on Hewlett-Packard in recent weeks, so even though earnings came in just a few cents above the consensus estimate, the stock rose sharply in reaction.


Challenger Assails G.O.P. Front-Runner
Far ahead in the race for Governor, according to polls, John Rowland was attacked by a challenger within his own Republican Party this week for his conduct as a Representative and former Representative.
While representing the Waterbury area for six years during the 80's, Mr.
Rowland wrote 108 overdraft checks on his account in the House bank, his challenger, Secretary of the State Pauline Kezer, said in her first radio advertisement, broadcast on Monday, and repeated in their first debate today.


Longs Drug Stores Corp.(LDG,N) reports earnings for Qtr to July 28


Colombian Says No To Election Inquiry
Colombia's chief prosecutor announced today that he would not open a formal investigation of taped telephone conversations in which drug traffickers appeared to agree to donate funds to the campaign of the new President, Ernesto Samper.
The prosecutor, Gustavo de Greiff, said there was no proof that either Mr.
Samper or his chief rival, Andres Pastrana, who was the conservatie candidate, had received money from drug traffickers.


High H.I.V. Levels Raise Risk To Newborns, 2 Studies Show
IN findings that bear directly on the question of how to prevent mother-to-infant transmission of the AIDS virus, two new studies from scientists in New York State show that the likelihood of infecting offspring rises with the amount of the virus in a pregnant woman's blood.
The studies, from researchers in the New York State Health Department and New York University, are believed to be the first to measure the amount of the AIDS virus, known as H.I.V., in infected women during pregnancy and at delivery and in the infant during its first months of life.


Big Business Puts Money on Mexican Status Quo
Life under the long rule of the Institutional Revolutionary Party has gotten better and better for Roberto Hernandez, and though he is a discreet man, he has not been shy about showing his gratitude.
During the economic chaos of the last decade, Mr.
Hernandez, the son of a rancher, made millions of dollars speculating in the stock market.
When President Carlos Salinas de Gortari put hundreds of state-owned companies up for sale a few years ago, Mr.
Hernandez bought the country's biggest bank and made the billionaires' list.


Jury Hears Closing Arguments In 2d Waldbaum Arson Trial
A Brooklyn jury is to begin deliberating today in an effort finally to resolve one of the oldest unsettled cases in the city's courts: murder and arson charges against a man accused of helping set a 1978 fire that killed six firefighters at a Brooklyn supermarket.
In the second trial for Eric Jackson-Knight, who spent nearly 10 years in prison before his 1980 conviction in his first trial was overturned and a new trial ordered, the jury will assess two weeks of testimony and arguments that culminated yesterday with passionate pleas by prosecution and defense lawyers that justice finally be done.


Judge in Whitewater Dispute Rewards Faith of His Patron
When David B. Sentelle was nominated to be a Federal judge in 1985, his patron, Senator Jesse Helms of North Carolina, said that he had decided when he first met Mr.
Sentelle, "I would do whatever I could to make sure that this young man's integrity and talent, principles and courage, would be used by this country."
Now as he is embroiled in the controversy over the replacement of Robert B. Fiske Jr. by Kenneth W. Starr as the Whitewater independent counsel, Judge Sentelle has already had an influence on the country that may exceed the Republican Senator's fondest expectations.


In America; Gingrich Mugs the Crime Bill
Representative Newt Gingrich, the House Republican whip, cannot be accused of a slavish devotion to the truth.
For demagogues, the truth can only be a handicap.
Mr.
Gingrich, who hopes someday to become Speaker of the House, does not believe in handicapping himself.
So he goes on television and brazenly proclaims that the crime bill that he helped torpedo "would release over 10,000 drug dealers who are currently in prison."
Pinocchio would have been embarrassed to tell such a tale.
For Mr.
Gingrich, it was business as usual.
With President Clinton on the ropes, why not employ a few falsehoods to finish him off?


A City's Dreams Go to Market
BARRY BENEPE has been arranging blue-tipped pins on a giant topographical map in his West 16th Street office this summer.
Mr.
Benepe, the director of Greenmarket, a project of the New York City Council on the Environment that operates 20 open-air food emporiums where farmers sell directly to consumers, explained that each pin indicates a farm from which a vegetable grower, a cider maker, a fisherman or a dairy or poultry farmer drives to the city's Greenmarkets.
To Mr.
Benepe, who helped found the project in 1976, the pins represent 200 family farms that have been saved by the money they make at the city's markets.
And when he runs his finger from the blue pin near the Finger Lakes in upstate New York south to Manhattan, or from the cluster of blue pins in New Jersey north to the Bronx, he is tracing a web that connects urban life with rural life, a web that continues to change and grow -- and that continues to amaze Mr.
Benepe.


The Shadow of a Gunman
The great wave of terrorism that swept Europe in the 1970's was essentially secular, pro-Marxist or pro-Palestinian; the religious terrorism associated with Ayatollah Khomeini and others came later.
Ilich Ramirez Sanchez, better known as Carlos the Jackal, was the movement's fearsome embodiment, a cold-eyed zealot blamed for the death of 83 people.
But now that he has finally been apprehended in the Sudan, the world's most wanted terrorist turns out to be smaller than life, figuratively the shadow of his old self.
He appears to have been discarded by his former Arab patrons, and with the collapse of Communism he seems to have had no place to run.


Ailing Lewis Won't Compete In Zurich's 100-Meter Event
The Weltklasse Grand Prix meet in Zurich tonight, billed as the premier competition of the season, offers a star-studded lineup for the men's 100-meter dash, but the field won't include CARL LEWIS.
America's sprinting elite -- the world record-holder, LEROY BURRELL, DENNIS MITCHELL and JON DRUMMOND -- will have a showdown with the Olympic and world champion, LINFORD CHRISTIE of Britain.


Suburban Taxes Are Higher For Blacks, Analysis Shows
During the 1980's, increasing numbers of blacks attained that most potent symbol of the American dream: a home in the suburbs.
But in many suburban areas, an analysis of census data suggests, black homeowners are paying higher property taxes than whites on homes of similar value.
The analysis, done by Prof.
Andrew A. Beveridge of Queens College, looked at 30 cities and 31 suburbs and found that black homeowners are taxed more than whites on comparable homes in 58 percent of the suburban regions and 30 percent of the cities.


U.S. Petroleum Data
In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
Aug. 12
Aug. 5
Aug. 13
1994
1994
1993
Gasoline production, daily
7.4
7.1
7.2
Distillate production, daily
3.3
3.4
3.1
Gasoline stocks
208.0
210.6
208.0
Distillate stocks
131.5
130.2
122.5
Crude imports, daily
7.9
6.9
6.2
Product imports, daily
2.0
2.2
2.0
Crude stocks
328.5
324.8
348.5
Crude production, daily
6.5
6.6
6.8
Refinery utilization (%)
95.5
96.5
94.1
Source: American Petroleum Institute


Metropolitan Diary
HAND-LETTERED sign spotted by Arthur Witkin of Hartsdale, N.Y., taped to the information window of the office of the State Department of Motor Vehicles in White Plains:
THE PERSON WHO SPEAKS ENGLISH  WILL NOT BE IN TODAY.
. . .
Overheard by Sue Freedman of Scarsdale, N.Y., in a new coffee bar on the Upper West Side, where two stylish businesswomen in their early 30's are sipping and snacking.
One says to the other: "Thank God for the word 'muffin.' Otherwise, I'd be having cake for breakfast every morning."
. . .


Resorts Intl.(RT,A) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


The Compromise Plan: A Last Hope, or a Hoax?
Is the Mitchell plan, the Senate Democratic leadership's compromise on health care reform, the last best hope for achieving universal health insurance?
Or is it a shell game, an exercise in deception that would waste tens of billions of dollars and discourage work efforts by the poor?
The answer, say health economists -- some with resignation, some with disgust -- is both.


Longview Fibre Co.(LFB,N) reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
7.75
7.25
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
4.00
3.50
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
4.56
4.50
3.10
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.61
4.59
3.00
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.94
4.99
3.11
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.14
7.29
5.71
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.37
7.50
6.31
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.23
8.37
7.08
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.37
6.42
5.64
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Letterman on Bonilla: Not Topical Enough
The Mets had waited for this moment for more than a year.
Time and time again, they watched David Letterman ridicule them on his show.
Time and time again, they chuckled with a little bit of embarrassment and plotted ways to get even.
That opportunity was scheduled tonight.
Fulfilling a long-desired Met wish, Letterman invited Bobby Bonilla to appear tonight to talk about the team and the baseball strike.


Republicans Seek to Block Cuomo Funds
Seeking to block a major source of campaign money for Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo, a group of Republicans filed a lawsuit today contending that the Democratic National Committee illegally contributed more than $1 million to state Democrats over the last two years.
The Republicans, who are acting on behalf of the leading Republican candidate for governor, State Senator George E. Pataki, are asking that the money be returned and that the national committee be barred from making additional contributions to Mr.
Cuomo this year.
The national party's donations exceeded state limits, the lawsuit charges.


Where President's Pitch On Crime Misses Mark
Darrold Courtney, a sheet-metal worker, has this to say about President Clinton and the $30 billion anti-crime bill now stalled in Congress: "The man is trying to sell too many camels in one load here."
Wilford Holder, a mechanic, thinks he sniffs a boondoggle.
He especially rails against "that midnight-basketball-for-kids thing," but he is not sure, since he sees some tough measures in the bill.
"They ought to break it down in pieces so a normal person could understand it," he says.


Staples Inc.(SPLS,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to July 30


Kohl's Corp.(KSS,N) reports earnings for Qtr to July 30


Many Faces of Harlem's Main Street; A Day in the Life of 125th: From Bustling to Restless to Cool
It's 2 A.M. on Saturday and the Uptown Comedy Club at 125th Street and Fifth Avenue is literally shaking with the recorded thunder of rappers Warren G &amp; Nate Dogg, playing a seemingly endless variation on the gangster-chic theme that dominates the street.
Much of 125th Street, Harlem's main commercial thoroughfare, surges with black youth on foot, on bicycles, on motorcycles, in automobiles, Jeeps and even a stretch limousine or two.
A summer weekend ritual of see-and-be-seen, set to Harlem's hip-hop rhythms and sensibilities, has evolved on the street of Hughes, Divine, Powell and Malcolm X.


As Congress Debates, Businesses Try to Cut Health Costs by Joining Forces
William Stack obtained health insurance for his seven employees at his small printing business for the first time this summer.
Insurance had been too expensive, he said, but the price came down this year after he joined a new purchasing cooperative that he helped to organize.
Seeking to make health coverage affordable, employers around the country have been following Mr.
Stack's example and starting purchasing groups, which can negotiate reduced rates for their members because they can spread the costs and share the risks of expensive illnesses.


CACI Intl.(CACI,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Crown Heights Defendant Is Back in the Whirlwind
Lemrick Nelson Jr. is a taciturn young man who speaks in a whisper, recalls a childhood of playing baseball with Jewish youngsters in Brooklyn and talks of himself as a "nice, humorous person."
He has spent the last several days at his mother's house in New Jersey, waiting until it is time to surrender to Federal prosecutors on charges that he killed a Hasidic scholar in Crown Heights in 1991.
Neighbors say they have seen him on the front porch, listening to reggae and rap music and talking on a cellular phone.
Teen-agers on the block have quietly wondered who the new kid is.


Corrections
Because of a mechanical error, an article yesterday about the making of Oliver Stone's new film, "Natural Born Killers," included an incomplete paragraph in some copies.
It should have read: "As if anticipating criticism of 'Natural Born Killers,' Warner Brothers has actively joined in the defense of the film, pointing out that its depiction of television's craving for serial killers is thoroughly realistic."


Mathis Appeals 'No Contest'
Lawyers for BUSTER MATHIS Jr. appealed yesterday to the New Jersey boxing commissioner, LARRY HAZZARD, to reverse his "no contest" ruling in Mathis's heavyweight fight against RIDDICK BOWE.
After Mathis had been pounded to one knee in last Saturday's bout in Atlantic City, Bowe struck his opponent with a right that knocked Mathis over.
Referee ARTHUR MERCANTE immediately stopped the fight and called the blow an intentional foul.


Inquiry Finds Ticket Scalping 'Pervasive'
New York State's Attorney General said yesterday that an investigation by his office had found a "pervasive problem" of tickets for plays, concerts and sporting events being resold illegally at huge markups.
The Attorney General, G. Oliver Koppell, presided at a hearing in Manhattan before several state legislators who are considering changes in the state's three-year-old anti-scalping statute.
The law, due to expire next June, limits the markup on tickets that are resold to 20 percent, or $5 above the original ticket price.


Corrections
A music review on Monday about the Woodstock '94 festival in Saugerties, N.Y., misidentified one of the gospel singers who performed on Sunday morning.
She was Mavis Staples, not Shirley Caesar.
The review also referred incorrectly in some copies to a song performed by Bob Dylan.
It was "Rainy Day Women No. 12 and 35."


Kmart to Sell Its Control Of 3 Chains
The Kmart Corporation announced yesterday that it would sell a majority interest in three of its specialty store chains, a move that had been widely anticipated.
But the company also said it was still undecided about what to do with another specialty group and its core chain of Kmart discount stores.


Hanson Plc(HAN,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Men Who Are Women, and Fans Who Adore Them
If you fused military basic training with charm school and added precision drilling in Broadway-style song and dance, you might come up with an approximation of the Takarazuka Music School, a Japanese cultural institution with a status roughly comparable to that of Miss America in the United States.
The all-female school, which is the subject of Kim Longinotto and Jano Williams's film, "Dream Girls," was founded in 1914 and is near Osaka.
Each year it produces a glitzy revue that suggests a demure, ritualized mixture of a Las Vegas floor show, a Ziegfeld-style Broadway extravaganza and a cross-dressed beauty pageant.
"Dream Girls," which opens today at Film Forum, is a 50-minute documentary that pointedly illustrates the ways the Takarazuka school and revue reflect Japanese puritanism and sexual politics.
Depending on their vocal registers and physiques, the students are assigned to male or female roles in the school's much-admired productions.
In these shows, the girls who impersonate men become the stars.
Preening and gliding in formal evening wear with their stage sweethearts, they are seen as the suave romantic heroes of fantasies that suggest Astaire-Rogers movies reimagined as modern soap opera.


U.S. Plays Game With Cuban Immigrants
To the Editor:
The report of Cubans hijacking a ferry to come to the United States, and possibly sparking a new Mariel boat lift, highlights the hypocrisy of United States immigration policy toward Cuba (news article, Aug. 7).
Under President Reagan, the United States agreed to take as many as 20,000 Cuban immigrants a year, but in reality only a few thousand visas are granted annually.


Valassis Communications (VCI,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Edgar A. Bering, 77, World War II Doctor
Dr.
Edgar Andrew Bering Jr., a pediatric neurosurgeon and researcher who devised a wound dressing widely used on combat casualties in World War II, died on Thursday at his summer home in Islesboro, Me.
He was 77 and lived in Oxford, Md.
The cause was heart failure, his family said.


Personal Health; A warning about drugs that rob bones of calcium.
OSTEOPOROSIS and the factors that may help to prevent or cause it have received much attention in the last decade.
Bone specialists have identified insufficient calcium in the diet, lack of exercise, cigarette smoking and a natural hormonal decline at menopause as major contributors to the weakened, fragile bones of osteoporosis, a bone-wasting disease that has become a costly epidemic in late 20th-century America.
But through it all, one important contributor to osteoporosis has been largely overlooked: the role played by medications that have bone loss as a major side effect.
In a new booklet, the National Osteoporosis Foundation calls attention to this unfortunate effect of many important medications, not to frighten those who must take them but to suggest that adjustments in treatment or greater attention to prevention might help protect the bones while accomplishing the desired therapeutic goal.


Foster Care's Ills Include Runaway Children
To the Editor:
"Languishing in Foster Care" (editorial, Aug. 2) omits what may be the most telling symptom of the ills that plague the foster care system: the prevalence of recurrent runaway behavior among foster children.


METRO DIGEST
TAX DISPARITY FOR BLACKS IN SUBURBIA
During the 1980's, increasing numbers of blacks attained that most potent symbol of the American dream: a home in the suburbs.
But in many suburban areas, a census analysis suggests, black homeowners are paying higher property taxes than whites on homes of similar value.
A1.
SUBWAY RIDERS ARE STICKING WITH TOKENS
Heralded as the wave of the future, electronic fare cards have not caught on with New York City subway riders as quickly as transit officials had hoped.
Despite special promotions and discounts, many riders appear to be sticking stubbornly with tokens, either out of convenience or from a nostalgic attachment to something they view as a part of New York.
A1.


Food Notes
Fast Pasta and Sauce
Cucina Tosca, a line of pastas with sauce that take less than 10 minutes to prepare, is to be available in supermarkets in coming weeks.
The products were developed by Pino Luongo, the restaurateur.
"I wanted consumers to be able to have a fresh-tasting sauce without preservatives," Mr.
Luongo said.
The hardest part, he said, was finding dried spaghetti that was short enough to fit in the box yet long enough to twirl around a fork at least four times.
"You have to have four turns, otherwise an Italian would not be happy," he said.


Sri Lankans In Close Race In Parliament
After one of the most violent campaigns since this island nation gained independence in 1948, Sri Lankans voted on Tuesday in parliamentary elections pitting the governing party against a daughter of the political family it ousted 17 years ago.
Partial results in Colombo at mid-morning today indicated that the opposition People's Alliance was heading for a clear parliamentary majority, sweeping most of the seats in 11 of the 15 voting districts that make up the country's electoral map.
A final breakdown of seats in the 225-seat leislative assembly was not expected until later in the day.





Wieden Broadens Creative Team
Wieden &amp; Kennedy said yesterday that Susan Hoffman, a longtime creative director there, had been teamed with Dan Wieden, president and creative director, as a co-head of the creative department.
Ms.
Hoffman has assumed her larger creative duties from David Kennedy, co-founder of the agency with Mr.
Wieden, who was chairman and creative director when he retired in December.
In confirming Adweek's report of the appointment, Mr.
Wieden said Ms.
Hoffman had been serving as co-head of the department since January.


Empathy Among The Ruins
LIFE is strange, even on vacation.
There I was forsaking this column for the one I was sitting on, a lovely Ionic model long toppled and lying on its side in the shade of a fig tree in Ephesus, which is in Turkey.
Birds were chirping and the morning air was turning hot.
The holiday was working.
I was not thinking about New York.
Then, a tour passed to fracture solitude.
It was French, but two of its members wore shirts emblazoned with insignia of New York.
One said "The New York Tigers," the other said "Manhattan Central." For just a second, I thought I should point out that there are no New York Tigers.
None of the French tourists wore shirts saying Paris, or for that matter, Berlin, Rio or Tokyo.


Executives of Leslie Fay Are Cleared in Scandal
An independent examiner has cleared the senior management and the board of the Leslie Fay Companies of any knowledge of or participation in the accounting fraud that drove the apparel company into bankruptcy last year, a report released yesterday said.
But BDO Seidman, the accounting firm that was Leslie Fay's outside auditor until the fraud was uncovered in January 1993, was harshly criticized by Charles A. Stillman, the securities lawyer who wrote the report.
Mr.
Stillman had been appointed by the United States trustee in the bankruptcy case to determine whether Leslie Fay's audit committee had thoroughly investigated the matter.


Sports of The Times; Baltimore Is Having Fine Summer
THIS is a time of deprivation for baseball, but a time of reparation for football.
There is a football team in Baltimore once again.
This team cannot legally be called the Baltimore Colts, because that team was taken on a trail of tears to Indianapolis 10 years ago by a surly outsider named Irsay.
So the management of the new team has done the next best thing and given the team no nickname whatsoever.
Just Baltimore.


In School; A language may yet live on as long as children can say, E 'olelo Hawai'i wale no ma 'ane'i.
"Aloha!" the teacher said, greeting the 16 preschoolers as they arrived at the door of their classroom.
"Aloha!" the children responded in an off-key chorus as they formed a circle on the floor under a sign that read, "E 'olelo Hawai'i wale no ma 'ane'i" ("Only Hawaiian spoken here").


Hancock Fabrics Inc.(HKF,N) reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


California Microwave Inc.(CMIC,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


People
*
Diane Potter, vice president of circulation at Times Mirror Magazines, New York, was named a director of business development at its brand development group, joining Jack Horstmeyer and Nancy Walker.


Rate Move Buoys Price Of Bonds
Prices of Treasury securities rose sharply yesterday, after the Federal Reserve announced its fifth interest rate increase of the year.
The price of the 30-year bond climbed 120/32 , to 10118/32 , for a yield of 7.37 percent, down from 7.50 percent on Monday.
The yield was the lowest in nearly two weeks.
Before the Fed began raising interest rates, starting with an increase in the funds rate on Feb. 4, the yield was 6.35 percent.


Meeting on Crime Bill
The President met with Republican leaders, but it was unclear whether he was gaining any votes for the crime bill.
Page B6.


The Yale Art Gallery Names a New Director
The Yale University Art Gallery named Susan Mullin Vogel, the founder and executive director of the Museum for African Art in SoHo, to be its new director yesterday.
Yale's president, Richard C. Levin, made the announcement at a news conference at the gallery, which was founded in 1832 and is the nation's oldest university art gallery.
In her new position, which she is to assume on Jan. 1, Ms.
Vogel is to oversee 100,000 works of art, including such paintings such as van Gogh's "Night Cafe" and Manet's "Young Woman Reclining in Spanish Costume," sculptures by Henry Moore and Constantin Brancusi, the Garvan collection of American paintings and decorative arts and the Jarves collection of early Italian painting.


Uninsured Drivers
To the Editor:
Peter F. Green (letter, Aug. 5) declares that New Jersey motorists driving without mandated liability insurance should not be held accountable under the law.


Off the Meny
Lunch on Elvis
An Elvis Presley concert at the Nassau Coliseum on Aug. 22, 1977, never happened.
The King died six days before.
But only about 10 percent of the sold-out crowd of 30,000 would-be concert-goers returned their tickets for refunds.
Now, on the 17th anniversary of the concert that never was, the Milleridge Inn, 106 Hicksville Road, Hicksville, L.I., is throwing an Elvis party.
Those with original tickets are invited to a free lunch at noon on Monday at the restaurant.
The menu will feature Presley cuisine, including fried peanut butter and banana sandwiches and chicken-fried steak.
"We will also have an alternative menu for those who are not inclined to eat that way," said Ben McAnn, the owner of the restaurant.
Elvis impersonators will entertain.


Whitewater Hearing Tests Public's Endurance; So Long to the Best
To the Editor:
People often ask how we can attract young, intelligent, dedicated people to government service.
The first thing should be to keep Senator Alfonse D'Amato under wraps -- and certainly off television, where his lack of education and bad manners become apparent.


TJX Cos.(TJX,N) reports earnings for Qtr to July 30


Director of N.A.A.C.P. Is Fighting for Survival
For much of his adult life, the Rev.
Benjamin F. Chavis, executive director of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People, has lived on the edge of controversy and conflict.
In the 1970's he spent nearly five years in prison for the firebombing of a white-owned grocery store before the conviction was overturned.


Problem With Switch Is Cited in Derailment
The derailment of a subway train in Brooklyn on Monday was apparently caused when someone in a control tower mistakenly threw a switch as the train was passing over it, Transit Authority officials said yesterday.
An antiquated mechanical system that is supposed to prevent such mistakes failed to work, officials said.
Investigators looking into the accident, which happened on a Coney Island-bound B train, said a lever on a control table that activates the switch had been thrown.
The switch itself was apparently locked into the closed position that shunts the train from the local track to the express track.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-13  NUCLEAR WAKEUP CALL  American weapons experts support the Russian contention that nuclear material on the black market may not be from military installations, but they say its appearance is a global wakeup call.
A1  German authorities seized another sample of plutonium.
A13


ADT Ltd.(ADT,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


U.S., Japan In Accord On Patents
The United States and Japan signed an agreement today that would make major changes in the patent policies in both countries, providing what is being hailed as greater protection for American inventors.
The accord, while covering contentious issues, is just one arena in broader, and essentially stalled, trade negotiations with Tokyo.
It is the first accord the two nations have signed in more than a year of often trying talks.


Caniggia to Play for Benfica
Benfica, the defending Portuguese soccer champion, greeted its latest foreign acquisition yesterday with the arrival in Lisbon of CLAUDIO CANIGGIA from Argentina.
He is on a one-year loan from AS Roma.
Caniggia is coming back from a 13-month suspension for cocaine use. (AP)


Patient Strangled In Bed at Hospital
An 83-year-old patient was found strangled in his bed at Brooklyn Jewish Hospital on Monday, a cotton wrist restraint twisted around his neck, the police said yesterday.
The medical examiner determined yesterday that the death of the man, Victor Skelton, was a homicide, said Ellen Borakove, a spokeswoman for the medical examiner's office.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; A family-run public relations firm in transition keeps its place near the top of the industry heap.
FOR the last year, Edelman Public Relations Worldwide has been trumpeting its ranking as the top public relations firm in the nation by Inside PR, a leading trade publication.
But when results of the magazine's 1994 survey of overall performance and reputation were published last week, Edelman had slipped to fourth place, changing places with Porter/Novelli, a unit of the Omnicom Group, which has risen to first place from fourth.
Still, Edelman is enjoying a run of success that most of its competitors can only envy.
Though revenue growth slowed last year to 5.9 percent, 1993 was a year in which many other large public relations agencies suffered declines.


Whitewater Hearing Tests Public's Endurance; A Washington Diary
To the Editor:
Frank Rich's Aug. 4 demolition of Joshua Steiner, the Treasury Department's chief of staff, was unfair.


House Battle Threatens Big Research Universities With Loss of Millions
A long-simmering feud between two powerful House Democrats has erupted into a full-fledged battle over what one considers political prerogative and the other calls scientific pork.
The struggle may cost the nation's leading research universities hundreds of millions of dollars in money they expected to get from the Pentagon.
The fight is between Representative John P. Murtha of Pennsylvania, the chief protector of academe's have-nots, and Representative George E. Brown Jr. of California, the champion of the research titans.


Woodstock, Not Quite Redux
By virtue of its enormous size -- and its enormous buying power -- the Woodstock Generation (a.k.a. the Baby Boom) altered the cultural fabric like none before it.
Makers of cars, clothing and movies traffic in its nostalgia, hoping to hit the fat and sassy target group squarely in the wallet.
Nowhere is the tilt more evident than in rock music, the generation's signature art form.
Once, pop music tunes came and went in a matter of weeks or months.
These days you can make several stops along the radio dial and hear "classic rock" tunes, many of them more than a quarter of a century old.
The casual listener might conclude that rock is no more -- or at least that time stopped back in 1969, during the summer of Woodstock I.


Eating Well
TYPICALLY, a new food product will live or die on taste alone.
But for many of the new no-fat and low-fat snacks -- imitation potato and tortilla chips, and the increasing varieties of rice cakes -- taste is no longer a primary consideration.
Words like cardboard, bland and imitation come to mind in describing this wave of nutritionally correct snacks.
It takes some digging to ferret out low- and no-fat versions that people will eat willingly.


Sneaker Is On The Other Foot
The Republicans who maintain that President Clinton's stalled crime bill is loaded with excessive social spending often point to a provision for midnight basketball as a prime example of waste.
What they may not know is that the idea of midnight basketball was promoted by George Bush when he was President.
In fact, Mr.
Bush, a Republican, was so impressed with a midnight basketball program in Maryland that he named it as one of his Thousand Points of Light.


Concern Rising On U.S. Shores As Cubans Flee
By the hundreds, the Cubans stream through the refugee center's doors, some clad only in their underwear and Coast Guard-issue gauze jumpsuits, eager for a shower, a meal and a new life.
Sunburned and gaunt, they have been arriving in United States waters in increasing numbers recently -- 868 since Friday alone, Federal officials say.
It is the largest five-day total since the Mariel boat lift in 1980, when 125,000 Cubans arrived in Florida over five months.
On Monday, 282 refugees were rescued by the Coast Guard, and by 9 o'clock tonight at least 215 more were picked up.


INSIDE
Harlem's Main Street
It is a stretch of Harlem with many guises: fast, edgy, sometimes inexplicable at night, 125th Street has the more measured cadence of work and worry by day.
Page B1.
New Fears for Rwanda
The United States is urging France to keep its troops in their "safe zone" in Rwanda, fearing a new refugee exodus if the soldiers leave.
Page A12.
Trade Aids Mexico's Rulers
Mexico's transition away from socialism has been profitable for some, and they are now among the ruling party's biggest supporters.
Page A3.


CHRONICLE
It's hard to walk around the offices of Janklow &amp; Nesbit, the New York literary agency, these days without bumping into someone who is working on a book about POPE JOHN PAUL II.
The agency is representing authors of three books about the Pope: CARL BERNSTEIN, who is collaborating with MARCO POLITI, an Italian journalist; TAD SZULC, and the ultimate authority, the Pope himself.
The Pope's book, "Crossing the Threshold of Hope," will be the first to be published, by Alfred A. Knopf.
It is to reach stores on Oct. 20 to coincide with the Pope's visit to the United States.
No dates have been set for the publications of the books by Mr.
Bernstein and Mr.
Szulc.


Arbitration An Issue For Strike Trade-Off?
As a blockbuster, it could rival the trade of Harvey Kuenn for Rocky Colavito or Fred McGriff and Tony Fernandez for Joe Carter and Roberto Alomar.
How about a trade more in keeping with these times: salary arbitration for earlier free agency.
It might not be as sexy as those other swaps, but if the disputatious owners and players want to extricate themselves from the quagmire of their stalled talks for a new collective bargaining agreement, the elimination of the arbitration process the owners hate so intensely and a change in the free-agent eligibility rules could be a place to start.


The New York Stock Exchange reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Despite Hearing His Song, Agassi Loses
They played Barbra Streisand's recording of "The Way We Were" when Andre Agassi came onto the court for his opening match at the Volvo International tonight.
And that was fine with Agassi, since he had requested the rendition by his friend in keeping with an ATP Tour experiment here that requires players to be introduced while a song of their choice plays in the background.
But Agassi, most definitely, did not like the rock music being played during changeovers in his second-round match with Jan Siemerink of the Netherlands, and he asked several times in the opening set that this part of the experiment be dropped.
But the music played on and the fourth-seeded Agassi was upset not only by it, but also by the 24-year-old Siemerink, 6-3, 3-6, 6-3, at the Connecticut Tennis Center.


Fox-CBS: Already A Ratings Squabble
It's just preseason football, and already Fox and CBS are squabbling.
This may be the start of a beautiful feudship.
It began last Dec. 17, when Fox acquired the rights to National Football Conference games for $1.58 billion, and exiled CBS from football for the first time since 1956.


Donna Karan Says Sales Improved in 2d Quarter
In an unusual move for a privately held company, the Donna Karan Company issued a report yesterday on its second-quarter performance that showed strong increases in its sales and cash flow.
Donna Karan, an apparel and cosmetics company, declined to disclose earnings figures, but the second quarter is typically a losing period for the company for seasonal reasons.


Wine Talk
REMEMBER your first visit to New York?
To Paris?
London?
You had read everything you could get your hands on about the city and spent months fantasizing about the trip.
And what was your first impression?
Wonderful?
Yes.
Exciting?
Perhaps.
But not at all like what you'd imagined.
Right?


Phillips-Van Heusen Corp.(PVH,N) reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Rumor Mills Spin Mistrust In 2 Countries
Easily one of the most far-fetched of the rumors to sweep this city in recent weeks is the story of an American aircraft carrier plowing through Lake Tanganyika toward the port of Bujumbura with lethal intent.
That rumor's grasp on the public's fascination was loosened only by whispers that President Francois Mitterrand of France, fearful that a Uganda-based drug operation was threatened by regional discord, had sent French troops into neighboring Rwanda to protect illicit enterprises.


Carlos Is Interrogated by a Judge in France
There were reports he was wasted by dissolute living.
His own lawyer said he was drugged before being extradited to France on Monday.
But the legendary terrorist known as Carlos in fact seemed quite chirpy today when he appeared before a judge for probably the first time in his life.
After spending a night in prison, he was taken handcuffed and under heavy guard to the Palais de Justice office of France's top anti-terrorist investigating judge, Jean-Louis Bruguiere.
Witnesses said he remarked on the assault rifles carried by his escorts.
"They are good," he said.


Henry Geldzahler, 59, Critic, Public Official And Contemporary Art's Champion, Is Dead
Henry Geldzahler, the curator, critic and public official whose enthusiastic advocacy of contemporary art made his name synonymous with the art scene in New York for three decades, died yesterday at his home in Southampton, L.I.
He was 59.
The cause was cancer, said Kay Bearman, a longtime friend.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League
SEATTLE MARINERS -- Optioned Jim Converse, pitcher, to Calgary of the Pacific Coast League.
Basketball  National Basketball Association
DENVER NUGGETS -- Named Tommy Sheppard director of media relations.
Continental Basketball Association
CBA -- Announced the resignation of Mark Lamping, commissioner, effective Sept. 1.
Football  National Football League
ARIZONA CARDINALS -- Waived Richard Shadwick, defensive lineman.
CINCINNATI BENGALS -- Waived Daniel Stubbs, defensive end.
NEW YORK GIANTS -- Waived Mark Flythe and Steve Brannon, defensive ends; Leon Brown, running back, and Joey Smith, defensive back.
Signed Adam Schreiber, offensive lineman.
Placed Jarrod Bunch, running back, on the physically-unable-to-perform list.
PITTSBURGH STEELERS -- Waived Richard Shelton, defensive back.
Hockey  International Hockey League
CHICAGO WOLVES -- Agreed to terms with Bran Wiseman, center.
SAN DIEGO GULLS -- Signed Lonnie Loach, left wing, to a three-year contract.
Named Mark Sowinkski director of corporate sales-promotions.
Colonial Hockey League
BRANTFORD SMOKE -- Signed Ted Miskolczi, right wing. Olympics
U.S.
OLYMPIC COMMITTEE -- Named John Krimsky Jr. executive director.
Soccer  American Professional Soccer League
FORT LAUDERDALE STRIKERS -- Announced the resignation of Thomas Rongen, coach.
National Professional Soccer League
CLEVELAND CRUNCH -- Signed Hector Marinaro, forward, to a three-year contract.
MILWAUKEE WAVE -- Signed Billy Duranceau, midfielder, to two-year contract. College
NATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF COLLEGIATE DIRECTORS OF ATHLETICS -- Named East Carolina athletic director Dave Hart Jr. to the executive committee.
ALFRED -- Named Tom Spanbauer men's basketball coach and Eleanor Shriver women's lacrosse coach.
CALDWELL -- Named John Micheal assistant athletic director and sports information director.
CLEMSON -- Named Steve Nelson associate athletic director for compliance.
COLUMBIA -- Named Ted Zazopoulos defensive line coach and Jim Malone tight ends coach.
Announced the resignation of Lori Zalbowitz, assistant sports information director.
CORNELL -- Named Michael Taylor men's assistant basketball coach.
DREW -- Named Lenny Armuth men's soccer coach and Kimberly Keenan cross-country coach and business manager.
DUKE -- Named Jody Hyden women's tennis coach and Chris McMullan restricted-earnings baseball coach.
HOFSTRA -- Named Ted Tsirigotis linebackers coach and Dante Wright receivers coach.
KEAN -- Named Jim Davidson lacrosse coach.
MASSACHUSETTS-LOWELL -- Announced the resignation of William T. Hitchmoth II, defensive line coach, so he can take a restricted earnings coaching position at Harvard.
Named David Slattery defensive line coach.
MESSIAH -- Named Lori Braa assistant director of athletics for operations and Dale Fogelsanger men's and women's cross-country track coach.
MONMOUTH, N.J. -- Named Ellen Grosso women's assistant basketball coach.
NAZARETH, N.Y. -- Named Anthony Zostant women's volleyball and women's lacrosse coach.
NEVADA -- Named Stacey McIntyre women's assistant basketball coach.
UNLV -- Announced the resignation of Tommy Sheppard, coordinator of sports information.
PRINCETON -- Named Dodie Colavecchio women's interim soccer coach and Brian Parker women's assistant soccer coach.
SIENA HEIGHTS -- Named Susie Wickman women's basketball coach.
WESTERN CONNECTICUT STATE -- Named James Salgado, Paul LaPolice, Paul Fuller and Michael Brennan assistant football coaches.


No Headline
"People at Union Square buy food they can talk about. In the Bronx, people buy food they can eat." JOHN SCHMID, on the demographics of Greenmarkets in New York City.  [ C6:3. ]


For Second Time in Two Days, an Infant at Home Is Fatally Shot
A 5-month-old baby was shot to death last night in her family's apartment in the Bushwick section of Brooklyn, the second infant in two days to be killed at home by gunfire in the city.
The latest victim, Christine Baez, was shot in the head, and her father, Juan Baez, 27, was shot in the arm at about 8:30 P.M. under circumstances that the police said were murky.


Oh Expected to Manage Again
The Japanese home run king, SADAHARU OH, is apparently going to put on a uniform again, in his second attempt at managing.
Japanese newspapers reported yesterday that Oh would become manager of the Daiei Hawks next season.


Search for Votes on Crime Turns Up Only Uncertainty
President Clinton and Democratic leaders continued to scour the House today for votes for the stalled crime bill, but it was unclear whether they had gained any ground.
One indication of potential trouble came from Representative Jack Brooks, Democrat of Texas.
He insisted that a $10 million criminal research center in his district remain in the bill, and his position was backed by Speaker Thomas S. Foley, who called it a "good project."


Books of The Times; Defining the Choices That Add Up to Identity
I'm Not Stiller
By Max Frisch
Translated by Michael Bullock. 383 pages. Harcourt Brace. $12.95.


Whitewater Hearing Tests Public's Endurance; Welcome to the Club
To the Editor:
If a tree falls in the forest, and no one's politically sensitive diary is around to record the event, did it really fall?
The attitude of members of the Senate Banking Committee, on display in their Aug. 2 questioning of Joshua Steiner, the Treasury Department's chief of staff, seems to be no.


Stewart &amp; Stevenson Services Inc.(SSSS,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Germans Seize More Weapons Material
The German authorities have made another seizure of highly toxic weapon-grade material -- the fourth since May -- believed smuggled out of the former Soviet Union, a prosecutor in the northern city of Bremen said today.
A 34-year-old German was arrested there on Friday after reportedly trying to sell a tiny sample, 0.05 milligrams -- a few grains -- of plutonium 239 mixed with other substances to a journalist, who reported the attempt to the authorities, according to Bremen's chief prosecutor, Hans-Georg von Bock und Polach.


Experts in U.S. Call Plutonium Not Arms-Level
Federal weapon experts say that the plutonium seized in Germany and suspected of coming from Russia is not of the purity found in military stocks and that the Russians may be right in asserting that the security fences around their sprawling military establishment remain unbreached.
However, the experts also say the material, though probably intended as fuel for a nuclear-power reactor, was still potent enough to help make a nuclear bomb, though a crude one by most standards.
They view non-weapons establishments in Russia as the most likely source of the leaks, although they say this remains to be proved.


Spectacle Makers Make Sure It's Not Only Rock-and-Roll
A Rolling Stones concert is a battle between man and machine.
On one hand, the band makes some of the simplest, most primal rock-and-roll around; after 30 years, they continue to play basic blues progressions and write swaggering songs about their virility.
On the other hand, the Stones have developed one of the most intricate, technologically advanced stage shows in the business.
One of the hardest tasks for the design team that puts together the concerts is to negotiate between the Stones' raw energy and the computer-controlled precision of their technology.
High above the crowd at the concert on Monday night at Giants Stadium in East Rutherford, N.J., Patrick Woodroffe, who designed the lighting and directs the visuals for the Stones' tour, discussed this predicament, 10 minutes before show time.
"We're trying to find a balance between the technical and the emotional," he explained.
"Without detracting from the band, we have to make the greatest spectacle in rock."


Small Army of Iowans Mobilize in Search for Girl


Cato Corp.(CACOA,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


When the Juniors Are Senior


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article on the Media Business page on Monday about the producers of "She TV," a new comedy-variety show on ABC, referred incorrectly to the role played by Brett Butler on "Grace Under Fire." She portrays a refinery worker on that program; Ms.
Butler herself is a battered wife turned stand-up comic.


David Lyon, Ad Executive, 83; Helped Create 'Marlboro Man'
David G. Lyon, a retired advertising executive who helped make the Marlboro Man a popular image and who later ran his own advertising agency from his Connecticut home, died on Aug. 5 at Norwalk Hospital.
He was 83 and lived in Westport.
The cause was heart failure, his family said.


COMPANY BRIEFS
SHAMROCK HOLDINGS OF CALIFORNIA INC., Burbank, Calif., bought 70,700 shares of Helene Curtis Industries, Chicago, for $2.29 million, raising its stake in the company to 6.5 percent from 5.5 percent.
TJX COMPANIES INC., Framingham, Mass., said its board had authorized management to repurchase up to $100 million of common stock on the open market or through private transactions.


Airwave Entrepreneurs Still Feeling Their Way
As the owner of the Continental Windshield Repair Company in Baton Rouge, La., Marilyn U. Moore would hardly seem qualified to become a communications entrepreneur.
But that didn't stop her from bidding a hefty $600,000 recently for a handful of licenses to provide interactive television service over the airwaves.
"I believe that interactive television is the wave of the future," said Ms.
Moore, who along with hundreds of other people packed into a Washington hotel ballroom three weeks ago and took an entrepreneurial leap of faith that if the Government was holding an auction then there must be something valuable for sale.


Figgie Intl(FIGIA,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


On Economics, the Teacher May Need Homework
The educational video opens with a scene of high school seniors boasting about graduation gifts from their parents: a trip to Europe for one, a convertible sports car for another.
After hearing what her friends received, a student named Jen goes home to get the bad news.
Her parents are giving her a mutual fund.
"I don't even know what it does," says Jen, disappointed with such a boring gift.


Shanghai Journal; Chinese Scene: Dogs, Chased by Snarling Officials
At the Shanghai Naughty Dog Pet Shop, Baby and Tony have stopped in for their weekly pedicure and shampoo.
"They are like my children," said Annie Jiang-Jing Wu, the proud owner of Baby and Tony, two pampered, overfed mutts that are treated each week to a $15 grooming in Shanghai's fanciest pet store.
The outside of the year-old shop is designed to look like a castle, with gold-tipped turrets and a marble entryway, and inside the dogs are treated like royalty.


Accounts
*
Dan Lungren, the Attorney General of California, has hired the G.R.I.P.
Campaigns unit of Pacific/West Communications Group, Irvine, Calif., for his re-election campaign.
Billings were not disclosed.


Dr. Enid R. Peschel;Medical Researcher, 51
Dr.
Enid R. Peschel, a medical educator and researcher at Yale University, died on Monday at Yale-New Haven Hospital.
Dr.
Peschel, who lived in Woodbridge, Conn., was 51.
The cause was a heart attack, said her husband, Dr. Richard E. Peschel.


FEDERAL RESERVE RAISES KEY RATES TO COOL ECONOMY
The Federal Reserve raised the interest rates it controls today, hoping to prevent the economy's continuing strength from leading to inflation but making it more expensive for Americans to borrow money.
The central bank raised two short-term rates by half a percentage point each, more than most analysts had expected.
The moves produced rallies in stock and bond markets, as investors acted on their beliefs that inflation would stay low and long-term rates would not keep rising.


Teen-Ager From New Rochelle Has Lesson on Way to Stardom
While Janet Evans won the race tonight, Cristina Teuscher learned a lesson and took another step toward becoming swimming's next superstar.
Until Sunday, when the seven-day Phillips 66 United States championships and world championship trials began at the Indiana University Natatorium, Teuscher (pronounced TOY-cher) was just another promising youngster.
But since then, the 16-year-old junior at New Rochelle (N.Y.) High School has won four berths (two in relays) on the United States team in the world championships three weeks from now in Rome.


Hampton Back At Practice
Rodney Hampton was back at Giants practice today, although a little lighter in the pocketbook, a day after being a no-show for the team's first workout since its return from Berlin on Sunday night.
"Something came up, a family problem, and I had to leave town," explained Hampton, who said he flew to Baton Rouge, La., early Monday morning.
"I tried to call Dan" -- Coach Dan Reeves -- "and I left a message. If the same thing came up again, I'd do the same thing, but I'd make sure I talked to the head man first. I talked to Dan when I got home. He understood."


Washington Urges France To Delay Rwanda Pullout
Worried that a new wave of refugees will flood out of Rwanda, the United States has asked France to keep its troops there for a few more weeks to stabilize the situation, Administration officials say.
But France is so far resisting the pleas.
After France rejected a direct appeal by the White House last weekend, the Clinton Administration began soliciting expressions of international support for extending the stay of the 2,500 French soldiers in a "safe zone" in southwestern Rwanda.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  *
Pulte Corp., Bloomfield Hills, Mich., is selling $115 million of 8.375 percent senior notes due in 2004 priced at 99.701, to yield 8.42 percent, through Merrill Lynch &amp; Co. with Dillon, Read &amp; Co.
The noncallable notes are rated Baa3 by Moody's Investors Service Inc. and BBB by the Standard &amp; Poor's Corp.


Summery Grilled Salad
SAUTEED peppers are sweet.
Grilled onions, especially red onions, are even sweeter.
In this rice salad, the two provide a contrast to the tuna, yogurt and balsamic vinegar.
The combination of flavors is delicious.
Slice up some local ripe tomatoes, add some good country bread and dinner is complete.
Grilled Tuna Rice Salad Provencal
1.
Combine the rice with 1 1/2 cups water, and bring to a boil.
Reduce the heat, cover and simmer, cooking a total of 17 minutes.
2. Meanwhile, slice the onions about 1/4-inch thick. Prepare a stove-top grill.
3.
Wash and dry the tuna.
Grill the tuna according to the Canadian rule: measure the fish at thickest part and cook for 8 to 10 minutes to the inch.
4. Grill the onions, turning once or twice, until they are soft.
5. Wash, trim and coarsely chop the peppers.
6.
Heat a nonstick pan until it is very hot.
Reduce the heat, add oil and saute the peppers until they are soft.
7. Mince the garlic, and add to the peppers.
8.
Wash, dry and chop the oregano, and combine it in a serving bowl with the vinegar, yogurt and mayonnaise.
When the tuna is done, cut it up into small chunks and stir the chunks into this mixture.
When the onions are cooked, cut them up coarsely and add.
Then, add the sauteed pepper and garlic.
9. Mix in the rice, and season with salt and pepper.
10. Wash, trim and slice the tomatoes, and serve with the rice salad and bread.
Yield: 2 servings.
Approximate nutritional analysis per serving: 760 calories, 13 grams fat, 55 milligrams cholesterol, 420 milligrams sodium (before salting), 45 grams protein, 115 grams carbohydrate.


Presley Cos.(PDC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Medtronic Inc.(MDT,N) reports earnings for Qtr to July 29


AT LUNCH WITH: Jeane Kirkpatrick; A Warrior, A Mother, A Scholar, A Mystery
JEANE KIRKPATRICK says she has been a feminist all her life.
If most people would not readily define her that way, it does not surprise her.
"Most people don't really know me at all, if I may say so," she says, sitting at her desk at the American Enterprise Institute, with its arresting view of the Jefferson Memorial.
"I mean, most people don't know much about what I think about most anything, beyond some very narrow issues."


Are There Any Safeties In the Giants' Numbers?
With the regular season 18 days away, the Giants' defensive coordinator, Mike Nolan, said today that his front seven players are pretty much set.
It's the secondary that he sounded a little nervous about.


Kurdish Smugglers Blow Smoke Rings Over Northern Iraq
Huge tractor trailer trucks, spewing black diesel soot into the air, lumber over the small Habur Bridge from Turkey each morning to deliver the one commodity that overflows in abundance in northern Iraq -- cigarettes.
There is an acute shortage of medicine, milk is impossible to find, fruit has not appeared in most market stalls for months and spare parts are so scarce that old machines and cars are cannibalized.
But packets of Kent, Viceroy, Marlboro or More cigarettes are hawked on nearly every street corner and out of warehouses where cartons tower to the ceiling.


CHRONICLE
Senator Boren won't be running into one of Oklahoma's more famous professors, ANITA F. HILL, on campus for a while.
Ms.
Hill, a professor at the university's law school who was catapulted into national prominence in 1991 when she accused Clarence Thomas, then a Supreme Court nominee, of sexual harassment, has moved temporarily to Laguna Beach, Calif., The Associated Press reported.
Professor Hill, who started an unpaid leave of absence from the university this week, moved into a rented two-story cottage in Laguna Beach on Monday.
She refused to comment on the move, saying, "It's not my custom to grant interviews to any newspapers or to anybody."


Diverse Musicians And Psychiatrists Take On Schumann
As if the cicadas weren't problem enough, there was Woodstock.
"We're here, and they're over there," said Leon Botstein at the start of the Bard Music Festival on Friday evening, noting that Robert Schumann, the specimen under the microscope this year, might have found the juxtaposition amusing in his roles as progenitor of the pop song and scourge of philistines.
But "they" were here, too, most noticeably on Saturday evening, when Bard presented its only outdoor concert of the opening weekend, in the festival tent.
Although the site of the Woodstock '94 festival was four miles north and across the Hudson River, in Saugerties, N.Y., the thudding rhythms and an occasional tune were loud enough to cover the orchestral sonority at times and confuse it at others.
As so often, peace (if that was still the watchword at Woodstock) meant different things to different people.


Them!
We remember how hot and dry and empty the desert looked that day, and how the trailer just sat there looking . . . well, kind of like an empty sardine tin.
No, exactly like an empty sardine tin, because somebody or something had ripped off one side.
We remember the frightened little girl who, when the state troopers happened upon the scene, could say only "Them!" We remember the curious mewing sounds that accompanied their arrival, and their nest in the Los Angeles drainage system and the flamethrowers -- and dear Lord, we don't want to remember any more.
But we do, because we have just seen a new book titled "Identification Guide to the Ant Genera of the World," portrayed in yesterday's Science Times, that brings that 1954 movie classic, "Them," irresistibly to mind.
Only thing is, the identification guide is even scarier.


A Girl and Her Seal: An Interspecies Friendship
"The winter weather grew bleaker and so did Andre's spirits," says the narrator of "Andre" as the star (Tory the Sea Lion) acts the dickens out of this moment.
Posed thoughtfully beside his bathtub, Andre twitches his whiskers, blinks his big brown eyes and offers the camera his sad, noble profile.
Compared with Andre, who can also make raspberry sounds and do the Peppermint Twist, none of the human actors in this too-too-cute family film has a flipper to stand on.
Hoping for a whiff of "Free Willy," "Andre" tells of a lonely sea creature who becomes a part-time pet for animal-loving children.
Little Toni Whitney (Tina Majorino), the kind of girl who waits patiently with a bucket of fish until the runaway Andre waddles back home, is the heroine of this story.
Toni is part of a perky, plaid-clad Maine family that winds up making Andre a guest in their Rockport home, which is already crammed with pets like Prince Charming (a frog), Miss Cluck (a chicken) and Walter Pigeon.
If you can't guess what Walter is, do yourself a favor and stay home.


America Online Says Users Of Service Exceed 1 Million
America Online Inc. of Vienna, Va., asserting that it is the country's fastest-growing consumer on-line information service, said yesterday that it had surpassed the 1 million subscriber level.
The company reported 900,000 members just one month ago, and 800,000 in May.
"It's 1 million down, 97 to go," said Steve Case, the company's 35-year-old president and chief executive, referring to the estimated 98 million American households.


Vote Against Crime Bill Is Lesson on Clout
Representative Lee H. Hamilton carries the look and the sound of small-town America with him.
He uses the phrase "visit with" to mean "talk to," he still wears his hair cut short and he has the same soft Hoosier manner that once made Herb Shriner a popular humorist.
But Mr.
Hamilton, an Indiana Democrat, has spent 30 years on the Potomac, and he is now a major player on Capitol Hill as chairman of the House Foreign Affairs Committee.
He is invited to the big-time parties in Georgetown and at the White House (he was there for dinner recently with the Emperor and Empress of Japan).
He regularly gets approval ratings in the 70's and 80's from most liberal groups and ratings in the 30's from most conservative organizations.


A Master Builder for Asia's Future
Conventional wisdom, and the lucre of those in the business, suggest that the biggest game in town here is property, lots of it, pumping its value to levels beyond even Tokyo's galactic heights, building office and apartment towers with a frenzy.
But Gordon Wu, from his office 64 floors above a skyline of mirrored stalagmites, dismisses the way of his fellow tycoons here.
"That's for every Tom, Dick, Harry and Trump," he said.
"I want to go into infrastructure."


Wildfires Burn Dozens Of Houses In California
A fire set by an arsonist and fueled by 100-degree heat and erratic winds raced through dry canyons in coastal Central California today, burning about 42,000 acres and forcing hundreds of people to flee.
By late afternoon, at least 37 houses were destroyed, and the fire, roaring through dry oaks and brush, was closing in on San Luis Obispo, about 150 miles northwest of Los Angeles.


Broad Revamping At BBDO West
The BBDO West unit of BBDO Worldwide announced a substantial reorganization yesterday that included several executive changes.
Operations at the Los Angeles and San Francisco offices will be realigned into three divisions -- BBDO Brand Services, BBDO Media Services and BBDO Systems -- and will report to Steve Hayden, chairman of BBDO West.


Whitewater Hearing Tests Public's Endurance
To the Editor:
You report that Democrats and Republicans lined up in support of Donald W. Riegle Jr., chairman of the Senate Banking Committee, who sternly lectured Bernard Nussbaum, the former White House counsel, during his testimony on Whitewater issues (news article, Aug. 6).


Speedy Muffler reports earnings for Qtr to July 2


U.N.L.V. Won't Pay
The University of Nevada-Las Vegas has no plans to pay ROLLIE MASSIMINO, its basketball coach, the remainder of nearly $2 million secretly promised him in a supplemental contract by former university officials.
U.N.L.V.'s interim president, KENNY GUINN, said yesterday that since the contract giving Massimino an extra $375,000 a year above his base salary was never approved by the Board of Regents, the university is not obligated to pay the coach.
"If he wants to try and collect the money, he has to ask the people he thinks owes it to him," Guinn said.
"It is not my responsibility to try and raise money."


Not Guilty Plea in Crown Heights Killing
After silently and grimly making his way through the streets of downtown Brooklyn flanked by his mother, lawyers and reporters, Lemrick Nelson Jr. pleaded not guilty yesterday to civil rights charges in the killing of a Hasidic man three years ago.
Yankel Rosenbaum, a 29-year-old scholar, was slain on the first of four nights of racial unrest in Crown Heights in August 1991.
Mr.
Nelson was found not guilty in his death at a state trial a year later.


Aspiring Crafts
After the last few years of design being whittled down to its essentials, it's refreshing to find objects that bring a smile.
Charm and humor may yet become the new lingua franca, speaking through small pleasures.
In time for Labor Day, a few whimsical host -- or crowd -- pleasers.


Timor Djordjadze; Stage Director,49
Timor Djordjadze, a Russian-born stage director in New York, died on Thursday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 49.
The cause was cancer, said an announcement from Pace University, where Mr.
Djordjadze was an associate professor of fine arts.
Mr. Djordjadze graduated from the


Corrections
An article and chart yesterday about health care legislation omitted one senator among those who crossed party lines in voting on an amendment to expand coverage care for children and pregnant women in some editions.
Senator William V. Roth, Republican of Delaware, voted for the amendment.


Samuel Manu-Tech reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Stocks End Day Mixed as Dow Falls 8.09
A day after the Federal Reserve Board raised interest rates, the stock market closed mixed but largely unchanged for big stocks.
Smaller over-the-counter stocks, however, continued their rally for the eighth session yesterday, magnifying Wednesday's gains.
The bond market kept most of its price advance, but closed slightly lower.


CONFEDERATION LIFE INSURANCE SELLS BRITISH UNIT
The Confederation Life Insurance Company, the Canadian insurance company seized by regulators last week, yesterday announced the sale of its British subsidiary to the Sun Life Assurance Company, another large Canadian insurer.
The sale, whose terms were not disclosed, was the first of many expected in coming months as Canadian officials liquidate Confederation.
As a mutual company, Confederation is owned by its policyholders, and the extent to which they will suffer as a result of the company's heavy losses on mortgage loans and real estate investments is not known.
The British subsidiary was one of the most profitable parts of Confederation, earning a profit last year of about $38 million while Confederation as a whole lost $21 million.


Amid Rwanda's Misery, Charity Battles Despair
On her first day of work among the Rwandan refugees, Sara Rossi, a 28-year-old Swiss nurse, faced 2,500 sick and wounded people sprawled on the tennis courts and around the grounds of a sports complex here.
A virtual mountain of 500 dead bodies lay nearby.
There was one other nurse, no running water and few medical tools.
"When I came I thought I could not deal with it," Miss Rossi said.


The Old South Beach
To The Home Section:
Reading "Remaking a Hotel, the Un-Miami Way" (Aug. 4) brought back some wonderful memories.
My wife and I spent our honeymoon in April 1954 at the Delano Hotel in Miami Beach, and the following year we spent our first anniversary there.
Honeymooners were given a free cabana surrounding the pool.


Helen F. Cserr; Physiology Professor, 57
Helen F. Cserr, a professor of physiology at Brown University in Providence, R.I., whose research focused on the anatomy and mechanism of the human brain, died on Aug. 11 at her home in North Dighton, Mass.
She was 57.
She died of a brain tumor, said her daughter, Ruth, of Princeton, N.J.


Fly Fishing Never Belonged to Men Only
To the Editor:
I suppose some fishermen are reassured by the image of women "clomping" along the river bank and exclaiming "I have no idea what I'm doing" (front page, Aug. 8).


It Rains, But Then Christie Pours It On
The athletes considered it a mini-world championship: the best track and field event that 5.7 million Swiss francs could buy in a year devoid of mammoth international diversions like the Summer Olympics.
But someone in this city of orderly streets and profitable banks neglected to control the elements tonight.
And instead of producing world record after world record on a costly new Mondo track, the planet's top runners and jumpers were reduced to slogging their way through weather conditions that ranged from overcast to drizzle to squall.


Seoul Drawing Fire for Crackdowns
Kim Young Don, a 23-year-old senior at Sogang University, spent last weekend at a "pan-national" rally with thousands of other students, calling for reunification of the Korean peninsula and the expulsion of American troops from South Korea.
The police tried to break up the rally and clashed with studentsarmed with sticks and stones.
About 200 people were injured.
Finally the police dispersed the crowd by pouring tear-gas fluid on them from helicopters.


Amstar Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Puritan-Bennett Corp.(PBEN,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to July 31





Africa Has Shown No Shortage of Compassion; The Gandhi Legacy
To the Editor:
Your Aug. 7 Week in Review article on Africa tarnishes the image of Mohandas K. Gandhi.
You charge that the Mahatma was only concerned about Indian immigrants in South Africa and not about Africans.


Altman Resigns His Post Amid Whitewater Clamor
Roger C. Altman, a rising star in the Administration until Whitewater led both Democrats and Republicans in Congress to attack his truthfulness, submitted his resignation today as Deputy Treasury Secretary but said that it would not take effect until the Senate confirms his successor.
Administration officials also said today that the Treasury Department's general counsel, Jean E. Hanson, would also resign in coming days.
Both Mr.
Altman and Ms.
Hanson had been harshly criticized by members of the Senate Banking Committee during the recent Whitewater hearings for misleading them in February testimony over the extent of contacts between the White House and Treasury over Whitewater.


Some New Moves to Music by Ellington
Cleo Parker Robinson Dance Ensemble got off to a good start on Monday night at the Damrosch Park Band Shell in a program shared with the Jay Hoggard Ensemble, a jazz group.
Ms.
Robinson, who founded the Denver-based modern dance company 24 years ago, gave a gracious welcoming speech filled with warm tributes to choreographers who have worked with the troupe.
Then one of those choreographers, Talley Beatty, weighed in with "Ellingtonia," a gleaming new work set to four pieces by Duke Ellington.
By now, Mr.
Beatty could probably create jazz-dance in his sleep.
But for all its familiar signature moves and patterning, "Ellingtonia" is an invigorating explosion of dance filled with fast stage-crosses from which duets and ensemble sequences seem to peel off, occupy the stage for a moment, and merge once more into the passing crowd.


Poco Petroleums reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


From One Woman's Tragedy, The Making of an Advocate
Sometimes, late at night, Carolyn McCarthy gets phone calls from strangers looking for arguments.
The callers begin by offering their condolences, but soon the tone changes, and Mrs.
McCarthy finds herself on the line with another person angry over her outspoken advocacy of gun control.
Mrs.
McCarthy, whose husband was killed and whose son was seriously injured in the shooting last December aboard a Long Island Rail Road train that left six people dead, says she never hangs up on them.
She stays on even when people become a little cruel, intimating that her motives for appearing before the television cameras are less than pure.


MFS Communications (MFST,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Blacks Relent on Crime Bill, But Not Without Bitterness
In the official Congressional Directory, Representative John Lewis notes that he received a degree from the American Baptist Theological Seminary and lists his profession as "civil rights leader."
Mr.
Lewis's self-description helps explain his abiding antipathy toward violence, including what he has long considered to be the state-sponsored violence of capital punishment.
For that reason, Mr.
Lewis, Democrat of Georgia, voted last week to block anAdministration-backed crime bill that would have greatly expanded the number of Federal offenses that would be subject to the death penalty.


No New Powers Unless Palestinians Prevent Attacks, Israel Says
Angered by recent attacks, Israeli officials warned on Wednesday that it would be impossible to broker further agreements on extending Palestinian self-rule in the West Bank and Gaza Strip unless Palestinian officials halted Islamic militant violence against Israelis.
The latest violence, in which one Israeli was killed and eight were wounded in separate incidents in Gaza on Sunday, has led Israeli leaders to freeze plans for the withdrawal of Israeli troops from the strip and from parts of the West Bank.


Tafelmusik Plays Telemann, Vivaldi, Purcell and Bach
The Canadian period-instrument ensemble Tafelmusik takes its name from the Baroque practice of composing music for the background of banquets and other large gatherings -- what Erik Satie later labeled "furniture music." It is wonderfully fitting that this repertory has found a second life in the drive-time programming of our better classical radio stations.
In the concert hall, audiences do not carve meat or drive a car but instead concentrate exclusively on the music, for the most part.
There is a sort of attention surplus, which conductors like Nikolaus Harnoncourt and Trevor Pinnock have tried to balance out with sharp-edged, revved-up interpretations.
Tafelmusik, which has been recording prolifically of late for Sony Classical, favors a more laid-back, elegant sound, not manically precise: Jeanne Lamon leads from the first-violin chair.
The music sounds very much as it might have sounded in the 18th century.


Jordan Lets 2 New Jersey Children Leave
The guard tapped on the door of the apartment in Amman, Jordan, and said: "Get ready. You're going to meet the King in 10 minutes."
For Nesime Dokur, it was the beginning of the end of a six-week-long nightmare that had taken her more than 5,000 miles, from her home in New Jersey to an apartment provided by King Hussein of Jordan, while the case she had been pressing went on a confusing journey through the Jordanian legal system.
The summons to the palace yesterday, she realized, meant that she had finally been awarded custody of her slain sister's two children, Lisa Abequa, 6, and her brother, Sami, 3.


Altman Resigns as Deputy Treasury Secretary


Grow Group Inc.(GRO,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Giants Vs. Jets: Not Just A Game
When they used to stumble over one another in P. J. Clarke's in midtown back in the Woodstock era, maybe a Giant or a Jet would growl, "We're better than you are."
But today, on the 25th anniversary of the first meeting between the teams, Perry Williams put it into a 90's perspective:


Arizona Junior Quickly Adds A 400-Meter Title to His Belt
For competitiveness, the ultimate star in swimming may be Chad Carvin, a 20-year-old University of Arizona junior from Laguna Hills, Calif.
On Sunday night, when the seven-day Phillips 66 national championships and world championship trials began, he surprisingly won the men's 200-meter freestyle.
Tonight, he easily won the 400-meter title, and on Thursday and Friday he will be favored in the 1,500 meters.


Blacks Make Boycott Hurt A Small Town
No one disputes the origins of the episode last April 20.
Marilyn B. Powell, while driving her car, noticed that her niece had been stopped at an intersection where two white police officers were checking licenses and seat belts.
Mrs.
Powell, who is black, pulled over and asked the officers to let her take a 3-week-old infant from her niece's car because of the heat.
The police told her to wait, and she objected.
Accounts of the scuffle that followed differ, but by the time it ended, Mrs.
Powell, a 36-year-old substitute teacher and nurse's aide with no police record, had been sprayed with Mace and charged with three misdemeanor counts of disobeying, resisting and assaulting a police officer.


International Family Entertainment Inc.(FAM,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Designs Inc.(DESI,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to July 30


CompUSA Stock Falls After Loss
Shares of CompUSA Inc. plummeted yesterday after the company reported a fourth-quarter loss several times what Wall Street analysts had expected.
CompUSA has suffered from price wars and additional competition from other personal computer chains and consumer electronics stores.
CompUSA shares fell $1.50, to $7.375, on the New York Stock Exchange.
Analysts said declining revenues per store, lower profit margins and an increasingly competitive market called into question the viability of CompUSA's business model.


For His Stand on Crime Bill, Giuliani Gets Raves and Jeers
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani played Mr.
Smith when he came to Washington today to push President Clinton's $33 billion crime package.
He won rave reviews from Democrats, a polite nod from House Republican leaders, but harsh public jeers from several New York Republicans for his pleas to both parties to drop their partisan bickering for the benefit of the nation's cities.
Mr.
Giuliani was joined by more than 20 mayors and police chiefs from around the country in meetings with Congressional leaders, but his outspoken defense of Mr.
Clinton's bill put him firmly in the spotlight.
It was unclear whether he won any votes in his private meetings with a handful of lawmakers, but Republicans and Democrats said he was bound to earn much of the credit if the bill eventually passes.


Leon's Furniture reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Health Insurer Joins Minnesota's Suit Against Tobacco Producers
For the first time, a health insurer and state officials have joined in a lawsuit that accuses cigarette manufacturers of conspiring for decades to hide information about the dangers of smoking.
Hubert H. Humphrey 3d, the Minnesota Attorney General, and Blue Cross and Blue Shield of Minnesota filed the action yesterday, accusing cigarette manufacturers and related trade associations of violating the state's antitrust and consumer protection statutes by failing to disclose data about the dangers and addictive nature of cigarettes to protect the industry's profits.


Culp Inc.(CULP,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


France's Useful Role in Rwanda
On Monday Rwanda will face yet another potential crisis if France keeps to its plan to withdraw its peacekeepers.
Most of those 2,500 troops are protecting a security zone in southwestern Rwanda where more than 600,000 people, mostly Hutu, have fled, fearing reprisal killings by a new Tutsi-dominated Government.
Observers fear that when the French leave, so will the unprotected Hutu, making a second human wave across the border into Zaire, where some 800,000 refugees already languish in disease-ridden, makeshift camps.
But unlike the last Rwandan exodus, this one can be foreseen.
An obvious preventive step would be to persuade France to stay until a planned U.N. peacekeeping force, made up of troops from African nations, can be assembled -- a matter of weeks, not months.
Objections to a longer French stay, however, arise not in Paris, though there is a clamor to bring the troops home, but among suspicious leaders of the new regime in Kigali.
Its agreement is essential, but its distrust is understandable.


Gumshoes of Cyberspace Out to Save Investors Pain
It could have been the chance of a lifetime, the opportunity to invest in a new airline.
But something about the deal did not smell quite right to Alan R. Smith, an amateur investor and professional photographer in Fort Worth.
So before he plunked down his $10,000, he spent far less on a phone call -- and found out the airline's chairman had a history of securities fraud.
Mr.
Smith placed his call to the Detective Information Network, a fledgling service started this year by a pair of experienced professional investigators who think they are the first to bring the high-tech tricks of their trade to the general public.
These are not your average gumshoes; rather, they are the Sam Spades of cyberspace, using computers and telephone lines to search through reams of public records -- the Mortgage Asset Research Institute's data base in Mr.
Hall's case.
Using Available Information
For a fee, these investigators will check out investment promoters, locate missing heirs, drum up deadbeats, even find old flames.
And for less money -- about $25 -- they will tell you exactly how to do it yourself.


Shades That Glow
After the last few years of design being whittled down to its essentials, it's refreshing to find objects that bring a smile.
Charm and humor may yet become the new lingua franca, speaking through small pleasures.
In time for Labor Day, a few whimsical host -- or crowd -- pleasers.
THE Copylight from Brainbox of Germany is a light fixture that is amusing and functional.
Just clip the 12-inch-square acrylic shade to a sconce, and when a 40-watt bulb is illuminated underneath, the shade glows, much the way an X-ray does.


He Isn't Counting Courier Out
At least one of Jim Courier's rivals thinks that Courier might reconsider his decision to put his career on indefinite hold in time for the United States Open, which begins in less than two weeks.
"Everyone goes through ups and downs," said Michael Chang, the world's No. 6 player, by telephone from his parents' home in Orange County, Calif.
"Jim might feel different today."


COMPANY BRIEFS
MID AM INC., Bowling Green, Ohio, a multibank holding company, said it would acquire ASB Bankcorp Inc., Adrian, Mich., for $20.1 million in common stock, or $65 a share.


Arms Plants Provide Civilians' Power
What could be wrong with the agreement last June between Vice President Al Gore and Prime Minister Viktor S. Chernomyrdin of Russia to close the two reactors here that keep making bomb-grade plutonium?
After all, most people think there is already too much plutonium and no place to put it.
"Tomsk would be frozen," is the answer from Nikolai A. Vyatkin, general director of Tomskenergo, the electric utility here in this provincial capital in Siberia, about 2,500 miles east of Moscow.


Events: Tours, Shows, A County Fair, a Lecture
Crafts on the Pier  Pier 17 at the South Street Seaport, Fulton Street and the East River; (212) 866-2239.
The American Arts and Crafts Alliance is sponsoring a show and sale by 60 artists on Saturday and Sunday, from 11 A.M. to 8 P.M.
No charge for admission.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
7.75
7.75
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
4.00
4.00
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
4.25
4.35
3.02
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.56
4.61
2.97
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.91
4.94
3.09
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.17
7.14
5.67
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.39
7.37
6.26
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.26
8.23
7.07
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.33
6.37
5.63
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Waban Inc.(WBN,N) reports earnings for Qtr to July 30


Welcome Home. Do as We Say.
This summer the Supreme Court struck down an ordinance in Ladue, Mo., that prohibited homeowners from posting signs on their property.
The suit against the town was brought by a resident who had been fined in 1991 for putting an anti-gulf-war poster in her window.
The Court held that residential signs are a venerable means of communication that "reflect and animate change in the life of a community."
Yet for 32 million Americans, this decision means nothing.
The right to post signs remains one of many that they are not guaranteed in their homes.
These people live in common interest developments: tightly controlled communities of condominiums, co-ops or single family homes.
The communities are set up by real-estate developers and ruled by homeowners' associations whose main interest is protecting property values, not constitutional rights.


Western Co. of North America (WSN,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


O'Neill Is Leaving Debate Over Batting Title Up to Heavy Hitters
Paul O'Neill might have already won his first American League batting title.
Or maybe not yet.
Or perhaps never.
Confused?
Get in line.
Welcome to one of the sizzling debates that could result if the strike-interrupted season stays interrupted.
If the players and owners do not reach an agreement to save the season and no more games are contested, will the Yankee outfielder be christened the American League batting champion?


For an ailing line of cars, Chrysler prescribes a campaign with an up-and-coming TV personality.
THE Chrysler Corporation hopes that hiring a smart aleck is an intelligent way to give its flagging Eagle line of cars a more distinct identity in an increasingly crowded automotive marketplace.
Greg Kinnear, the television host whose puckish personality has won him widespread notice, will appear in Eagle's 1995 model year advertising, which begins tonight.
Chrysler plans to increase Eagle's budget significantly -- up to two to three times more than the estimated $30 million spent nationally on the 1994 models.


Maple Leaf Foods (MLF) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


No Headline
"People ask what those women saw in me. Let's face it, I wasn't a bad-looking stud. But that's not it. It's the music; it's standing up there under the lights. A lot of women just flip; looks have nothing to do with it. You call Mick Jagger good-looking?" -- ARTIE SHAW, the ex-band leader, now 84.  [ C10:1. ]


Bipartisan Group Is Near Completion of Its Health Plan
A bipartisan group of senators trying to find a compromise on national health insurance said tonight that they had nearly finished their plan and would seek support for it from Senate leaders on Thursday.
Several of them said they had received "sobering" cost estimates for their plan, which stresses reduced bureaucracy and cost control.
They will meet Thursday morning with Robert D. Reischauer, director of the Congressional Budget Office, to go over the estimates one more time.


With stripped wood, it's a country life


Arts Mover and Shaker Recounts His Busy Life
Mosaic Memoirs  By Lincoln Kirstein  Illustrated. 270 pages.
Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux. $25.
In 1948, Lincoln Kirstein and George Balanchine founded the New York City Ballet, an outgrowth of earlier ballet companies that were among their joint ventures since 1933.
The temptation is to place Mr.
Kirstein's highly selective memoirs (portions of which were published earlier) within that familiar context: In short, to discuss what is outside this book rather than what is actually in it.


Phillips Cables reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Vatican Seeks Islamic Allies In U.N. Population Dispute
Seeking to head off approval of abortion rights or sexual freedom at a coming world population conference, the Vatican has been reaching out for support to some radical and fundamentalist governments and groups in Islamic countries, including Iran and Libya.
Less than a month before representatives of 180 nations meet in Cairo to discuss a draft document that lays down guidelines for avoiding a population explosion, the Vatican has acknowledged that its envoys have met recently with officials in the Iranian and Libyan capitals.


American Travellers Corp.(ATVC,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Primark Corp.(PMK,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Corrections
A chart on Tuesday about health care lobbying described campaign contributions received by the listed members of Congress incorrectly.
In addition to health and insurance industry political action committees, the totals included large gifts from individual donors.
One Congressman listed, Representative Jim Cooper, said he does not accept contributions from political action committees.


Africa Has Shown No Shortage of Compassion; Colonialism's Curse
To the Editor:
Re "Africa Allows Its Tragedies to Take Their Own Course" (The Week in Review, Aug. 7): As a graduate student in African history, I would like to respond to your article, which laments "Africa's indifference to itself." Like most reporting on Africa, this is ahistorical, superficial and, to my mind, racist.


Florida Nearing Emergency As Cuban Exodus Increases
Nearly 500 Cuban refugees were picked up off the Florida coast today, nudging state officials closer to declaring an immigration emergency that would include the mobilization of the National Guard and state workers to shelter, medically screen and transport large groups of people to relocation centers.
The Coast Guard said late tonight that 537 Cubans had arrived in Florida today, compared with 339 on Tuesday, 282 on Monday and 170 on Sunday.
The daily numbers have steadily risen since the beginning of the year and are now the highest since the 1980 Mariel boatlift, which brought 125,200 Cubans to the United States in five months.


New Arena for Sabres
Two banks will loan the Buffalo Sabres $35 million to build a new downtown stadium, the National Hockey League club announced yesterday.
The agreement was the last major hurdle before construction can start on the $122.5 million Crossroads Arena.


New Assertion By Lawyers For Simpson
Lawyers for O. J. Simpson today accused prosecutors of denying them access to blood samples that the police have had since Mr.
Simpson's former wife and a friend were stabbed to death two months ago.
In a pre-trial hearing of two and a half hours that included angry exchanges and personal attacks between the two sides, prosecutors told Judge Lance A. Ito of Los Angeles Superior Court that the samples -- two drops of blood -- had been on a list of evidence but that the Police Department had not sent them with other samples to a Maryland laboratory for DNA testing.


Amerco Inc.(ARIO) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Lawyer Not on Trial Team
Arthur Lewis Jr., the Brooklyn lawyer who successfully defended Lemrick Nelson Jr. at his state trial in the murder of Yankel Rosenbaum in 1992, will not be a member of the defense team that will represent the Brooklyn youth in his Federal trial, Mr.
Lewis said.
He said he had decided not to represent Mr.
Nelson because of his large caseload and because he was concerned that he himself was a target of the Federal investigation into the killing of Mr.
Rosenbaum in Crown Heights in 1991.


Timberwolves Owner Dismisses His Coaches
SIDNEY LOWE's run as coach of the Minnesota Timberwolves was marked by pouting players, undisciplined underachievers and lopsided losses.
It ended with his dismissal yesterday, along with his assistants JIM BREWER and CHUCK DAVISSON, as part of the sweeping changes planned by GLEN TAYLOR, the new club owner.
When Taylor's purchase of the club went through Aug. 5, the former Minnesota State Senator promised to make more moves in an effort to change the fortunes of one of the National Basketball Association's failed franchises.


Bridge
The fifth edition of The Official Encyclopedia of Bridge, a complete reference guide to every aspect of the game, is now available ($39.95 from the American Contract Bridge League, (800) 264-2743).
Ten years have elapsed since the previous edition, and the technical material has been completely updated and expanded under the editorship of Henry Francis.
The diagramed deal has been added as an example of a "five or seven" situation, although this one is really "four or seven." In the 1986 Vanderbilt Knockout Team Championship, the North-South cards were held by Edgar Kaplan and Norman Kay.
Kaplan as North doubled the opening one-diamond bid, and followed with five no-trump, the grand slam force.
He knew that his partner could not bid seven spades, which would have needed two of the top three trump honors, but nevertheless the convention was helpful.


Debating in the Senate
CHARLES E. GRASSLEY
Republican of Iowa.
He opposes the bill put forward by the Senate majority leader, George J. Mitchell, but favors passage this year of the elements that he says Republicans and Democrats agree on.
These include, Senator Grassley says, requiring that workers be allowed to retain their health insurance even if they lose their jobs, barring insurers from disqualifying applicants from coverage for pre-existing conditions, and allowing companies to form voluntary cooperatives to buy health insurance for their workers.
ROBERT C. SMITH
Republican of New Hampshire.
A staunch conservative from a low-tax state, he strongly opposes the Mitchell bill, partly because he says it would impose 17 new taxes.
He also contends that the Mitchell bill would throw out the nation's present medical care system and replace it with a vast Federal bureaucracy, that it would create three new entitlement programs, that it would diminish the choice of plans by establishing a standardized benefits package, and would require some employers to pay for their workers' health insurance.
MARK O. HATFIELD
Republican of Oregon.
Senator Hatfield opposes the Mitchell bill, partly because he says it does not address cost containment.
In addition, he contends the Mitchell measure would pre-empt existing Oregon laws, including one that bars punitive damages in malpractice suits, which he says reduces costs by cutting malpractice premiums.
He also regards as too low the Mitchell provision that calls for 1.75 percent of insurance premiums to be earmarked for medical research.
BILL BRADLEY
Democrat of New Jersey.
He supports Senator Mitchell on employer payments, which he says would meet his goal of reaching universal coverage through "shared responsibility." But he opposes Mr.
Mitchell's cost-containment provisions, which Senator Bradley says would impose taxes on too many people.


Nigeria's Leader Ousts Heads Of Two Oil Workers' Unions
Setting the stage for a potentially violent showdown, the Nigerian military ruler, Gen.
Sani Abacha, dismissed the leadership of the country's two main petroleum workers' unions today.
The unions have mounted a crippling six-week strike to demand a return to democracy.
In a toughly worded speech in which he pledged himself to ending a growing union-led challenge of the military's hold on power, General Abacha accused the union leaders of betraying the trust of their members and criminally attacking the "economic lifeline of our country."


Small Is Good
To The Home Section:
Thank you for Mitchell Owens's article "Thinking Big About Small Houses" (July 21).
It was an impressive, fact-packed article.
The concept of reasonably sized houses is reassuring and very upbeat.
Large houses have been depressing me for the last five years.
They are reminders of the Depression era, grandeurs before the fall.
NANCY STOUT  New York


Mary C. McDonald, Schools Official, 83
Mary C. McDonald, a retired assistant director of continuing education for the New York City schools, died on Monday at her home in Rockville Centre, L.I.
She was 83.
The cause was chronic kidney failure, her family said.


Corrections
The Personal Health column yesterday, about medicines that can contribute to bone loss, described the antacid Rolaids incorrectly.
Rolaids was recently reformulated to exclude aluminum.


Southern Indiana Gas &amp; Electric Co.(SIG,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Spar Aerospace reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Hall Names Assistants
The new Seton Hall basketball coach, GEORGE BLANEY, added two assistants to complete his staff, the university announced yesterday.
The 54-year-old Blaney, who succeeded P. J. CARLESIMO on July 22 at the Hall after a monthlong search, named KENNY WILLIAMSON, a former Florida State assistant, and BRUCE HAMBURGER, an assistant the past eight seasons under Carlesimo.


After 20 Years, South Africa's U.N. Delegate Comes Full Circle
After being shunned for 20 years, the South African delegate to the United Nations suddenly finds himself catapulted into the center of attention.
The reversal in South Africa's politics reopened the door, and the country's re-entry into the thick of things has been welcomed by other African countries and developing nations that want to share its enormous natural resources, industrial might and technical expertise.


Architects in Academe
After the last few years of design being whittled down to its essentials, it's refreshing to find objects that bring a smile.
Charm and humor may yet become the new lingua franca, speaking through small pleasures.
In time for Labor Day, a few whimsical host -- or crowd -- pleasers.
SUSANA TORRE will be the first architect since Eliel Saarinen and the first woman to direct the Cranbrook Academy of Art in Bloomfield Hills, Mich., when she takes office in the spring of 1995.
The school was founded in 1932 and currently has 150 graduate students studying painting, sculpture, architecture, industrial design, ceramics and metalworking.


Mr. Starr's Duty to Resign
When a special Washington court replaced Robert Fiske with Kenneth Starr as Whitewater independent counsel two weeks ago, the judges specifically cited the need for the appearance, as well as the reality, of impartial justice.
But it is now clear that the chairman of that panel, Judge David Sentelle, violated the court's own standard for purity of appearances by meeting with a Senator eager to have the court dump Mr.
Fiske as counsel.
For that reason, the appointment of Mr.
Starr is fatally tainted.
This situation was brought about by Judge Sentelle's flamboyantly bad judgment in meeting with Senator Lauch Faircloth and another Clinton opponent, Senator Jesse Helms.
At the time, Judge Sentelle and his two colleagues on the court were considering the appointment of a new prosecutor.
Mr.
Starr is in no way to blame for this untoward meeting, but he has to recognize that a cloud of political favoritism now hangs over his appointment and will undermine public confidence in it.
As a matter of public service and personal honor, he should resign the appointment.


Williams-Sonoma Inc.(WSGC,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Rasheed Watches From the Wings As Giants-Bunch Saga Plays Out
Kenyon Rasheed is still good friends with Dallas Cowboys Coach Barry Switzer.
When Switzer got the job in Dallas, the Giants fullback sent him flowers.
Switzer put them on his desk, staring at them with a smile on his face.
At the time he was preparing to fire off a thank-you note to Rasheed, whom Switzer called Pork Chop at Oklahoma because Rasheed didn't eat red meat.
"He will be a starter in this league," Switzer said, "Count on it."
Rasheed is close to fulfilling Switzer's prediction.
But it won't be easy.
He is caught in the middle of what has become a nasty situation between the Giants and Jarrod Bunch, the starting fullback for the last two seasons.
Watching from the sideline is Rasheed, a smart, hard-working player who thinks Bunch will get every advantage to start because he is a former first-round pick.


Wall St. Says High Price Is Worth It
If a company agrees to buy something for 60 percent more than its market value, does that make its stock worth more or less than it was before?
In the case of American Home Products, the answer is more.
Its successful bear hug of American Cyanamid will cost it $9.7 billion in cash, or $3.6 billion more than American Cyanamid was worth just before American Home Products made its intentions known on Aug. 2.


No Upsets as Tournament Turns Down the Volume
Drowned out by controversy on Tuesday night, when Andre Agassi blamed his opening-round exit on piped-in music that distracted him during change-overs, today the beleaguered Volvo International took a meteorological drenching that halted play midway through the afternoon.
There were no upsets among a contingent of seeded players that included Boris Becker, Petr Korda and the local iconoclast Ivan Lendl, but the departed Agassi left behind a legacy of unrest.


U.S. Petroleum Data
In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
Aug. 12
Aug. 5
Aug. 13
1994
1994
1993
Gasoline production, daily
7.4
7.1
7.2
Distillate production, daily
3.3
3.4
3.1
Gasoline stocks
208.0
210.6
208.0
Distillate stocks
131.5
130.2
122.5
Crude imports, daily
7.9
6.9
6.2
Product imports, daily
2.0
2.2
2.0
Crude stocks
328.5
324.8
348.5
Crude production, daily
6.5
6.6
6.8
Refinery utilization (%)
95.5
96.5
94.1
Source: American Petroleum Institute


Versa Services reports earnings for Qtr to June 29


Sports of The Times; This Strike Is Not Just A Hiccup
A HICCUP.
That's what the two-day strike of 1985 was as far as major league baseball players were concerned.
When the settlement came, major leaguers put on their uniforms and immediately resumed playing.


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS  Woodforde Upsets Ivanisevic  Top-seeded Goran Ivanisevic, the world's No. 2 player, was beaten, 6-3, 3-6, 7-5, by a doubles specialist, Mark Woodforde of Australia, yesterday in the RCA Championships in Indianapolis.
Woodforde, unseeded in singles, is part of the top-seeded doubles team, with his fellow Australian Todd Woodbridge, which has won five tournaments this year. (AP)
An All-Sister Final: Sarah Cyganiak of Mequon, Wis., the top-seeded player, scored a 6-1, 6-4 victory over her sister, Elizabeth, in the first all-sister final in United States Amateur championships yesterday in Kiamesha Lake, N.Y.
Sarah Cyganiak, 18, will be a second-semester freshman at the University of Michigan this fall.
Elizabeth, 21, is a senior at Michigan.


Fahlgren Sold Back To Its Executives
Fahlgren, an agency in Parkersburg, W. Va., that handles 17 co-op accounts of franchisees of the McDonald's Corporation, said yesterday that as expected it had agreed to buy itself back from its parent, the Interpublic Group of Companies.
Terms were not disclosed.
Buyback negotiations began last month to resolve a conflict created when Interpublic acquired Ammirati &amp; Puris, the lead national creative agency for a McDonald's rival, Burger King.
McDonald's "is pleased with the agreement," Steve Drongowski, Fahlgren's president and chief executive, said.


Pataki Charges Cuomo Put Mansion Budget to Own Use
In a campaign dog-and-pony show -- minus the pony but starring the dog -- the Republican gubernatorial candidate, George E. Pataki, yesterday used an array of props and the less-than-original vehicle of a Lettermanesque Top 10 list to charge that Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo has misused taxpayer money to enhance his life style.
Atop Mr.
Pataki's list of "Mario's most wasteful spending" was the use of the Executive Mansion budget last year to pay for flea collars and housebreaking "wee-wee pads" for Mr.
Cuomo's dogs, Cara and Max.
To illustrate that expenditure, Mr.
Pataki summoned his own dog, Jefferson, into the news conference at his Manhattan headquarters.
Jefferson, who is named for the third President, a Democrat, dutifully sat and barked for a milk bone at his master's command.


1-800-$$$-$$$$
True or false? Calls to 800 numbers are free.
Mostly true, but there is a loophole.
Some 800-number calls carry a charge, sometimes steep, and the caller is probably not aware of it.
A lot of duped customers are angry, to the point where phone companies are finally cracking down, the Federal Communications Commission has proposed some new rules and Representative Bart Gordon of Tennessee has a bill that would ban the charges outright.
The trouble stems from a 1992 law to curb abuses on 900-number calls.
That law also said 800-number calls shall be toll-free.
However, in case toll-free was taken to mean, for example, that a catalogue company could not charge for a shirt sold over its 800 line, the law says it is all right to charge for the business transacted so long as there is an agreement -- for example, where the caller has contracted for a computer information service on an 800 line, or where the caller gives a credit card number to order that shirt.


Pataki Attacked Over Arrangements for His Father's Care
In a three-way explosion of campaign bitterness, the candidates for governor lashed out at each other today over reports that the father of George E. Pataki, a Republican candidate whose worth nears $1 million, is living in a nursing home for indigent volunteer firefighters.
Mr.
Pataki's Republican rival, Richard M. Rosenbaum, implied that the Patakis had taken unfair advantage of the state-funded nursing home that Louis Pataki Sr., now 82, a longtime volunteer fireman, moved into last August.
Documents show that ownership of the parents' farm in Peekskill, N.Y., was transferred to George Pataki and his brother not long before the elder Mr.
Pataki entered the home.


NASA Prepares Shuttle for 2d Test of Environmental Eye in Sky
The space shuttle Endeavour faced few outstanding problems today as it was being readied for a 10-day flight to test an experimental Earth-imaging radar system that may one day help scientists predict volcanic eruptions and earthquakes or track ocean oil spills.
NASA officials said they had dealt with a few minor hardware problems, but that Endeavour was ready to fly.
The environmental mission virtually repeats one conducted in April, which will allow researchers to confirm and expand earlier results and make seasonal comparisons.


Castle Energy Corp.(CECX,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Dominion Textile (DTX) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


U.S. Energy Chief Calls for Help for Russia on Atomic Security
Entering the diplomatic dispute between Germany and Russia, Energy Secretary Hazel O'Leary said yesterday that finding the provenance of the atomic materials recently seized in Europe was far less important than increasing the general security of Russia's nuclear research and production complex.
This complex, she implied, is the most likely source of the intercepted bomb materials.
"That's urgent," she said in an interview. "That needs to happen today."


Chinese Accused of Pirating Disks
There is no telephone listing for the Suzhou Polydisk Factory, and visitors to the modern factory sheathed in blue reflecting glass and rose-colored marble are met at the gate by an unsmiling guard who asks them to leave.
Now.
"No photographs," the guard says angrily, standing not far from a large billboard quoting China's paramount leader, Deng Xiaoping: "Science and Technology Are the Number One Productive Force."


MFP Technology reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Blacks Gain in Sports Jobs
The hiring of black athletic administrators by the nation's colleges has grown but still has far to go to achieve racial parity.
Those are among the findings of a four-year study by a committee of the National Collegiate Athletic Association.
According to the study, which excluded the nation's historically black colleges, 10.1 percent of the 5,889 new administrative positions created since June 1991 were filled by blacks, giving blacks 8.7 percent of the more than 29,000 positions in the 1993-94 academic year.


Jail Guards' Overtime Leads to Fight With Union
New York City's jail guards are working more overtime, and the longer schedules are generating a dispute between city and union officials over morale and prison safety.
Officials in the city Department of Correction said yesterday that a recent surge in the jail population has led to the department spending a fifth of its total overtime budget in the first seven weeks of the fiscal year.


Jacobson Stores Inc.(JCBS,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to July 30


Cyanamid Accepts New Bid of $9.7 Billion
Yielding reluctantly to a sweetened takeover offer from the American Home Products Corporation, the American Cyanamid Company yesterday became the latest drug company to be swallowed up in the consolidation sweeping the health care industry.
The $9.7 billion merger would create one of the world's largest drug companies, giving American Home Products a line of new products to sell to health maintenance organizations and other big managed health care customers.


Fire in Central California Is Being Tamed, But Another Grows
Helped by cooler temperatures and gentler winds, firefighters today surrounded and controlled half the fire burning in the hills near this city on the Central California coast.
Highways were re-opened, and the dark cloud of smoke and ash that had lingered over the area since Sunday disappeared.


Great American Management &amp; Investment Inc.(GAMI,NSC) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Hartmann Continues to Carve His Niche
Rick Hartmann arrived on Long Island this year after 10 years of playing golf on the European tour and is already making a name for himself in a metropolitan area crowded with some of the best club professionals in the country.
After winning the Long Island Open and finishing second in the New York State Open, the 35-year-old Hartmann is now putting in a strong bid for the New York area's most prestigious golf trophy.


Lukas Has Cat Ready to Stalk the Bull
Outside Barn 83 on the far reaches of the Oklahoma training center at Saratoga Race Course, the man in the sunglasses watched the chestnut horse galloping around the track toward the race of the year against the demon of the year.
And Wayne Lukas nodded toward Tabasco Cat and announced that this was one horse who wasn't afraid of the demon, Holy Bull.
They will meet in the 125th running of the Travers Stakes on Saturday, "the summertime Kentucky Derby," with the winner getting 60 percent of the purse of $750,000, leadership of the 3-year-old class and maybe the inside track on racing's ultimate title, Horse of the Year.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  *
Chevron Capital U.S.A., is selling $350 million of notes due in 2004 through Goldman, Sachs &amp; Co.
The notes, which are callable in seven years, carry an interest rate of 7.45 percent and are priced at 99.442 to yield 7.53 percent. *
Dormitory Authority of New York State is selling $246.1 million of tax-exempt revenue bonds for state university educational facilities through Bear, Stearns &amp; Co.
The bonds are priced to yield a maximum of 5.75 percent for an issue due in 2024, while other long bonds are priced to yield 6.25 percent in 2014 and 6.30 percent in 2021.
For short-maturity serial bonds, yields range from 4.10 percent in 1995 to 6.25 percent in 2009.
The bonds are rated Baa1 by Moody's Investors Service Inc.; BBB+ by the Standard &amp; Poor's Corp., and A by Fitch Investors Service Inc..


2 Concerns That Share Low Profile
The acquisition of American Cyanamid by American Home Products will bring together two companies whose products are part of the consumer mainstream, though neither company is well known to the public.
American Home Products and its chairman, John R. Stafford, have long been content to reap profits rather than publicity.
Its products like Anacin and Dristan have been staples for decades, helping to bankroll more recent efforts to expand in the prescription drug business.


Valassis Communications (VCI,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Younkers Inc.(YONK,NNM) reports earnings for 13wks to July 30


Mets' No. 1 Draft Choice Not Cutting an Easy Groove
Paul Wilson is drained and clearly frustrated.
For the right-handed pitcher the Mets made the No. 1 pick in the June draft, this is the season that will never end.
Yet the Mets look at Wilson's 0-3 record and staff-high 4.62 earned run average on their St.
Lucie Class A team well aware that he didn't do markedly better -- 0-2, 3.00 e.r.a. -- in the Gulf Coast rookie league and they say these numbers mean absolutely nothing.


Market Place; Some analysts think now is the time to buy steel stocks.
IS now a good time to buy steel stocks?
Some people think so.
The industry certainly is having a spectacular year after a decade of sagging orders, slumping prices and plant closings.
Steel shipments in the first half of the year rose 5.8 percent, to almost 47 million tons, the highest level in 13 years, the American Iron and Steel Institute, the principal trade group, reported recently.
The American industry is running flat out and is expected to do so for at least another year.


Make Congress Obey Congress
The House took a long-overdue step toward responsibility this month when it approved, with only four dissenting votes, a bill to make Congress obey the laws it imposes on everyone else.
Such overwhelming support should send a message to the Senate to do the same.
The House bill and a similar bill pending in the Senate would subject senators and representatives to 10 Federal laws from which they have historically exempted themselves.
Both bills give employees of Congress and various Congressional agencies the same legal rights as private-sector workers under Federal laws that regulate labor standards, family and medical leave and occupational safety and health, among other things.


'Poison Pill' Adopted by Hills Stores
Striking back at a large investor who is seeking to oust four of its directors, the Hills Stores Company said yesterday that it had adopted a plan that would limit the ability of any shareholder to acquire more than 15 percent of its stock.
Hills installed its "poison pill" after the Federal regulators granted the investor, Dickstein &amp; Company L.P., an investment firm that owns 12.6 percent of the company's outstanding common stock, permission to buy up to 50 percent of its shares.


On Retrial, Suspect Is Acquitted in Fire That Killed 6 in '78
A man who spent nearly 10 years in prison after a jury convicted him of helping to set a 1978 fire that killed six firefighters in Brooklyn was acquitted last night in a retrial.
The second trial for the defendant, Eric Jackson-Knight, was ordered in 1988 when a judge threw out the original conviction, ruling that prosecutors had improperly withheld information from the defense.


DDB Needham Sells Hawaiian Agency
DDB Needham Worldwide said yesterday that it had agreed to sell Milici Valenti Gabriel Honolulu, its agency in Hawaii, to the local managers.
Terms were not disclosed.
The agency will continue to be headed by Nick Ng Pack, president and chief executive, and will be renamed Milici Valenti Ng Pack.
It has 49 employees and billings estimated at $29 million from clients like Hertz, American Airlines and the First Hawaiian Bank.


New Into Old Keeps Laboratory Young


Envirodyne Industries reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Redraw Lines Of 3 Districts, Texas Is Told
With less than 90 days before the November election, a Federal judicial panel threw Texas politics into turmoil today by ruling that three oddly shaped Congressional districts in Houston and Dallas were unconstitutional because they had been created solely to protect minorities.
The judges ordered the districts redrawn.
The immediate effect of the ruling was confusion.
A spokesman for the Texas Attorney General said it was unclear whether the decision could be overturned or at least delayed on appeal, or whether the Texas Legislature would be forced into special session to redraw the districts.


Towns Taking Up Whitman On Offer of Fiscal Review
Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman talks of "reinventing government" when she describes her program to lower income-tax rates and pare state agencies.
Now she wants to export her philosophy to local governments, at least in part to silence her critics.
When she delivered her budget message in March, Mrs.
Whitman had some bad news for local governments.
Some special state aid programs were being eliminated and others held at current levels.
Municipal officials facing rising costs viewed the leveling of state aid as a reduction and said the Governor was forcing them to raise property taxes to balance their budgets.


CHRONICLE
RORY KENNEDY, the youngest of the 11 children of Robert F. and ETHEL KENNEDY, is following in her family's tradition of working for the poor, but she is putting her own stamp on her efforts by making documentaries and videos aimed at community groups and policymakers.
Her first work, a documentary she produced and directed with ROBIN SMITH about the struggles of drug-addicted women during pregnancy and motherhood, will have its premiere on Sept. 19 at the Time &amp; Life Building in Manhattan.


Canadian Natural reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


METRO DIGEST
TRAGEDY TURNS WOMAN INTO AN ADVOCATE Carolyn McCarthy, whose husband was killed and whose son was seriously injured in the shooting last December aboard a Long Island Rail Road train, has been in front of the cameras a lot, an increasingly visible figure in the debate over gun control.
But nothing has given her more exposure than her decision to appear in a commercial for Governor Cuomo.
A1.
ON RETRIAL, MAN CLEARED OF ARSON Eric Jackson-Knight, 37, of Coney Island, who spent nearly 10 years in prison for setting a fire that killed six firefighters, was acquitted by a Brooklyn jury in his second trial.
A1.


Hechinger Co.(HECHA,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to July 30


Dare Gets a Good Deal From Nets
Yinka Dare, the 7-foot-1-inch, 265-pound center taken 14th by the New Jersey Nets in the National Basketball Association draft in June, has signed a multimillion-dollar contract with the team.
The Nets have scheduled a news conference for 1:00 P.M. today at the Meadowlands in East Rutherford, N.J., to formally announce the signing of Dare, who left George Washington University after his sophomore season.


Transactions
Baseball  National League
MONTREAL EXPOS -- Named Bill Gelvett, director of player development, and Neal Huntington assistant director of player development.
Fired Kent Qualls, director of minor league operations; and Herm Starrette, director of minor league field operations.
Basketball  National Basketball Association
MINNESOTA TIMBERWOLVES -- Fired Sidney Lowe, coach, and Jim Brewer and Chuck Davisson, assistant coaches.
Continental Basketball Association
HARTFORD HELLCATS -- Named Casey Kahler general manager.
Football  National Football League
DALLAS COWBOYS -- Waived Tim Daniel, wide receiver; James Parrish, offensive tackle; Greg Schorp, tight end; Alfie Burch, safety; Keith Wagner, tackle; Mark Mason, running back; Gabriel Oladipo, defensive tackle; and Richie Cunningham, placekicker.
DENVER BRONCOS -- Waived Shawn Moore, quarterback, and Todd Jones, offensive lineman.
GREEN BAY PACKERS -- Waived Kurt Warner, quarterback; Charles Arbuckle, tight end; Adam Walker, running back; Daryl Frazier, wide receiver; and John Fisher, center.
Claimed Lance Zeno, center, off waivers from the Atlanta Falcons.
MIAMI DOLPHINS -- Waived Robert Davis, cornerback.
SAN DIEGO CHARGERS -- Signed John Kidd, punter. Waived Kent Sullivan, punter.
SAN FRANCISCO 49ERS -- Waived Jerone Davison, fullback, and Rod Moore, wide receiver.
TAMPA BAY BUCANEERS -- Claimed Scott Sisson, kicker, off waivers from the New England Patriots.
Arena Football League
ARIZONA RATTLERS -- Activated Brad Lebo, quarterback. Suspended John Bankhead, lineman.
CHARLOTTE RAGE -- Suspended Anthony Howard, wide receiver-linebacker.
Canadian Football League
SACRAMENTO GOLD MINERS -- Added Jim Kemp, quarterback, to the roster.
Transferred David Archer, quarterback, to the reserve list.
SHREVEPORT PIRATES -- Signed Ron Perry and Steve Solari, linebackers; Willie Covington, wide receiver; Ryan Benjamin, running back, and Donnell Johnson, offensive lineman.
Re-signed Don Chaney, tight end, and Johnny Scott, defensive lineman.
Waived Derek Hill, slotback; Lorenza Baker, wide receiver; Derwin Antoine, running back; Danton Barto, linebacker, and Sheldon Haliburton, tackle.
Hockey  National Hockey League
BOSTON BRUINS -- Signed Evgeni Ryabchikov, goalie, to a three-year contract.
CALGARY FLAMES -- Signed Trevor Kidd, goaltender, to a multiyear contract.
WASHINGTON CAPITALS -- Agreed to terms with Randy Burridge, left wing, and Rob Pearson, right wing, on one-year contracts.
Horse racing
AKSARBEN -- Named Greg Hosch racing secretary for the 1995 season.
Lacrosse  Major Indoor Lacrosse League
MILL -- Named John Mouradian executive adviser for lacrosse operations for the National Division and Mike French executive adviser for lacrosse operations for the American Division.
PHILADELPHIA WINGS -- Named Tony Resch coach.
Soccer  American Professional Soccer League
COLORADO FOXES -- Signed Noah Epstein, forward. Activated Bryan Haynes, forward.


Fred's Inc.(FRED) reports earnings for Qtr to July 30


Swings and Misses, Perhaps, but No Strikes Here


Hudson General Corp.(HGC,A) reports earnings for Year to June 30


Authentic Fitness Corp.(ASM,N) reports earnings for Qtr to July 2


'Shenandoah' in a 20th-Anniversary Go-Round
In the two decades since it had its first performances here at the Goodspeed Opera House, "Shenandoah" has lost more than it has gained.
Although it was not exactly a favorite with the critics when it moved to Broadway early in 1975, the public took to its mixture of family values, antiwar sentiment and general all-around pieties.
The musical won two Tony Awards that season -- one for best book, the other for John Cullum's performance as Charlie Anderson, a flinty Virginia widower -- and ran a healthy 1,050 performances.


Perrigo Co.(PRGO,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


THE HEALTH CARE DEBATE: The House; House Action on Health Measure May Wait Till After Labor Day
House Democratic leaders today acknowledged that they had no clear idea when they could begin work on health care legislation, but said it might be after Labor Day, a prospect that dismayed many advocates of a health care overhaul.
Representative Richard A. Gephardt, the majority leader, told members in a closed Democratic caucus today that the Congressional Budget Office had yet to complete its analyses of the House's health care bills, and that the House could therefore not begin to act on them.


CHRONICLE
JOSE ALDAZ is a pianist who has had a long and strong connection to Rildia Bee O'Bryan Cliburn, the pianist VAN CLIBURN's mother, who died on Aug. 3.
"Van Cliburn and I were good friends, and his mother used to say: 'You are my other little boy. You must call me every day' ," Mr.
Aldaz, who first met her 30 years ago, recalled yesterday.


MicroAge Inc.(MICA,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-13  DOUBTS ABOUT NUCLEAR SECURITY  An investigation of nuclear security in Russia shows that the country is far from establishing an effective system for protecting and accounting for critical ingredients for making nuclear arms.
A1


A Personalized Mozart By Vladimir Feltsman
With just about every orchestral program featuring two soloists, the Mostly Mozart Festival has gone through a good deal of the concerto repertory this summer.
The festival has been particularly fortunate with its pianists, who have offered a reasonably comprehensive overview of contemporary Mozartean interpretive styles.
Vladimir Feltsman joined the list on Tuesday evening, when he gave a personalized, illuminating account of Mozart's Concerto No. 23 in A (K. 488).
Also on the bill at Avery Fisher Hall was Christian Tetzlaff, a 27-year-old German violinist who was making his Mostly Mozart debut.
Gerard Schwarz was on the podium.
One thing Mr.
Feltsman and Mr.
Tetzlaff have in common is that they first became known to American listeners through their recordings of fiery late Romantic and 20th-century works, but have lately been polishing their reputations as Baroque and Classical interpreters.
Mr.
Feltsman's Bach recordings and his extensive Bach series at the 92d Street Y have helped to tip the balance.
And Mr.
Tetzlaff, having just recorded the Bach solo Sonatas and Partitas for release in January, gave a cool but compelling performance of the Partita No. 2 in D minor (BWV 1004) in a preconcert recital.


Casinos Ban King
The boxing promoter DON KING, indicted last month on nine counts of wire fraud, was barred yesterday from doing business with New Jersey casinos.
King did not appear before the state's Casino Control Commission meeting in Atlantic City at which regulators suspended his nongambling casino license.


A Nuclear Glossary
Uranium
URANIUM , an element found in nature, must be "enriched" for use in most power plants.
It is processed to raise the proportion of one form, U-235, the kind that is easiest to split in a reactor or bomb and comprises only 0.7 percent of natural uranium.


Garden Q. &amp;. A.
A Good Bug
Q.
I've read that lacewings are good insects to have in the garden.
Just what do they do and how can I recognize them? -- Marion Mack, New Haven


APS Holding Corp.(APSI,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to July 25


Prostitution Arrests
To the Editor:
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani's crackdown on prostitution (33 New York City sex-providing establishments were raided by the police Aug. 4) forces me out of the closet.
I am a "john." I make no apology.
In any rational universe the fact that I am able to have a sexual experience with a consenting adult only if I pay that adult would be nobody's business but mine.
Tragically, this is not the case.
I am guilty of a crime and subject to arrest.
So are those sex workers who tend to my needs.
HUGH LOEBNER  New York, Aug. 8, 1994


BUSINESS DIGEST
Consolidation in Health Care
American Cyanamid agreed to be acquired by American Home Products for $101 a share, becoming the latest drug company to be swallowed in the consolidation in the health care.
The merger would create one of the world's largest drug companies.  [ Page D1. ]
American Cyanamid is being bought for 60 percent more than than its market value, But Wall Street likes the deal, and American Home Products stock has stayed strong.  [ D6. ]
The two leaders shy from the spotlight.
John R. Stafford of American Home Products and Albert J. Costello of American Cyanamid are content to reap profits rather than publicity.  [ D6. ] Companies
Hills Stores adopted a "poison pill," seeking to strike back at a large investor, Dickstein &amp; Company.  [ D1. ]
The investigators of the Detective Information Network are the Sam Spades of cyberspace, using computers and telephone lines to search through reams of public records.  [ D1. ]
MCI submitted a plan for local service in Illinois that was substantially different from Ameritech's proposal.  [ D3. ]
Cray Computer has been awarded a $4.2 million contract by the National Security Agency, a small piece of sorely needed help.  [ D3. ]
CompUSA stock plummeted after the company reported a fourth-quarter loss that was worse than expected.  [ D3. ]
A company offers beverages with water from the Pacific.  [ D3. ] The Economy
The thinking behind the Fed decision to raise rates is that the economy is incapable of moving toward more prosperity now.
But there is evidence that the argument that there are not enough qualified workers or enough plants and resources to support a stronger economy may not apply.
Economic Analysis.  [ D1. ]
Roger Altman resigned as Deputy Treasury Secretary.  [ B10. ]
A health insurer and Minnesota officials joined in a lawsuit that accuses cigarette manufacturers of conspiring for decades to hide information about the dangers of smoking.  [ B10. ] International
Bootleg compact disks show the rampant piracy in China of American intellectual property.
Pirated compact disks are flooding out of China by the tens of millions each year.
The Clinton Administration is threatening to impose sanctions on China unless it closes 26 compact disk factories.  [ D1. ]
A House committee agreed to move ahead on GATT legislation and to confer with its Senate counterpart.
It allowed the Administration to negotiate future trade pacts on a fast-track basis.  [ D2. ] Markets
Stocks were largely unchanged.
The Dow fell 8.09 points.
Technology stocks, however, rallied in Nasdaq trading.  [ D8. ]
The dollar slipped in quiet trading as traders waited for Germany's central bank to move on interest rates.  [ D15. ]
Crude oil prices surged as tensions grew in Nigeria.  [ D15. ]
Treasury prices were mixed.
The 30-year bond gave up some gains from Tuesday, but shorter-term securities rose.  [ D16. ] Today's Columns
Does the Washington deadlock on health care matter?
Some economists argue that insurers and big employees are already containing costs, but others say that this year may be the last chance for reform.
Peter Passell: Economic Scene.  [ D2. ]
Steel is enjoying a comeback, and some steel stocks are being recommended by analysts.
Demand is booming, and American steelmakers have been getting price increases.
Market Place.  [ D8. ]
Chrysler will try an endorser with an attitude.
Greg Kinnear, the puckish host of "Talk Soup" and "Later" will appear in ads for the Eagle line of cars.
Stuart Elliott: Advertising.  [ D20. ]


A Spy Agency Gives Contract to Cray Computer
The Federal Government gave a small vote of confidence to the struggling supercomputer industry yesterday when the National Security Agency awarded the Cray Computer Corporation a $4.2 million contract to help develop what might become the world's ultimate spying machine.
The contract is the first significant revenue obtained by Cray Computer, a Colorado Springs company founded five years ago by the supercomputer pioneer Seymour Cray after he left the Cray Research Corporation.


Mrs. Clinton Didn't Mislead on the Foster Case
To the Editor:
I represent the First Lady.
William Safire asserts in his Aug. 4 column that Hillary Rodham Clinton "intended . . . to mislead" at her April 22 press conference, when she stated that her chief of staff, Margaret Williams, did not "remove" documents from Vincent W. Foster Jr.'s office just after his death.


U.S. Leather Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Giuliani Pleads for Crime Bill in Washington


Africa Has Shown No Shortage of Compassion
To the Editor:
"Africa Allows Its Tragedies to Take Their Own Course" (The Week in Review, Aug. 7) maintains that Africans show "indifference" to the suffering of fellow Africans.


UAP Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Old Games, New Generation; Some Very City Ways to Play
Skellzies caps are still skittering over city sidewalks and playground pavement.
"Line, line, line!" bellowed 13-year-old Jason Diaz the other day, pointing at the wax-filled bottle cap that his buddy Ruben Kearse had just thumb-flicked across the paint-striped pavement of Ciccarone Park, on Arthur Avenue in the Bronx.
Although a veteran of such duels, Ruben, 11, had aimed at the No. 5 corner of the four-foot-square skellzies court only to see it land on a line.


A Mini 'Mona Lisa'
After the last few years of design being whittled down to its essentials, it's refreshing to find objects that bring a smile.
Charm and humor may yet become the new lingua franca, speaking through small pleasures.
In time for Labor Day, a few whimsical host -- or crowd -- pleasers.


Treasury Prices Mixed A Day After Fed Move
Prices of Treasury securities were mixed yesterday, with longer maturities giving up a little of the gains made Tuesday in the wake of the Federal Reserve's move to increase short-term interest rates half a percentage point.
The 30-year bond fell 9/32 , to a price of 1019/32 , yielding 7.39 percent, up from 7.37 percent on Tuesday, following the market's biggest rally in two weeks after the Fed's fifth interest rate rise of the year.


Corrections
A brief report in Business Day on Tuesday about the second-quarter financial results of Toys "R" Us Inc. misstated the percentage increases for the company's earnings and sales for the quarter and the first six months of its fiscal year.
For the quarter, sales rose 10.2 percent, while earnings rose 7.1 percent; for the six-month period, sales rose 11.9 percent and earnings rose 6.6 percent.


Roanoke Electric Steel Corp.(RESC,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Haitian Chief Buffs Image On the Streets
Lieut.
Gen.
Raoul Cedras strode confidently down the street, looking not like the dictator and impediment to democracy that Washington makes him out to be, but like an earnest candidate on the campaign trail.
Dressed in civilian clothes for a foray into the countryside on Monday, General Cedras shook hands, smiled and danced with his wife during a stop at a cantina as the television cameras focused on him.


If This Strike Seems Familiar, It's Because It Is
It's beginning to look a lot -- a frighteningly lot -- like 1981.
As the baseball shutdown reaches its seventh day today, striking similarities abound between what is or isn't happening now and what happened in the first week of the 1981 work stoppage.
That doesn't guarantee that this strike will last as long as the 50 days that one did, but the early signs are not promising.


Goody's Family Clothing Inc.(GDYS,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to July 30


Freed Man Is Planning to Leave The Town Where Trouble Began
Eric Jackson-Knight, more than a dozen years of jail time under his belt, walked out of a Brooklyn courthouse last night a free man and said that, more than anything, he wanted to leave New York -- his home and the place where all the trouble began.
Mr.
Jackson-Knight wore a wide smile on a face that appeared lined and worn and spoke in a voice that was quiet but strong.


Hughes Supply Inc.(HUG,N) reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Radical Anti-Abortion Alliance Described
In the face of rising violence against abortion clinics, Planned Parenthood yesterday made public what it described as evidence of a growing alliance between opponents of abortion and extreme right-wing groups.
The evidence, presented at a New York news conference, included videotape from a meeting in which one speaker urged parents to arm their children and another said, "Abortionists should be put to death."


Hadco Corp.(HDCO,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to July 30


In Southern California, A Fit Climate for Theater
From New York, the American theatrical landscape may seem parched and empty this summer, with several long-running Broadway shows closing up shop and precious little threatening to move in any time soon.
But here in the most extremely southern reaches of Southern California, with up to six productions running simultaneously in the two major regional theaters -- three at the La Jolla Playhouse on the campus of the University of California at San Diego, and three more 20 minutes down Interstate 5 in San Diego proper, at the Old Globe Theater -- it's a lush season, and the air is as redolent of greasepaint as it is of the sea.
In the last couple of seasons, regional theaters in general, and those on the West Coast in particular, have become the most fertile developmental ground for new work in the American theater.
To wit: three of the four Tony nominees for best play last season -- "The Kentucky Cycle," "Twilight: Los Angeles, 1992" and the winner, Tony Kushner's "Angels in America: Perestroika" -- spent developmental time at the Mark Taper Forum in Los Angeles.
And though few new nonmusicals are expected to land on Broadway in the 1994-95 season, two that are -- Neil Simon's "London Suite" and Arthur Laurents's "Jolson Sings Again" -- will first have their world premieres at the Seattle Repertory Company.


Leftists Win Most Votes In Sri Lanka
Final results showed today that an alliance of left-leaning opposition parties won the largest number of votes in parliamentary elections, setting the stage for a comeback by the family that led this nation for long periods in the 1950's, 60's and 70's.
The People's Alliance, led by Chandrika Bandaranaike Kumaratunga, the 48-year-old daughter of two previous Prime Ministers, won 105 seats in Sri Lanka's 225-seat assembly, short of an outright majority.
The United National Party, which has governed here for 17 years, won 94 seats.


A Kayak To Paddle And to Pack
WHILE kayaks are popular water craft for running rivers and exploring ocean coastlines, the boats are not always easy to launch.
That problem is increasingly being addressed by manufacturers who are making smaller, lighter-weight kayaks, some of which fold for easier carrying.
Among this breed of mini-kayaks is one that not only folds, but also comes with its own backpack.


Baker (J.) Inc.(JBAK,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to July 30


Flexsteel Industries Inc.(FLXS,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Diving Into History in Lake George
Resting 105 feet below the surface of Lake George, a warship built in 1758 has been opened to public viewing as part of a new state underwater preserve.
The ship, a relic of the French and Indian War, can be seen only by divers who obtain a permit from the State Department of Environmental Conservation at Lake George.
The only thing visible from the surface is a buoy marking the ship below.


Raytheon Narrows Review to 3 Shops
The Raytheon Company has narrowed the review on its consolidated account to 3 agencies from 10.
The account, with billings estimated at $10 million, has been divided among Grey Advertising in New York, Keiler &amp; Company in Farmington, Conn., and McCann-Erickson Southwest in Houston.
Raytheon decided to consolidate at one agency after agreeing to part from Grey in June.


Economic Scene; Measuring the pain of the deadlock on health care reform.
WITH Democrats badly split over health care reform and Republicans caught up in the role of spoilers, the prospect for health care legislation this year is dimming.
Does it matter?
It certainly does to President Clinton, who can ill afford another legislative bruise in a town that shows no mercy to lamed politicians.


Executive Changes At D.M.B.&amp; B.
D'Arcy Masius Benton &amp; Bowles/ North America is making changes involving top managers in two countries.
Rupert Brendon, 51, chairman and chief executive of D.M.B.&amp; B./Canada in Toronto, said on Tuesday that he would leave after 16 years, relinquishing the title of chief executive on Oct. 3 and of chairman on Dec. 31.
After that he will become a consultant to the agency.


Clinton Demanding North Korean Inspections
Eager not to be seen as backing down in his dispute with North Korea, President Clinton is demanding that North Korea allow inspections of two nuclear sites before the United States, South Korea and other countries provide it with modern nuclear reactors, White House officials said today.
In a 40-minute telephone conversation Tuesday night with President Kim Young Sam of South Korea, President Clinton sought to dispel any ambiguities over the agreement reached on Saturday with North Korea, saying he would continue to insist on the inspections that the North Koreans have refused for over a year.


Russian Controls on Bomb Material Are Leaky
Russia has no way of knowing for sure if any of its vast supply of bomb ingredients is missing, many of its own nuclear officials and scientists admit.
An investigation of nuclear security in Russia, including interviews with numerous officials and independent experts in Moscow and in Siberia, where many nuclear materials are kept, reveals that the country is far from establishing an effective system for protecting and accounting for the plutonium and highly enriched uranium, the critical ingredients for making nuclear weapons.


Zapata Corp.(ZOS,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


AT HOME WITH: Artie Shaw; Literary Life, After Ending the Beguine
IT was October 1954 in New York.
Artie Shaw had just finished a gig at the old Embers Club on 52d Street.
It turned out to be his last.
He put down his clarinet that night and has never picked it up again.
He was 44, an age at which most men are settling into a career.
But he'd been a professional musician for 30 years and he'd had enough.
He'd already retired -- briefly -- twice before, but this time it was for good.


Medtronic
Medtronic Inc., the world's largest maker of implantable medical devices like pacemakers, saw its share price rise sharply yesterday after reporting a 24 percent rise in its first-quarter earnings to $1.13 a share from 91 cents a share.
The company's first quarter ended July 29.


Violence, Real and Unreal
To The Home Section:
In reading about the concerns of parents regarding the effects of fictive violence on children ("Debating the Violence in 'Lion King,' " July 14), whether it be the gratuitous gore of video games like "Mortal Kombat" or the celluloid terrors depicted in "The Lion King," I could not help but think how fortunate are those of us who have the luxury of making such fears the focus of a debate.


Accounts
*
Carnival Air Lines, Fort Lauderdale, Fla., to Harris Drury Cohen, Fort Lauderdale, to handle its national account, previously at Ryder &amp; Schild, Miami.
Harris Drury also handles a Carnival sibling, Carnival Cruise Lines.
Billings were estimated at $2.5 million. *
Paine Webber, New York, to Kobs &amp; Draft Advertising, New York, to handle its direct marketing account, previously at Saatchi &amp; Saatchi CMS, Rochester.
Billings were not disclosed.


Excerpts From the Senate Debate on the Mitchell Health Care Legislation
Following are excerpts from statements made yesterday on the Senate floor in the eighth day of debate over the health care bill, as transcribed by The New York Times from a broadcast on C-Span: STATEMENT BY SENATOR GRASSLEY
To contrast the Mitchell bill to the status quo alternative:
Today any insurance company can, first of all, deny you coverage.
Secondly, impose a pre-existing-condition exclusion so they can say, Well, look, if you have that pre-existing condition, we can exclude you for that existing condition.
Limit your lifetime benefits so that your protection runs out when you need it the most.
They can cancel it and cancel your coverage when you get sick.
We've had several examples in the very recent weeks of employers for good companies that had their health care canceled for all of their employees because of the incidence of illness among just a few of their employees and just effectively canceled out within a two- or three-month period.
There's also the exclusion of any service from coverage, even a service that might turn out to be most important to you if someone in your family becomes seriously ill.
And no American is guaranteed choice.
And I think these following points are worthwhile to keep in mind:
If your employer doesn't offer a plan you like, you can be out of luck.
And 84 percent of employers offer only one plan.
Of the employers that make available health insurance to their employees, they provide one plan.
Effectively, out of luck if you wanted an alternative choice.
You take it or leave it.
Secondly, if your employer doesn't offer a plan that allows you to keep your family doctor, you're also out of luck. . . .
And the Dole plan is better than the status quo alternative, but it's still I don't believe good enough.
The insurance companies can still impose pre-existing-condition limitations, they can sell you a policy that doesn't cover the service you may need the most . . . because policies aren't required to provide comprehensive coverage.
STATEMENT BY SENATOR SMITH
My office has received thousands of phone calls and letters, more phone calls and letters, I think, than anything since I've been in the Congress, on the issue of health care reform.
Both sides.
I hosted a statewide health care conference earlier this year, in April, that featured leading policy experts from every facet of the health care delivery system.
There were doctors, and there were providers and nurses and patients and everyone who had in some way had an impact, or were impacted by any change in legislation in the health care industry. . . .
In addition to that, I have 10 counties in my state and I have held a town meeting in each of those counties. . . .
We were there to directly hear from constituents regarding the issue of health care reform.
And they spoke out.
There were hundreds of them, in all of those town meetings, more than any ever attended any of my citizen forums on any issue. . . .
In short, I guess the fairest thing to say is I've heard New Hampshire speak to me, with me, on this issue.
And overwhelmingly what they're saying is that they don't want the Government any more involved in health care than it is already involved now.
In other words, less Government involvement.
I think there's a concern, unfortunately, that comes through as I listen to these constituents and providers, and all of those who are in any way affected by this pending legislation.
There's a concern that the Government is going to do something to me on this issue.
I think that's coming through loud and clear, and it's a very valid concern: Rather than helping us, they're going to do something to me that may cost me my good quality health care.
And the polls, the national polls, which have changed dramatically from overwhelming support to what President Clinton had proposed to the opposite now, . . . show that Americans share the same feelings as those people in New Hampshire.
So I don't think there's a great difference between the states, no matter what state you represent on this issue.
I believe that based on what I have heard, people that I've talked with, that most Americans would oppose not only the underlying finance bill, which is technically on the floor, but also the Clinton-Mitchell-Gephardt, or Clinton-Mitchell bill, as we have here.
Fifty-three percent, according to the polls, worry that Congress will pass a plan that gives the Federal Government too much control.
And that's a very valid concern.
They're suspicious because Government has proven again and again that it's not efficient, it's not compassionate, it's not thrifty and therefore shouldn't be trying to provide for the health care needs of people, least of all health care.
If a mistake is made by a Government official in, perhaps, the administration of the I.R.S., or some other program -- post office, perhaps, late delivering the mail -- it's a problem, maybe, but it's a minor problem compared to some slip-up in the treatment of your health.
STATEMENT BY SENATOR HATFIELD
What we're trying to do in Oregon is to provide everybody with standard, primary health care.
We're not going to separate every Siamese twin born in Oregon; we're not going to guarantee, in essence, that everybody has the right to any medical procedure -- over 9,000 of them under Medicare alone.
We have prioritized them.
People say, Oh, that's rationing health care.
Well, we're rationing health care, yes, but we're doing that today under an economic face which is certainly discriminatory, far more discriminatory than saying to a person 80 years old, If you have a life expectancy added to your life by one year, are we going to engage in a very costly medical procedure as against covering 100 women with prenatal care?
No.
We can't afford to do it.
Now that gets down to where the real rubber hits the road in terms of having to make the tough decisions that somehow we're going to offer anyone any medical procedure or access to any medical procedure.
That's the implication, because we've not addressed those thousands of medical procedures and we . . . have the attitude that any one of them -- and it's very, very clear -- any one of them would be open for anyone.
What Oregon has done is it focuses on the provision of preventive health care services and assesses an access to primary health care before serious health problems develop.
Now, it looks at the effectiveness of treatment, it draws lines, as I say, to exclude payment of services that are not effective nor add to the individual's quality of life.
I think we have to face this reality in the national picture as well.
STATEMENT BY SENATOR MITCHELL
I hope the American people will not be fooled by the rhetoric they're hearing here today.
And I hope the American people will also think about the irony of these Republican senators getting up here day after day after day and denouncing Government health insurance and Government health care as bad for their constituents even as they benefit from it themselves as individuals and their families.
Every member of this Senate participates in the Government-run health insurance system that's available to all Federal employees.
And the Government pays 72 percent of the cost of that health insurance for these Republican senators who are standing here telling their constituents that it's bad for the constituents even as they participate in it for themselves and their families.
You American taxpayers are paying through the Government, 72 percent of the cost of health insurance in a Government-organized health insurance system for the very Republican senators who are now telling you that you shouldn't want Government-run health insurance.
And you are entitled to ask yourselves if it is so bad for you, why is it so good for them and their families.
Has one of them stood up and said, "My constituents, Government health insurance is bad for you, and to prove how much I believe that statement, I'm going to voluntarily drop out of the Government insurance system. And I'm going to put my family in the same place where your family is."
Have you heard one say that yet? No. And you're not likely to.
Now that's just the insurance. Now let's talk about direct care.
If one of these Republican senators doesn't feel well, if he gets a headache, or his stomach aches, he walks a few feet down the Capitol and he goes to the office of the Capitol physician, a Government employee.
He is greeted by a clerk who is a Government employee, checked by a nurse who is a Government employee and then goes in to see the doctor, who is a Government employee.
If Government health care is so bad, why do these Republican senators insist on having it for themselves?
And then if they get sick, if the doctor says, You've got to go to the hospital, they go to the Bethesda Naval Hospital, or the Walter Reed Army Hospital, Government hospitals.
Well, my gosh, ask yourselves, Mr. and Mrs.
America, If these Government facilities are so bad, why do these Republican senators want to go there themselves?
And it's not just senators.
President Reagan and President Bush were in their capacities as President the most powerful men in the world.
And they were independently wealthy, and they could have gone anywhere in the world when they got sick.
And where did they go?
Why they went to these Government hospitals.
And who can forget the photographs taken of them waving out the window to the public and the press in those Government hospitals?
Why, are you telling us that it's good enough for Presidents, but it's not good enough for ordinary Americans?
STATEMENT BY SENATOR BRADLEY
The Senate's effort to reform the American system of health care has important consequences for all Americans.
It will determine the availability and the extent of health care for each of us.
It will determine in part how long our parents will live and how healthy our children will be.
As we debate this issue, let's remember what brought us here in the first place.
We are not debating this issue by chance.
There's a reason why we all speak of this effort as health care reform.
In dozens of living rooms and conference halls, in emergency rooms of hospitals and on street corners, the message that I hear from the people of New Jersey is that we need reform.
Our current system is not working as it should; those who have health coverage are paying too much for it, and those without health coverage deserve it. . . .
What people want most is some control of escalating health care costs.
What people fear the most is losing their health care if they change jobs or get laid off or lose a job because of a corporate bankruptcy.
What perplexes them as well, when they're confronted with all these escalating costs of health care, is the power of the insurance industry.
Want coverage for your heart problem?
The insurance company says no because it's a pre-existing condition.
In other words, the insurance company will insure you for everything but the heart condition that is most likely to generate the health costs for your family.
In confronting skyrocketing health care costs, small business is left to the mercy of insurance companies.
Small businesses have no leverage to negotiate with insurance companies.
Too often they're presented with a take-it or leave-it choice that only offers exorbitant costs for health care coverage.
Each of us can enumerate countless occasions in our states when we've had interactions with small-business people who've simply said they can't afford to cover the workers in their particular small business, they can't afford to cover because they were told by the insurance company that it's $6,000 or $7,000 a person and they have no leverage to negotiate with the insurance company.
If you get open-heart surgery, the tab is $49,000. A Caesarean section birth, $7,500.
Remarkably, women of higher incomes have more Caesarean section births.
I don't think that's related to a differential in the size of the birth canal; it's related to the ability to afford to pay.
And a visit to an orthopedist, $300 for the first visit, $175 for each visit after that.
Most people have become accustomed to good health care, even with these costs.
The health care simply costs too much, more than it should cost.
When President Clinton proposed health care reform last year, none of us thought he was imagining the problem.
There was consensus that we should act, we should do something.
The political noise of the last 12 months aside, health care reform is as needed today as it was then.
The families who need it are still here, in New Jersey and all of our states.
The families that don't have the health care need it as much today as they did a year ago.
All those of us who were paying health costs today are paying too much today, just as we were paying too much a year ago. . . .
It is the job of Government to protect the public health and welfare in the short and long term of its citizens.
How to do this in the area of health care is the essence of what this debate is all about.
Our fundamental goal should be to enable a competitive health care marketplace to keep people healthy but take care of them when it does not.
By and large, America's health care system is an excellent system, but it does have a few glaring faults.
We should block or undermine those elements that work in our current system.
We should fix those areas that don't work, and in so doing, improve the overall system.
Recent trends suggest the health care markets are becoming more competitive and efficient.
We can spur that process by insuring that insurance companies compete on price and quality, not on their ability to omit high-risk patients.
Managed competition is beginning to bring better health care at lower prices to many Americans.


Unitil Corp.(UTL,A) reports earnings for 12mos to June 30


Benjamin Esterman, 88, Dies; Ophthalmologist and Surgeon
Dr.
Benjamin Esterman, an eye surgeon who helped found the specialized glaucoma clinic at the Manhattan Eye, Ear and Throat Hospital in 1936, died on Sunday at Peninsula Hospital Center in Far Rockaway, Queens.
He was 88 and lived in Lawrence, L.I.
The cause was cancer, his family said.


Therapy In a Squeeze
After the last few years of design being whittled down to its essentials, it's refreshing to find objects that bring a smile.
Charm and humor may yet become the new lingua franca, speaking through small pleasures.
In time for Labor Day, a few whimsical host -- or crowd -- pleasers.


Robertson-Ceco Corp.(RHH,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Police to Start New Program For Homeless
Seeking to reduce the number of homeless people living on the streets, the Giuliani administration will soon assign a new team of police officers to persuade the homeless to move to shelters, city officials said yesterday.
Under the plan, the Police Department will train at least 36 plainclothes officers and their supervisors to work the streets from vans, city officials said.
The citywide program is expected to start late this fall.


Tandycrafts Inc.(TAC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


A Matter of Timing
In raising interest rates on Tuesday, the Federal Reserve invoked a belief that is dogma on Wall Street and often challenged elsewhere -- that the American economy is not capable of moving toward more prosperity now.
That view is not stated so baldly.
Softer language is used.
The nation does not have enough qualified workers to supply a stronger economy, the argument goes.
Nor are there enough factories, machinery and computers, or enough steel and other materials used in manufacturing.
So allowing economic growth to continue unchecked will result in too much competition for scarce resources and a lot of inflation.


Vests That Double As Carryalls
DESIGNERS of outdoor clothing are looking for ways to make better use of materials.
Nowhere is that sense of purpose more developed than in the vest, a versatile piece of clothing.
People who fish know best about vests.
A patchwork of pockets has become a trademark for anglers who want their fishing gear within easy reach.
But now Stream Designs, a company in New York, and Trail Designs, its outdoor-clothing affiliate, have embellished vest design.


United Retail Group Inc.(URGI,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to July 30


Mexican Voters' Multiple Choice: Nine Parties
For about as far as the eye can see, the city's elegant central boulevard called Reforma is awash with banners and signs promoting the nine candidates in the presidential election on Sunday.
At first it appears to be an untidy blossoming of democracy.
But on closer inspection it looks more like an arrangement of artificial flowers, a set piece left over from the days when the governing party was a sure winner and democracy in Mexico was represented by small opposition parties that received nearly all their support from the Government they were supposed to be opposing.


Better Agency Planning Can Cut Overtime
To the Editor:
Re your Aug. 9 news article on New York City's exceeding its budgeted overtime costs: It is true that each agency must find its own remedy.


Dernau Journal; A Great Red Wine? The Rhineland? Don't Laugh
Werner Nakel is one of the few people in this country who woke up every morning this summer hoping that the record-breaking, sun-drenched heat wave that began at the end of June wouldn't break just yet.
Mr.
Nakel is a winemaker in the Rhineland, and in a gray, cool climate that often seems to skip over summer altogether, this year's blue skies and almost Mediterranean warmth hold the promise of a vintage of the century -- barring weather disasters, for which there is still plenty of time.


Essay; On Keeping Diaries
Like everyone else, I smacked my lips at the revelations in a young Treasury aide's diary of the President being "furious" at a friend's decision to remove himself from the Whitewater line of fire.
Like everyone else, I derided the aide's ludicrous attempts to wriggle away from his written record -- as, for example, in his description of a high official's attempt to deceive a Senate committee with half-truths as "gracefully ducking" questions.


Analog Devices Inc.(ADI,N) reports earnings for Qtr to July 30


Rebuilt West Side Highway Is a Trojan Horse
To the Editor:
Re your Aug. 2 news article on the proposal to rebuild Manhattan's West Side Highway: Along with the Clean Air Campaign headed by Marcy Benstock, many groups have opposed aspects of the plan, with official support from Community Board 2 and Assemblywoman Deborah Glick.
There is consensus in the West Village for detaching residential streets from the highway, just as on the Upper West Side and from the Franklin D. Roosevelt Drive on the East Side.


U.N. Population Report Urges Family-Size Choice for Women
The best way to avert a catastrophic global population explosion is to give women more choice in the size of their families and greater access to education and health care, a United Nations report on world population trends declared today.
The strong advocacy of family planning and women's choice by the United Nations Population Fund comes just three weeks before a major United Nations population conference opens in Cairo, where proposals about the role of abortion and birth control in managing population growth have already drawn fire from the Vatican and some Islamic groups.


Aikens Found Guilty
A Federal jury in Kansas City, Mo., yesterday found the former Royals first baseman WILLIE AIKENS guilty of selling crack cocaine to an undercover police officer.
The jury began deliberating the five charges against Aikens late yesterday morning and returned the verdict in the afternoon.
Aikens, who played for the Royals from 1980-83, was convicted on four counts of selling crack and one count of involving a gun in a drug transaction.
The defense rested its case without calling Aikens to testify.


Students Gain but Fall Short Of Goals
American students have gained almost a full grade level in science proficiency since the 1983 report "A Nation at Risk" described a crisis in American schools.
There have also been gains in math, but there were none in reading and writing skills, and overall achievement levels are far below national goals, the Department of Education said today.
A longstanding gap in the achievement levels of white and minority students is continuing, too, according to a department trends-in-education report.
The slow but steady progress made by minority students in the early 1980's has stalled, department officials said.


Hints for Returning Bachelors of the 90's
WHEN it comes to home maintenance, some bachelors in the 1990's still rank somewhere between 9-year-olds at summer camp and barnyard animals.
Retro as it may seem, their world is characterized by beer-can bookshelves, tennis rackets for spaghetti strainers and dust balls the size of St.
Bernard puppies.
Moreover, they actually believe the terms "heat and serve" and "permanent press."
Personal experience has revealed that there is only one thing worse than being a bachelor homemaker -- that's being a born-again bachelor homemaker, following separation or divorce.
The callow lug out of college who moves into a ninth-floor glorified detention cell simply repeats design strategies learned in the dormitory.


National Beverage reports earnings for Year to Apri 30


WHITE HOUSE GETS 3 NEW SUPPORTERS OF THE CRIME BILL
The Administration gained Congressional votes for the stalled crime package today as possible compromises began taking shape, but it remained shy of the number necessary to bring the bill back to the House floor.
Three members of the Congressional Black Caucus said that they would vote with the Administration, and Leon E. Panetta, the White House chief of staff, was optimistic enough to predict a vote as early as Thursday on moving the bill to the floor.


CHRONICLE
Pope JOHN PAUL II, who is recuperating from a broken thighbone, left Rome yesterday for a vacation in the mountains of northwest Italy, Reuters reported.
An avid mountaineer and hiker in his youth, the 74-year-old Pontiff will spend 10 days at a chalet at an altitude of 4,300 feet in the Aosta valley near the French border.


A New Challenge for Thatcher's 'Best Brain'
There are those who believe that Alexander Patrick Greysteil Hore-Ruthven, otherwise known as the Earl of Gowrie, is drinking deep from what The Financial Times of London says could be a poisoned chalice.
The job he took on, as of April 1, is the chairmanship of the newly organized Arts Council of England, for five years.
The chalice might seem poisoned for any number of reasons.
The left in Britain has complained for years that the Tories starved the arts, first by halting expansion in subsidies and then, last year, by actually cutting the Arts Council budget by $5 million.


Arden Group Inc.(ARDNA,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to July 2


Becker Is Blunt: Court Is Not a Music Hall
They turned down the volume yesterday at the Volvo International, site of Andre Agassi's tone deaf reaction to the ATP Tour's misguided innovation of setting midmatch change-overs to music in an attempt to keep fans entertained even when the balls aren't bouncing.
But Agassi, on a very sour note, was gone and vowing never to return, and nobody, particularly the tournament officials who let their event be used as a musical testing ground, seemed entertained by that.


Neutrogena Corp.(NGNA,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


INSIDE
Victim's Kin Get Children
Two children whose Jordanian father fled with them to Jordan after killing their mother left Amman to return to New Jersey in the custody of their mother's relatives.
Page B1.
Students Improve in Math
American students gained almost a full grade level in science proficiency since the 1983 report "A Nation at Risk." But there were no gains in reading and writing skills.
Page B11.
The Police and the Homeless
Seeking to reduce the number of homeless people on the streets, the Giuliani administration will soon assign a new police team to persuade them to move to shelters.
Page B1.
Florida Immigrant Tide
Florida officials pondered whether to declare an immigration emergency after nearly 500 more Cuban refugees were picked up at sea.
Page A14.


Hakuba Journal; Japan Slips and Slides Toward the Winter Games
This village in the northern Japanese Alps has been suffering through an unusually harsh heat wave, but on a recent steamy morning, just beyond a band of dark green rice fields, imaginations were soaring to winter.
At a new ski jump, covered with synthetic turf and slicked with water for summer use, one member after another of Japan's Olympic team rumbled down the slope, launched skyward and floated high above crowds of awed admirers.
The demonstration was just one sign of the anxious preparations here for the 1998 Winter Olympics, to be based in the nearby city of Nagano.
The planning has left officials both proud and worried as they struggle to complete what may be well over $5 billion in projects, including a multibillion-dollar extension of the bullet train.
By contrast, the Winter Games this year in Lillehammer, Norway, cost approximately $1 billion.


Dresser Industries(DI,N) reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Venezuela's Tight Grip Has Investors Gasping
Venezuela's largest foreign investor, a consortium led by the GTECorporation, is slashing by 40 percent its budget for upgrading the country's antiquated telephone system.
American Airlines is ending its daily flight from Caracas to New York next month, and is curtailing two other flights, to Miami and San Juan, P.R., effectively cutting its service by nearly half.


Cisco Systems Inc.(CSCO,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


When the Face of Evil Is 13: A Small Town's Pain
The timeless tree-covered ridges that shelter this village and its 970 residents still seem like bulwarks against the outside world.
Residents continue to stop by the small post office to pick up mail and exchange gossip.
They buy groceries or a six-pack at a general store, or drop in at the Savona Diner for a cheeseburger or the daily special, which today was baked lasagna at $4.95 a plate.
But change was inevitable here in the wake of the murder of 4-year-old Derrick Robie last year, and then the arrest of a 13-year-old village boy, Eric Smith.


Democrats' New Overseer Is Everybody's Mr. Inside
When Congress last year was blocking final Government approval of a genetically engineered hormone that had cost hundreds of millions of dollars to develop, the drug's maker, the giant chemical concern Monsanto, turned for advice to a man renowned for his skills as a legislative strategist.
When Sun Diamond Growers, the California agribusiness, organized a dinner earlier this year to retire the Congressional campaign debt of Henry Espy, brother of Agriculture Secretary Mike Espy, it called on one of the most prolific fund-raisers in the history of the Democratic Party.


No Moore but No Shift In Jets' Offensive Style
Suddenly, the Jets are faced with the first major problem of the Pete Carroll regime.
Or, as the ebullient Jets coach might put it, their first opportunity.
Whatever it's called, the Jets will have to fill the void left by Rob Moore, who broke his wrist against the Eagles last Saturday and will miss at least the first two regular-season games.
Moore was to be the Jerry Rice of the Jets' sophisticated 49ers-style attack this season.


Mexico's Leaders vs. Fraud: Can the Image Be Overcome?
To purge the stain of illegitimacy from Mexican elections, the Government has spent hundreds of millions of dollars on new voter-registration cards, brought in foreign experts to audit its voter rolls and developed a special ink that voters won't be able to wash off their thumbs in order to vote again.
When Mexicans choose their next President on Sunday, the slots in the ballot boxes will have been narrowed to discourage ballot stuffing.
Governing party organizers will face jail sentences if they pay for votes, and tens of thousands of observers will be on guard around the country to make sure they don't try.


Owners Agree to Come to the Bargaining Table
In an early score for the Federal mediators, they succeeded yesterday not only in getting the negotiators for striking players and owners to agree to meet again, but they also persuaded owners to end their boycott of the talks and come to the bargaining table.
John Calhoun Wells, director of the Federal Mediation and Conciliation Service, announced the developments after meeting separately with both sides in Manhattan on the seventh day of the strike.
Wells said he would meet with negotiators jointly Monday to schedule a series of bargaining sessions.


Cowell Wins By 2 Shots In Met Open
Charlie Cowell, the assistant at Green Brook Country Club in nearby North Caldwell, proved today that he had learned a hard lesson by losing two big golf tournaments after losing his concentration.
The 32-year-old Cowell curtailed his habit of counting his birdies before they were hatched today and, in the process, he captured the Met Open, the area's most prestigious golf tournament, by two strokes.
Cowell's name now joins Walter Hagen, Byron Nelson and Gene Sarazen as Met Open champions.


Smithfield Foods (SFDS,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Volvo Might Have Heard Lendl's Bouncy Swan Song
The dulcet strains of "Penny Lane," Ivan Lendl's chosen theme song at the failed musical experiment this Volvo International tennis event has become, won't be heard again.
Nostalgia isn't one of the 34-year-old Lendl's strong suits -- he selected the song out of serendipity rather than sentiment over his 12th and possibly last visit at the event.
But he seemed genuinely regretful after No. 7-seeded Marc Rosset's unbreakable serve sent the Swiss player into the quarterfinals and sent Lendl home to nearby Goshen for a weekend of golf.


Quorum Health Group Inc.(QHGI,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Corrections
An article last Friday about a Bosnian boy's treatment for leukemia in New York misspelled his doctor's name.
The doctor, director of the Hassenfeld Children's Center for Cancer and Blood Disorders at New York University Medical Center, is Aaron Rausen.


Pataki Account Is Ordered To Refund D'Amato Money
Democratic officials won the first round today in their legal challenge to Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato's plans to spend nearly $400,000 in campaign funds on behalf of George E. Pataki, a Republican gubernatorial candidate.
The decision could have a significant impact on Mr.
Pataki's campaign spending in his primary campaign against Richard M. Rosenbaum.
He must win the primary election on Sept. 13 to take on Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo.
And the ruling gave the Cuomo and Rosenbaum campaigns a new chance to highlight Mr.
D'Amato's support for Mr.
Pataki, a relationship that they have used to question Mr.
Pataki's independence.


Corrections
An article in Weekend last Friday about minor league baseball teams misstated the distance between New York City and Utica, N.Y.
It is 239 miles.


Siberian Village Rethinks Cost of Nuclear Projects
Mikhail V. Herman has one of the most unusual houses in all of Siberia.
A log cabin just off this village's only paved street, built by his father 70 years ago and shielded by a cherry tree, it has a digital radiation meter with foot-high numbers attached to the weathered logs of its exterior.
With its bright orange window frames, the cabin looked like many other homes in this village until last year, when a tank full of plutonium exploded at the Tomsk-7 nuclear installation.
The winds spewed plutonium in a northwest trace across the nearby villages and towns.
Soon after, officials from Tomsk-7 came by and installed the meter, telling Mr.
Herman to call them on the village's only telephone if the reading reached 100, which so far it has not.


Richards Dropped By TGI Friday's
Five agencies are competing for the account of TGI Friday's Inc., with billings estimated at $27 million, after the restaurant chain said it would end its relationship with the Richards Group in Dallas, effective on Oct. 7.
"The restaurant business is highly competitive by nature and we desire a partner who can focus on the TGI Friday's business without conflict," Steve Hickey, senior vice president of marketing for Friday's in Dallas, said last week.


COMPANY BRIEFS
COCA-COLA ENTERPRISES INC., Atlanta, a bottling and distribution company that is 43 percent owned by the Coca-Cola Company, said its board had authorized the repurchase of up to 10 million, or 7.7 percent, of the company's outstanding shares.
NEWELL CO., Freepoint, Ill., a manufacturer and marketer of consumer staples in hardware, housewares and office products, agreed to acquire Home Fashions Inc., Westminster, Calif., a maker of window coverings, for undisclosed terms.


No Headline
"People who are saying these are going to be truly democratic elections are confusing the start of this process with the end. It is as though at the moment of Brown vs. the Board of Education of Topeka, they were saying that segregation was over." SERGIO AGUAYO, a political scientist in Mexico.  [ A1:2. ]


Don't Expect Congress to Protect Your Privacy
To the Editor:
In "A National Registry for Work" (editorial, Aug. 8) you express unqualified support for the new Federal proposal to establish a computerized registry that would include all citizens, linked to their Social Security numbers, as well as all immigrants authorized to work in the United States so that employers would be able to determine every job applicant's identity.


India Casts Its Subtle Spell on Queens
WE are always happy walking in the bustling Indian enclave on 74th Street in Jackson Heights, Queens.
It makes me giggle with delight, the way I laughed the first time my wife escorted me into the marketplace in Pune, or the days we walked the streets in Bombay.
The spices, the colors, the characters.
It was just nuts.
My theory is, visitors are either depressed by the poverty in India or touched by the colorful and artful persistence of life itself.
You cannot be neutral.
My wife, having been to India 11 times as a volunteer for a child-care agency, has taught me to love it.
We cannot afford the carfare to India every week, but we can surely drive or take the subway to one little corner of India.
You always see something different.


Standex Intl(SXI,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Japan's Rocket Unable to Launch
Japan's budding space program was set back today when the liftoff of its new H-II rocket was aborted at the last second.
At six seconds before liftoff, the rocket's main liquid fuel engine was ignited, but the solid fuel booster rockets then failed to ignite and the launching was halted.


Holocaust Memorial To Become Reality


Abroad at Home; Free Speech, Except --
Freedom for political speech has broader support in this country than ever before, I believe.
Past repression of unpopular speakers seems anomalous today.
One thing on which most conservatives and liberals now agree is respect for the First Amendment.
But not the U.S.
Department of Justice.
Not, at least, if one goes by an astonishing brief the Department has just filed.
In the teeth of precedent and logic, it argues that immigrants in this country have only as much freedom of speech as the Government considers reasonable -- and can be deported if they cross that vague line.


Art in Review
'Photography in Germany, 1913-1935'
Howard Schickler Fine Art  52 East 76th Street  Manhattan  Through next Friday
The exuberantly experimental approach to photography championed during the 1920's by Laszlo Moholy-Nagy was countered by the work of other artists in Germany who used photography with a minimum of manipulation to describe the world in scrupulously accurate detail.
This small survey emphasizes images by notable photographers who worked in this manner, including Albert Renger-Patzsch, Aenne Biermann and Verner Mantz.


High-Tech Ohio Courtroom Provides Glimpse Of Future (and Preview of the Simpson Trial)
The country's most-watched murder case is about to go high-tech, with lawyers in the O. J. Simpson trial planning to use the newest computer and video technology to present evidence and possibly graphic re-enactments to the jury.
Plans to wire the Los Angeles courtroom for next month's trial will offer millions of Americans their first view of the trial of the future, where computer disks replace endless stacks of paper, and monitors can bring witnesses to the courtroom from hundreds of miles away.


Red, Yellow and Blue From a Wordsmith's Prism
The Primary Colors
Three Essays
By Alexander Theroux
268 pages. Henry Holt &amp; Company. $17.95.
Alexander Theroux's last book, "An Adultery" (1987), was less a conventional novel than one man's grandiloquent monologue about an unhappy love affair, a monologue that frequently threatened to become a veritable anatomy of adultery in all its shapes, moods and forms.
This time out, Mr.
Theroux makes no bones about emulating Robert Burton's 17th-century classic, "The Anatomy of Melancholy." Although his subject, the three primary colors, may initially seem like a peculiarly limited topic, he has brought to bear on it all his imaginative gifts as a novelist, and like Burton, he has produced a charmingly allusive book that enchants and provokes and often dazzles.


Trade Deficit In June Was A Bit Smaller
In a report that analysts said reflected a recovering global economy, the Commerce Department reported yesterday that the nation's monthly trade deficit fell slightly in June.
The 1.6 percent decline, to a seasonally adjusted $9.37 billion, from $9.51 billion in May, was primarily due to larger exports, which rose to a record level in June.


Red Hot Chili Peppers Keep the Party Going
On Wednesday, the Red Hot Chili Peppers, returning from their appearance at Woodstock '94, performed an unscheduled concert at the Academy.
The 1,400 tickets that had gone on sale that morning had been snapped up in less than four minutes, and in the evening the Los Angeles hard-rock and funk quartet validated its popularity by playing music that was fun but not necessarily good.
The Red Hot Chili Peppers are as well known for their willingness to get naked at the drop of a drumstick as they are for their music, a fusion of choppy funk and testosterone-fueled rock that has inspired countless mediocre bands.
Except for when band members dived into the audience after the encore, the shirtless Chili Peppers were a shadow of their usually hyper selves.
But the simple, monster drumbeat of Chad Smith and the over-plucked bass lines of Flea on songs like "Backwoods" and "The Power of Equality" were enough to rev up an audience eager to slam-dance.


Bipartisan Group Reports Agreement on Proposal
After nearly coming apart earlier in the day, a bipartisan group of senators announced tonight that they had reached an agreement on a proposed compromise on national health insurance legislation.
The plan is expected to put much more emphasis on deficit reduction than the proposals of President Clinton and Democratic Congressional leaders.
At the same time, it is likely to fall well short of the universal coverage Mr.
Clinton has said he would insist on.





A Reconciliation at Injured Girl's Bed
First, they shared a ride from the hospital.
Then they talked for hours, crying over their estrangement.
Now the grandmother and mother of Lidiya Kitayev are reconciled, but they fear it may be too late to help the child.
Two weeks after the 7-year-old Belarussian girl was dragged down four floors to the street in her father's suicide leap, she remains hospitalized in critical condition.
Lidiya is so sedated she appears to be unaware of the two women who have crossed the world to be at her bedside.


Hakuba Journal; Japan Slips and Slides Toward the Winter Games
This village in the northern Japanese Alps has been suffering through an unusually harsh heat wave, but on a recent steamy morning, just beyond a band of dark green rice fields, imaginations were soaring to winter.
At a new ski jump, covered with synthetic turf and slicked with water for summer use, one member after another of Japan's Olympic team rumbled down the slope, launched skyward and floated high above crowds of awed admirers.
The demonstration was just one sign of the anxious preparations here for the 1998 Winter Olympics, to be based in the nearby city of Nagano.
The planning has left officials both proud and worried as they struggle to complete what may be well over $5 billion in projects, including a multibillion-dollar extension of the bullet train.
By contrast, the Winter Games this year in Lillehammer, Norway, cost approximately $1 billion.


Owens-Corning's Blurred Identity
The Owens-Corning Fiberglas Corporation wants to "get pinker," its chief executive said yesterday.
Glen H. Hiner, also the company's chairman, announced a $10 million corporate-identity program that will seek to change the company's image and associate its global products line with the Pink Panther, the rascally but lovable cartoon character.


Cuomo Pledges 2d Installment Of Tax Cuts In the Future
In a campaign in which tax cuts have emerged as both a promise and a political weapon, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo today pledged a second installment in the cuts enacted this year, saying he wants to reduce the state tax burden as much as $1.5 billion more over several years.
The announcement was the latest in a series of dueling tax cut promises from the three men running for Governor.
Mr.
Cuomo's two Republican rivals today portrayed his proposal -- which contained no specifics and was essentially a pledge to develop a plan -- as hollow electioneering.
His main rival, George E. Pataki again used the opportunity to attack Mr.
Cuomo over the state's tax rate, though he himself has released only the barest details of his own plans.


Bangladesh Writer Vows to Fight From Exile
After two fearful months spent in hiding in her native Bangladesh, Taslima Nasrin emerged today for the first time in her new sanctuary in Sweden, vowing to press on with her fight against Muslim fundamentalists who have called for her death because of her writing.
Seeming at times nervous and uncertain and appearing under police guard before a carefully screened public gathering of some 150 reporters and Swedish supporters, Ms.
Nasrin said she would continue to write and speak against Muslim fundamentalism, which she described as "spreading darkness in many parts of the world."


Art in Review
'Flowers'
Witkin Gallery  415 West Broadway (near Spring Street)  SoHo  Through next Friday
This enjoyable treatment of a perennially popular summer theme includes both familiar images and welcome surprises.
In the category of classics are such different works as Imogen Cunningham's sensuous black-and-white rendering of twining calla lilies, from around 1929, and Walker Evans's 1930 photograph of a floral motif on a scrap of stamped tin.


Exercise and Smoking
To the Editor:
In an Aug. 10 interview with the essayist-humorist Fran Lebowitz, I was dismayed by Ms.
Lebowitz's attitude about smoking.


Three Judges Spurn Protest On Whitewater Prosecutor
The three-judge panel that selected Kenneth W. Starr as the Whitewater independent prosecutor issued an order today that in effect brushed aside a complaint about the appointment from a senior Democratic Senator.
The Senator, Carl Levin of Michigan, wrote to the panel on Friday urging the members to ask Mr.
Starr for a full accounting of his recent partisan activities and issue an opinion stating whether he could fairly investigate a case involving a Democratic President.


Alice Childress, 77, a Novelist; Drew Themes From Black Life
Alice Childress, an actress and a writer of plays and novels, including "A Hero Ain't Nothin' but a Sandwich," died on Sunday at Astoria General Hospital in Queens.
She was 77 and lived in Manhattan.
The cause was cancer, said her husband, Nathan Woodard.


A Brooklyn Woman Is Charged After the Death of Her Infant Son
A Brooklyn mother was arrested yesterday morning and charged with endangering the welfare of a child after the death of her 19-month-old son, who had severe internal injuries, the police said.
The baby, Angel Cruz Jr., was pronounced dead at Wyckoff Hospital on Wednesday afternoon, said Sgt.
John McCluskey, a police spokesman.
While the cause of death has not been determined by the Medical Examiner's Office, the mother, Lisa Cruz, 24, of 1532 Gates Avenue in Bushwick, was arrested yesterday after undergoing hours of questioning by detectives at the 83d Precinct.


Corrections
The Home Video column last Friday misidentified a company in San Mateo, Calif., that makes CD-ROM's.
It is Digital Pictures, not Digital Arts.


Close Call in California


Hormel (Geo. A) &amp; Co.  (HRL,N) reports earnings for Qtr to July 30


Lotus Development
Shares of the Lotus Development Corporation, which have been trading in the mid-40's, abruptly fell yesterday after a Dean Witter analyst said other Wall Street analysts' third-quarter earnings estimates were too high.
Software sales in September are likely to be soft, the analyst said.


Parker &amp; Parsley Petroleum Co.(PDP,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Corrections
An article in Business Day on Aug. 11 about the fourth-quarter financial results of the Procter &amp; Gamble Company misstated the percentage increases for the company's net income for the fiscal year.
Excluding one-time charges, net income rose 14.8 percent, not 12.8 percent, for the 1994 fiscal year from the previous year, and earnings per share rose 15.3 percent, not 13.3 percent.


Florida Gets the Decisiveness It Sought
For days, Gov.
Lawton Chiles of Florida had pressed the Clinton Administration to do something decisive about the wave of Cuban refugees flowing to the state's southernmost shores.
Tonight the Governor got his wish.
The announcement by United States Attorney General Janet Reno that the Government would begin detaining the arriving Cubans for an indefinite period was greeted warmly by Mr.
Chiles, who said in an interview on CNN, "It's a day that I'm delighted is here."


Insurance Rollbacks Are Upheld
The California Supreme Court yesterday upheld an insurance reform measure passed by California voters in 1988 that required insurance companies to roll back auto insurance premiums and gave the state insurance commissioner broad powers to control prices and profits.
The ruling clears the way for the commissioner to order insurance companies to refund as much as $1 billion to millions of California auto insurance customers.
The court decision, which was unanimous, also affirmed the authority of the commissioner to require the 700 insurance companies operating in the state to obtain approval for rate changes for all property and casualty insurance that includes homeowner policies.


The Spoken Word
"THE SCREWTAPE LETTERS," Church of the Advent Hope, 111 East 87th Street, Manhattan.
A reading of work by C. S. Lewis with music by Benjamin Britten, Frank Bridge and Frederick Delius.
Today at 7 P.M.
Free.
Information: (212) 534-8245.
"TIBET ON TWO (BENT) WHEELS," Tibetan Museum, 338 Lighthouse Avenue, Lighthouse Hill, S.I.
Norman Eng shows slides of his bicycle trip across the Tibetan plateau.
Sunday at 2 P.M.
Admission: $2 in addition to regular museum admission: $3; $2.50 for the elderly; $1 for children.
Information: (718) 987-3500.


Sports of The Times; Jets Had Their Own Woodstock
THE gaudy tie-dyed shirt was Jeff Lageman's gesture of solidarity to Woodstocks, past and present.
Just because a man is working brutal two-a-day practices doesn't mean he can't pay homage to rock festivals on his lunch hour.
What Lageman didn't know was that this week was also the 25th anniversary of another historic event -- the first meeting ever between the Giants and the Jets, the haves and have-nots.


A Giant Lives Up To His Name
There will not be any explosive quotes from Giant guard Lance Smith.
He will not call Jet Coach Pete Carroll a punk, or predict that the Giants will win the Super Bowl.
Coaches will never have to worry that Smith will show up 30 pounds overweight from eating too many Pop Tarts.
There will be no mohawks.
No Nike commercials.
It is said that offensive linemen live mostly in anonymity, the only time they hear their names is when they grab too much jersey.
If that is the case, then Smith is an invisible man.
But it is the kind of anonymity Smith enjoys.


Signing Is Another Fast Development for Dare
Willis Reed, the Nets' general manager, never believed that Yinka Dare would be available with pick No. 14.
He was also short on optimism when it came to signing the 7-foot, 265-pound George Washington University center to a National Basketball Association contract.
"We took a young man that, if he had stayed in school another year, he definitely would have been a lottery pick," Reed said today, the day Dare officially joined the Nets after signing a multiyear, multimillion-dollar contract.
Dare became the third 1994 first-round pick to sign to date.
"And I thought the signing would be a process by which we had to wait to slide him in after people ahead of us and behind us had signed.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-11  PLUTONIUM, A TREASURE AND PERIL  As the United States searches for a safe way to get rid of bomb-grade plutonium, Russia not only wants to save the material being taken from weapons but also to make still more in the quest for energy.
A1  RUSSIA SUSPECTS 3 NUCLEAR SITES  Russian officials are investigating three sites from which they suspect nuclear materials were diverted, American experts said.
A11


Mandela's First 100 Days: 'On Course,' He Says
In May, Nelson Mandela inherited a violent, desperately unequal, anxious but promising country governed by a white minority.
Today, 100 days later, he presides over a violent, desperately unequal, anxious but promising country governed by a black majority.


East Williston Citizens Block Legislative Theft of Their Streets
There is joy again in East Williston.
Nassau County officials told the village today that they intend to honor its borders on the new county legislative map.


WHITE HOUSE SEES A COMPROMISE SET ON THE CRIME BILL
President Clinton and Democratic Congressional leaders emerged from a hastily arranged White House meeting today with what aides said was a compromise that could gain enough Republican converts to rescue the crime bill and win House passage by early next week.
At the same time, various groups of House Republicans were setting their own terms for a deal with Mr.
Clinton, but it appeared that the White House was resisting any broad compromise and seeking instead to win just enough Republican votes to allow the President to win a narrow victory.


Feed a Hunger for Horror On Uncle Vincent's Treats
To some people, Vincent Price is just another B-movie actor, but to the folks at Film Forum 2 he is the official patron saint of their Annual Festival of Fantasy, Horror and Science Fiction.
A large, affectionate cult of moviegoers grew up watching Mr.
Price, who died last year at the age of 82.
No one was better at playing madmen oozing charm.
Tim Burton, the director of "Batman" and "Edward Scissorhands," is the most visible among those who idolize Mr.
Price, but the feeling is easy to understand.
The audience sensed that no matter how horrific a character he played, Mr.
Price was in on the joke, like a favorite uncle who told deliciously scary bedtime stories.


Man Says He Lied at Trial In Crown Heights Killing
A Brooklyn man who was a defense witness in Lemrick Nelson Jr.'s first trial, and who then changed his story, helping to prompt new state and Federal investigations into the killing of a Hasidic man in Crown Heights, said yesterday that he had lied at every turn.
The man, John Anderson, pleaded guilty in Federal District Court in Brooklyn to giving false testimony to Federal officials, saying he was not even present when Yankel Rosenbaum was stabbed to death in the first of four nights of racial unrest in August 1991.


Anne Turpin, 70, Learning Director
Anne Freeman Turpin, a retired director of special learning at St.
Bernard's School in Manhattan, died yesterday at her home in Richmond.
She was 70.
The cause was cancer, said her son, Douglas Ochs Adler.


Airport-Rail Plan Makes Very Little Sense
To the Editor:
"Speed the Train to the Plane" (editorial, Aug. 11) offers misplaced support for the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey's plan for a Manhattan train connection to La Guardia and Kennedy International Airports, despite your acknowledgment of the proposal's fundamental flaws.
You and the proposal's sponsors are trying to convince the public that there is a free lunch.


Barnes &amp; Noble Inc.(BKS,N) reports earnings for 13wks to July 30


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS  Unseeded Player Stuns Bruguera  Unseeded Bernd Karbacher of Germany advanced to the quarterfinals of the RCA Championships yesterday in Indianapolis with an upset of second-seeded Sergi Bruguera.
Karbacher said after his 7-6 (7-5), 7-6 (7-3) victory he knew he couldn't volley with Bruguera, ranked third in the world.
"You have to go for your best shots, and if you miss, you miss," Karbacher said.
The aggressive tactics paid off with a victory, putting Karbacher into a United States quarterfinal for the first time.
Bruguera became the fifth of the top six seeds to lose at the Indianapolis Tennis Center this week.
Only third-seeded Stefan Edberg, who last night defeated Richard Krajicek of the Netherlands, 6-1, 5-7, 6-4, has escaped upset. (AP)


Shuttle Countdown Halted at 1.9 Seconds
The flight of the space shuttle Endeavour was aborted just 1.9 seconds before liftoff early today, the closest to launch time the engines have ever been shut down.
Although none of the six-man crew were injured, they were forced to remain strapped in their seats for an hour as technicians at the Kennedy Space Center worked to shut down Endeavour's systems, and automatic safety systems hosed down the area around the ship with 300,000 gallons of water.
The shuttle carries 528,000 gallons of liquid hydrogen and oxygen propellants in its bullet-shaped external fuel tank.
Aborting a liftoff once the shuttle's engines have ignited is extremely perilous.


A Safety-Turned-Receiver Shows Promise for Patriots
Patriots 27, Redskins 17
Steve Hawkins, a safety in college who is being converted into a wide receiver, caught a pair of touchdown passes last night in his National Football League debut as the New England Patriots stayed unbeaten in the preseason.


Brinker Intl(EAT,N) reports earnings for Year to June 29


Sounds Around Town
Little Jimmy Scott
Little Jimmy Scott, Tavern on the Green, Central Park West at West 67th Street, (212) 873-3200.
Mr.
Scott's eerie, piercing alto with its cracks and crevices is a haunting instrument that suggests the ghost of Alberta Hunter channeled at 3 A.M. in a blue-lighted cigarette-smoke haze to contemplate life's romantic disappointments.
Mr.
Scott is performing songs from his new album, "Dream" (Sire/ Warner Brothers/Blue Horizon), which includes such classic tear-jerkers as "I Cried for You," "I'm Through With Love," and "Laughing on the Outside." Shows are tonight and tomorrow night at 9 and 11 and on Sunday at 8:30 and 10:30 P.M.
There is a $23.50 music charge today and tomorrow and a $17.50 music charge on Sunday; there is no minimum on any day.
STEPHEN HOLDEN Betty Carter
Betty Carter and Her Trio, the Blue Note, 131 West Third Street, Greenwich Village, (212) 475-8592.
One of the great divas of jazz, Ms.
Carter is a note-bending virtuoso who is constantly pushing the improvisatory envelope.
She knows exactly how far she can go without losing the emotional arc of a lyric.
Expect to hear selections from her forthcoming album, "Feed the Fire" (Verve), whose songs include "Lover Man," "If I Should Lose You" and "All or Nothing at All," and on which her singing is more abstract than usual.
Shows are at 9 and 11:30 P.M. today through Sunday.
There is a $27.50 music charge and a $5 minimum at tables or a $15 music charge and a one-drink minimum at the bar.
S.
H.


McHale Moves Up With the Timberwolves
KEVIN McHALE, the former Boston Celtics star, was named yesterday assistant general manager of the Minnesota Timberwolves.
The official hiring of McHale, originally from Hibbing, Minn., and a star at the University of Minnesota, came one day after Coach SIDNEY LOWE and two assistants were dismissed as part of the housecleaning by the new owner, GLEN TAYLOR.


Market Place
THOSE who missed the F.D.I.C.'s clearance sale a few years back have few chances left to establish a hefty presence in Texas banking.
Most of the merchandise is long gone.
By far the largest bank still based in Texas is Cullen/Frost Bankers Inc., its headquarters not Houston or Dallas but slower, sleepier San Antonio.
In recent years, its sale has been forecast as often as hot weather in a San Antonio August.


Art in Review
'Uncharted Territory'  'Contemporary Taiwanese Ceramics'
Taipei Gallery  McGraw-Hill Building  1221 Avenue of the Americas (at 48th Street)  Through next Friday
All of the 16 ceramicists in this show are of Taiwanese descent but at least in part American-trained.
Several of them studied painting or sculpture before turning to ceramics.
And all of them exploit this medium for its expressive rather than functional potential.


Justice Dept. Sides With Clinton on Woman's Suit
The Justice Department today threw its weight behind President Clinton's claim that the sexual harassment suit he is facing from a former Arkansas clerical worker should be put off until he leaves office.
In a brief to be filed with a Federal court in Little Rock on Friday, the Justice Department will argue that the President is immune from civil suit while he is in office.
To allow the sexual harassment suit to go forward, the Department argued, could irreparably interfere with the President's performance of his official duties.


Autodesk Inc.(ACAD,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Jack Sharkey, Boxing Champion, Dies at 91
Jack Sharkey, the bantering, cocksure boxer who captured the world heavyweight championship in an unlikely victory over Max Schmeling in 1932 and relinquished it a year and eight days later in an even less likely loss to Primo Carnera, died on Wednesday at the Beverly, Mass., hospital.
He was 91 years old and had been the oldest former heavyweight champion.
His family said the cause of death was respiratory arrest.


U.S. Author Gets Apology In Libel Case
An American author and his British publisher yesterday accepted substantial damages and an apology that effectively ended a libel action brought against them in English courts by Robert Maxwell and his newspaper company before his death.
The out-of-court settlement announced in High Court in London also ended a countersuit brought by the author, Seymour M. Hersh, and the publisher, Faber &amp; Faber Ltd.
The Maxwell lawsuit was prompted by Mr.
Hersh's 1991 book "The Samson Option," about Israel's nuclear weapons program.


A Night in the Underworld, A Day Pulling a Bank Job
For the time being, Roger Avary will remain better known as Quentin Tarantino's fellow writer (on "True Romance" and "Pulp Fiction") and fellow clerk (at Video Archives, that neo-Schwab's Drugstore in Manhattan Beach, Calif.) than as the writer and director of "Killing Zoe." Mr.
Avary's debut feature, fiercely ambitious but way out of control, is an orgiastically violent exercise in hand-me-down nihilism, much more firmly rooted in cinematic posturing than in real pain.
What has put Mr.
Tarantino on the map, and does not yet work for Mr.
Avary, is an ability to offset savage violence with outrageous wit, creating a vivid directorial perspective and lending that violence a moral dimension.
"Killing Zoe" has the bloodshed and the pretensions down pat, but in other respects it is noticeably slack.
Mr.
Avary may have urged his actors, most of whom play deadly, drug-crazed bank robbers, to read "Beowulf" for its Viking excesses (according to the production notes), but he neglects the simpler and more basic demands of this story.


To Milan and Love's Destiny by a Slippery Path
The production of "The Two Gentlemen of Verona" that opened last night in the Delacorte Theater probably deserves a pat on the back simply for showing up and behaving as confidently as it does.
The New York Shakespeare Festival was counting on a new version of Cole Porter's musical "Kiss Me Kate" for this slot.
Just before the summer season in Central Park began, however, plans collapsed and a substitute player had to be rushed into the lineup.
To the credit of all, haste has not made waste, although the evening's pleasures are on the intermittent side.


Maine Doctors Test Lawsuit Preventive
Doctors in Maine have a new tool in their medical bags, one designed to ward off malpractice lawsuits -- the simple affirmative defense that "I followed the clinical practice guidelines of my state."
In a five-year demonstration project, Maine has established such guidelines in four specialties: obstetrics-gynecology, radiology, emergency medicine and anesthesiology.


5 Sentenced in Check Fraud
Five people involved in an elaborate high-tech check forgery scheme were sentenced yesterday in Charlotte, N.C., after pleading guilty to bank fraud.
The cases involved a gang, based in Los Angeles, that has roamed the country cashing fake payroll checks made with computer desktop publishing equipment.


Bipartisan Health Plan
A group of moderate senators announced agreement on a health care bill straddling the center of the debate, but offered no details.
Page A20.


Before We Wreck the Health System . . .
America's health care system the world's finest -- consists of tens of millions of very complex parts.
It took nine years and $300 million, for example, just to develop and test Mevacor, the pill that reduces cholesterol.
And that is but one tiny part of the health care industry.
The health industry is twice the size of the U.S. auto industry.
It is 14 percent of our economy.
It affects every American from birth to death.
Successfully reshaping health care is far more complicated than building an aircraft carrier or designing the space shuttle or inventing the atomic bomb.


Haitians Brawl With U.S. M.P.'s
For the second time in a week, Haitian refugees at an American naval base in Cuba have brawled with United States military policemen, slightly injuring four Americans, the Pentagon said today.
No Haitians were hurt in the hourlong altercation that began shortly before midnight on Wednesday, when Army M.P.'s broke up a fight between a male refugee and a female refugee, a Pentagon spokesman said.


On My Mind; The Waldheim Bill
The papal knighthood conferred on Kurt Waldheim remains a mystery that can be explained only by Pope John Paul II, who does not.
But more important mysteries remain about the former Secretary General of the United Nations.
Now and at last Congress has been handed the opportunity to reveal any answers that are within the files of American intelligence.
Representative Carolyn B. Maloney, Democrat of Manhattan, has just introduced the War Crimes Disclosure Act, H.R. 4995.
It would push the Central Intelligence Agency to disclose relevant parts of the Waldheim dossier, which has been locked in its files for decades.
If the C.I.A. refuses, for the first time it would have to give some good, specific and appealable reasons.


For Children
Loula D. Lasker Swimming Pool and Skating Rink
Central Park  Harlem Meer (south of 110th Street)  Manhattan  (212) 534-7639  Recommended for all ages
Spotting the Lasker pool from afar, one child thought the turquoise vision was a mirage.
And it's true that from a distance on a humid morning, this 28-year-old pool, set amid the greenness of the park, seems unreal.
Thankfully, it is very real, having recently reopened after a $2.8 million renovation.
The water sparkles and seems extra clean, probably because the pool has a new, more efficient filtration system; chlorination, formerly done manually, is now performed automatically, Vijay Gupta, the renovation project's chief mechanical engineer, explained.
Unsightly concrete walls and gutters have been replaced with sleek stainless steel, and access ramps, showers and water fountains for the disabled have been added.
The tulip and cascade fountains, which hadn't worked in about five years, now gush like geysers, making splashy kiddie pools.
But what most children care about is feeling carefree.
Travis Lee, a 9-year-old who lives nearby, said it's a great pool because it's not too deep and he feels safe. (And the lifeguards are easy to spot in their neon-orange outfits.)
There are lockers (take your own lock), a snack bar and stadiumlike seating.
Hours: 11 A.M. to 7 P.M. daily through Sept. 5.
Attendance at city pools drops in August, so the pool is likely to be uncrowded, especially before noon and after 5 P.M.
Ferry Ride
NY Waterway  World Financial Center  West Street (between Vesey and Liberty Streets)  Lower Manhattan  (800) 53-FERRY  Monday through Friday
A lot of ferries zip across the Hudson River from Manhattan and New Jersey docks, but only one takes you from the World Financial Center to the Colgate clock at Exchange Place in Jersey City.
Indeed, the ride from Manhattan, where you can see the oversize clock across the water, drops you off almost under the timepiece.
It's a brief (five minutes) but glorious voyage from state to state, brisk enough to leave your hair looking like meringue if you sit on the ferry's open deck.
The clock sits on a large structure that looks like scaffolding, next to a sign that reads "Colgate" in red letters.
Up close, looking at the large minute and hour hands, which are black with red in the middle, you understand what it must have felt like to be a Lilliputian.
When we arrived on a recent visit, the clock read 3:27 P.M.; we watched the minute hand move, ever so slowly, to 3:28 P.M.
There are rungs around the clock face so that the repairman can make his way around (a tiny shed, way up high in back of the clock, might be, we figured, where that person lives.) We then walked through the adjacent parking lot to Exchange Place and a pier called the J. Owen Grundy Park.
One man was fishing and had caught one, which he said he would feed to his cat.
By the time we were back at the clock, it read 4:09 and a young visitor said, "We've been through a lot of minutes."
The Colgate-World Financial Center ferry runs only on weekdays and leaves about every 15 minutes from Manhattan, starting at 6:52 A.M. and continuing until 9:45 P.M.
Children 6 and under ride free; the round-trip fare for adults is $4.
On Saturdays and Sundays, ferries depart from the World Financial Center for Hoboken or Liberty State Park in New Jersey. 'Brooklyn Dodgers'
Brooklyn Historical Society  128 Pierrepont Street (at Clinton Street)  Brooklyn Heights  (718) 624-0890  Recommended ages: 5 and up
At least one 6-year-old boy in the baseball universe continues to look at the newspaper every day as if the major league games were still churning along.
He also talks about how Paul O'Neill (a Yankee) and Rico Brogna (of the Mets) are faring, as if they were still playing.
So in the continuing effort to stave off reality, we visited this show devoted to the long-ago Brooklyn Dodgers, who left in 1957 for Los Angeles.
Here's what the young fan considered important: a 10-cent comic-book cover depicting Jackie Robinson, as well as a picture of him as he signed on as a Dodger in 1947; a Pee Wee Reese baseball card; a base from Ebbets Field; the mitt Mickey Owen used in the fourth game of the 1941 World Series; a newspaper photograph of Ebbets Field being demolished by a wrecker's ball and assorted Dodger uniforms, bats and gloves.
This is but a small part of a permanent exhibition on Brooklyn neighborhoods and history, yet it could be significant for someone suffering the baseball-strike blues. (For a few guffaws, you should also seek out the funny mirror, circa 1920, in the Coney Island section.) The society is open Tuesday through Saturday, noon to 5 P.M.
Admission is $2.50 for adults and $1 for children; free for all on Wednesdays.
Summergarden
The Museum of Modern Art  The Abby Aldrich Rockefeller Sculpture Garden  14 West 54th Street  Manhattan  (212) 708-9491  Recommended for all ages  Through Aug. 27
Not even the warning of thunderstorms could keep one family from venturing out last Saturday night in the city, and it wasn't to see "The Lion King." (That had been done the night before.) The parents were desperate for high culture -- the Summergarden classical-music concerts at the Museum of Modern Art, in this case -- and were even optimistic that the children might appreciate it (or, at worst, be lulled to sleep).
But the thunderstorm got in the way and the concert was canceled.
The family returned home in the rain, uninspired and unhappy.
Maybe another family will have better luck this weekend or next.
The concerts, performed by musicians from the Juilliard School, are in their eighth year; the theme this summer is early 20th-century music.
"It's not fairy-tale music," said Sheila Porter, the concert's publicity agent, "but some kids really dig the music." The informality of Summergarden has, in fact, been attracting families (including infants, Ms. Porter said), even though it makes for a late evening. (The free concerts begin at 8:30 and end by 10 P.M.) There are no formal intermissions, but brief gaps between pieces allow families to make swift, discreet exits, if necessary.
Just don't knock over the Lachaise with your stroller.
The garden opens at 6 P.M. for the 8:30 P.M. concerts, on Friday and Saturday nights.
Ms.
Porter suggests arriving by 7 P.M. to get one of the 400 garden chairs (some people take their own seating).
Sandwiches, juice, wine and beer are sold in the garden, and dinner is served in the museum's restaurant from 5 to 11:30 P.M. (The museum is also open on Fridays until 8:30 P.M. and Saturdays until 6 P.M.) This weekend, the program is music for piano; next weekend, the Mosaic String Quartet is to play.
Keep in Mind
"REVEALING ROOTS: UNCOVERING INFLUENCES ON CONTEMPORARY AMERICAN PUPPET THEATER," an exhibition of various styles of puppets, divided by culture and heritage, including African, Mexican, Japanese, Indonesian, American Northwest and European traditions.
Through Sept. 30.
Hours: Monday and Thursday, noon to 8 P.M. and Tuesday, Wednesday, Friday and Saturday, noon to 6 P.M.
At the New York Public Library for the Performing Arts, 40 Lincoln Center Plaza, at West 65th Street.
Free.
Information: (212) 870-1630.
"OH, SO BIG AND SO, SO SMALL," a workshop contrasting the very large and the very tiny, at which participants will collect samples of insects and flora to put in a book and to use as subjects of paintings.
Kerlin Learning Center, Wave Hill, West 249th Street and Independence Avenue, Riverdale, the Bronx.
Tomorrow and Sunday, 1 to 4 P.M.
Free with museum admission: $4 for adults, $2 for children 6 and up.
Information: (718) 549-3200.
"SKY HUNTERS '94," a summer program featuring demonstrations by, and examinations of, birds of prey, including an African fish eagle that plunges 43 feet onto a stage, owls and a baby Andean condor.
At the Bronx Zoo, Bronx River Parkway at Fordham Road.
Show times: 11:30 A.M., 1:30 and 3:30 P.M. daily except Wednesday, weather permitting, through Labor Day.
Free with admission to the zoo: $5.75 for adults, $2 for children 2 through 12; free under 2.
Parking is $5.
Information: (718) 367-1010.
"BLOCKS IN HAND," an exhibition of mid-19th-century and contemporary construction-set toys, with an area for children to make their own buildings.
At the Stamford Museum and Nature Center, 39 Sco fieldtown Road, Stamford, Conn.
Hours: 9 A.M. to 5 P.M., Monday through Saturday and holidays; 1 to 5 P.M., Sunday.
Fees: $4 for adults and $3 for children.
Information: (203) 322-1646.
"THE TRAVELING TREE," a new children's musical about a businessman who wants to pave over a garden, a tree that has feelings and a businesswoman who is ambivalent about her work.
At Wings Theater, 154 Christopher Street, West Village.
Saturdays and Sundays, 1 P.M.
Tickets, $6.
Information: (212) 627-2961.


Smucker (J.M.) Co.(SJM.A,N) reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Subtle Swing From Cachao
Israel Lopez, the bassist, composer and band leader better known as Cachao, revolutionized Cuban and Latin dance music from the bottom up.
He recorded the first mambo -- a heated-up, sped-up Cuban danzon -- in 1939.
Later, he was among those who linked the drive of dance music to the expanded harmonies of modern jazz in descargas (jam sessions).
But at S.O.B.'s on Tuesday night, the music that once startled audiences sounded subtle and elegant, with a sense of swing that was as light as it was irresistible.
Cachao's ensemble included a tres (small guitar), congas, timbales, trumpet, trombone, saxophone, three vocalists and an electric piano.
The group sound was transparent but kinetic.
Cachao's bass lines bounced like balloon tires, centering but never dominating a band that made every note sound spontaneous.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  *
Federal Home Loan Bank is selling $50 million of notes due in 1996 through CS First Boston.
The notes carry an interest rate of 6.285 percent and are priced at par.


Excerpts From the Senate's Debate on the Democratic Health Care Proposal
Following are excerpts from statements made yesterday on the Senate floor in the ninth day of debate over the health care bill, as transcribed by The New York Times from a broadcast on C-Span: STATEMENT BY SENATOR BAUCUS
Mr.
President, I rise in very strong support to the amendment offered by the Senator from South Dakota, Senator Daschle, because it will improve the quality of health care in rural areas and give rural communities more access to the health care system.


Injury Sidelines Burrell
The sprinter LEROY BURRELL, who set the world record in the 100-meter dash last month, is expected to be sidelined for the rest of the track season because of a foot injury.
Burrell withdrew from today's Van Damme Memorial event in Brussels, the meet director, WILFRIED MEERT, said yesterday.


Airport-Rail Plan Makes Very Little Sense; Suitcase Burden
To the Editor:
Bruce Kanin and Jesse Bryant, in their Aug. 9 letters opposing the proposed rail links to La Guardia and Kennedy International Airports, ignore an important fact.


Treasury Department's Counsel Resigns
The Treasury Department's shake-up after the Whitewater hearings continued today, as its general counsel, Jean E. Hanson, resigned and Secretary Lloyd Bentsen immediately picked one of his longtime friends from Texas to replace her.
The friend, Edward S. Knight, first worked for Mr.
Bentsen as a legislative assistant in the mid-1970's and now runs Mr.
Bentsen's office, determining which policy analyses and briefing materials reach the Treasury Secretary's desk.
His selection is the second move this week by Mr.
Bentsen to install a close associate.


Ernst Pawel, 74, Biographer, Dies
Ernst Pawel, a novelist and biographer, died on Tuesday at his home in Great Neck, L.I.
He was 74.
The cause was lung cancer, his family said.


Simpson's Defense Seeking Records on Detectives
Lawyers for O. J. Simpson filed a motion today seeking access to personnel records of the four Los Angeles police detectives who investigated the stabbing deaths of Mr.
Simpson's former wife and a friend of hers.
The defense team also asked for any records that would show if one detective, Mark Fuhrman, had a history of racial bias.
Last week in court, the chief defense counsel, Robert L. Shapiro, asserted that race would not be an issue in the case.


For Haiti's 'Fixers,' Bodies Offer a Living
The men are polite, as they sell the dead.
They wait until the journalist is alone in the hotel lobby, then offer their services.
"Excuse me, excuse me," said one man recently, almost in a whisper, as reporters made their way to breakfast.
"But I have some news for you. I have a body for you to photograph."


Chilean Star Takes Steeplechase
The leading horses in American steeplechase racing met in the 53d New York Turf Writers Cup today and, after running two and three-eighths miles and clearing 12 fences, it was the Chilean star Mistico by four lengths over the Irish-bred Cheering News.
They ran on a soft grass course here for a purse of $109,100 and a shot at the lead for the Eclipse Award, won last year by Lonesome Glory, who finished third today.
It was the first start for Lonesome Glory, a 6-year-old gelding owned by Mrs.
Walter M. Jeffords Jr., since he fell in the Iroquois three months ago.


Homeless Man Is Stabbed After Halting Break-In
Frank Mayo knew everybody on West 95th Street, and everybody on West 95th Street knew Frank Mayo.
Everybody, that is, except three men who the police say broke into a Saab parked on the block yesterday.
Mr.
Mayo, a 37-year-old homeless man who residents say has been a regular on West 95th Street for the last couple of years, is a kind of self-appointed guardian for the tree-lined block between Central Park West and Columbus Avenue.
Hoping for some spare change, he helps residents carry their packages.
He finds parking spaces for those with cars.
He plants flowers in their gardens.


Museum Closing for Repairs
The Museum of the City of New York, Fifth Avenue at 103d Street, is to be closed during repairs Wednesday to next Friday and on Aug. 31.
The museum will be open on Aug. 27, from 10 A.M. to 5 P.M., and on Aug. 28, from 1 to 5 P.M.
On Sept. 1, it is to resume its normal hours: Wednesdays through Saturdays, 10 A.M. to 5 P.M; Sundays, 1 to 5 P.M., and Tuesdays, 10 A.M. to 2 P.M., for groups only.
Information: (212) 534-1672.


Charming Shoppes (CHRS,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to July 30


Restaurants
In the heat of the season, the land that stretches out along the eastern tip of Long Island seems oddly out of sync with itself.
At the ocean the wind whips the waves into a ferocious froth, and birds call mournfully to one another across peaceful bays.
Meanwhile, traffic jams the roads of all the pretty villages as tourists honk, jostling for an opportunity to park in front of the specialty food shops that line the streets.
The Hamptons have so many stores selling edible items that a Martian dropping in might wonder whether human beings ever think about anything but their stomachs.
This rage to eat is understandable.
Fishermen come back from the sea with their boats filled with tuna, mackerel and swordfish.
Anybody with a permit can pick up all the clams he can consume.
Lobsters are plentiful and chickens range freely.
At this time of year the fields are filled with the world's best tomatoes and corn.
Even a mediocre cook can produce a fabulous meal in no time.
So why are people lining up for French cheeses and Italian pastas and caviar from the Caspian?
What explains this mania for croissants and cappuccino?
And how come restaurants serving barely passable pasta are so busy that it takes weeks to get a reservation?
The truth is that if people just wanted great food, in the Hamptons they would buy local foods and stay home.


Motherless Children Back From Jordan
Lisa and Sami Abequa returned to the United States from their strange and troubled six-week odyssey today, still unaware that their mother was dead, their father was imprisoned in Jordan, and their aunt and grandmother would soon start easing them into a new life, without parents.
The children, 6 and 3, emerged from their flight from Frankfurt a bit weary and seemingly perplexed by the cameras and reporters at the gate at Newark International Airport this afternoon.
They were greeted with hugs by their grandmother, Meryem Gussal, 79, and by two cousins, Olga and Okan Yarlug, 11 and 9.


Asian Gang Leader Held in Plot to Kill 3
A leader of an Asian street gang linked by Federal authorities to smuggling illegal aliens from China was charged yesterday with plotting to murder his sister, her husband and their infant son, the authorities said, after his previous efforts of harassment and arson had failed to evict them from an apartment he owned in Brooklyn.
He wanted to rent it for more money.
Federal prosecutors said the murder plot, carried out on Dec. 18, 1988, by several gang members who were promised $7,000 for each body, succeeded in wounding the sister, Rosa Tam Liu, and in killing her husband, Jian Ping Liu, who was shot five times.
They said the infant escaped death because he was being cared for by relatives after the heat in the apartment had been turned off.


Of Murder, Psychology and Fruitcakes
In "Color of Night," his first film since the cult success of "The Stunt Man" (1980), the director Richard Rush has cast Bruce Willis as a thoughtful, sensitive New York psychologist.
This is not so much a casting decision as a throwing down of the gauntlet, an announcement that this film's defiant follies will not be run of the mill.
Indeed, the enthusiastically nutty "Color of Night" has the single-mindedness of a bad dream, and about as much reliance on everyday logic.
Set up as a conventional cat-and-mouse thriller, it plays more like a gleefully demented campfire tale.
Mr.
Rush, whose eclectic resume also includes "Getting Straight" (1970) and "Freebie and the Bean" (1974), hasn't come close to making a good movie out of "Color of Night." But he does succeed, at times backhandedly, in creating something memorably bizarre.


Editors' Note
A front-page article on Aug. 11 about government securities business set aside for minority-owned brokerage firms reported that the Securities and Exchange Commission was investigating reports of potential abuses involving firms in Louisiana, Florida and Georgia.


Health Bills Shouldn't Ignore Malpractice
To the Editor:
Just when I despaired that the word "quality" was barred from the health care debate by the Clinton Administration, Congress and The New York Times, you made my coffee with the headline "Two Votes for Quality Health Care" (editorial, Aug. 17).
Then you ruined by bagel by once again ignoring the hole in all of the health care packages -- medical malpractice.


Last Chance
Here is a sampling of shows and exhibitions in New York City that are to close soon: Closing This Weekend  W. EUGENE SMITH, Robert Mann Gallery, 42 East 76th Street, Manhattan.
Works by the photojournalist.
Closes today.
Free.
Hours: 11 A.M. to 6 P.M.
Information: (212) 570-1223.
"A WORTHY USE OF SUMMER: JEWISH SUMMER CAMPING IN AMERICA" and "CAMP PINECLIFFE, 1981: PHOTOGRAPHS BY GAY BLOCK," Jewish Museum, 1109 Fifth Avenue, at 92d Street.
Through Sunday.
An exhibition of photographs, letters and other mementos of Jewish camp life.
Admission: $6; $4 for students and the elderly.
Hours: Sunday, 11 A.M. to 5:45 P.M.; closed today and tomorrow.
Information: (212) 423-3200.


Shuttle Flight Aborted 1.9 Seconds Before Liftoff


Don't Expect Congress to Protect Your Privacy; Data Base Illusions
To the Editor:
The Government proposes to establish yet another Federal data base, to monitor work eligibility by combining Immigration and Naturalization Service data with Social Security numbers and thus reduce competition by illegal immigrants in the job market.


A Juggling Act


Varity Corp.(VAT,N) reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Giuliani Preparing To Make New Offer Of Severance Deals
With his efforts to pare New York City's payroll moving more slowly than hoped, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani will offer a new round of severance packages to city workers to cut 3,000 to 4,000 more jobs in selected city agencies, administration officials said yesterday.
The details of the severance packages, which the Mayor's office hopes to offer next month, still have to be negotiated with the municipal unions.
But the packages are expected to mirror those that ultimately enticed 6,139 workers to leave their jobs earlier this year, the officials said.


CHRONICLE
LARRY A. SILVERSTEIN, the president and chief executive of Silverstein Properties, a real estate development and investment company, has been elected the chairman of the board of the United Jewish Appeal-Federation of Jewish Philanthropies of New York.
Mr.
Silverstein, 63, has been involved with the organization for many years and has served as the chairman of its New York campaign and of its real estate division.


Vazgen I, Head of Armenian Church, Dies at 85
Catholicos Vazgen I, who headed the Armenian Apostolic Church throughout the world, died yesterday at his residence in Yerevan, the Armenian capital.
He was 85.
A statement released in New York said he had suffered a long illness.
It said the church would observe 40 days of mourning.


Corrections
A map yesterday showing sites where nuclear materials are kept in Russia and other former Soviet states contained numerous errors, because of misinterpretation by The Times of data provided by the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace.
A corrected map appears on page A10.


CHRONICLE
Does playing baseball eight times a week on stage help offstage on the real fields of Central Park?
It would be reasonable to assume that the team from "Damn Yankees" is leading in the playoffs of the Broadway Show League, a group of softball teams drawn from plays and theatrical organizations and unions.


Sri Lanka's Cycle of Tragedy
After 11 years of civil war and a violent parliamentary campaign, Sri Lankans gave most of their votes Tuesday to the opposition Socialist People's Alliance, ending 17 years of dominance by the market-oriented United National Party.
As a result a new government is being formed, led by Chandrika Kumaratunga, whose parents have both served as Prime Minister, and whose politician husband was assassinated in 1989.
But her prospects are uncertain.
Her parliamentary margin is narrow, and another election is scheduled in November to choose a president, an office with broad powers.
What seems sadly certain is that Sri Lanka will not recover the optimism and peace that graced its birth in 1948 as Ceylon (the name was changed in 1972).
In the first decade of independence, religion and ethnicity came to dominate the country's politics.
The Sinhalese majority is mostly Buddhist, and the Tamil minority is predominantly Hindu.


A Journey That Began 2 Years Ago
Dayely Gonzalez de la Olivia, is a skinny 12-year-old with long brown hair and a fashion sense so keen that when they distributed the new clothes at the refugee center here, she managed to find a pink and white shirt that perfectly matched the rosy gemstones in the earrings she wore on her trip across the Florida Straits.
Of everything she had owned in Cuba, those earrings were the only possessions she still had from her old life.
She and her parents, 48-year-old Pedro Felix Gonzalez Pita and his wife, 34-year-old Maura de la Olivia, came with nothing but the clothes they wore.
They had no money, no suitcases, not even family snapshots -- those were left behind with Dayely's grandparents.


A Correction: Where Nuclear Materials Are Kept"


Mr. Clinton: Defend Your Trade Pledge
The Clinton Administration fought for consumers when it signed a trade accord in April with more than 100 other countries in Marrakesh, Morocco.
But it besmirched its record when it sent Congress implementing legislation that contradicted the Marrakesh accord in dozens of places.
It was as if the Commerce Department had decided to protect powerful corporate friends in steel, textiles and cement rather than consumers or the vast number of U.S. companies that need to buy low-cost foreign goods.
Then House and Senate committees took the Administration's draft and made it worse.
Conferees will meet soon to hammer out final language -- providing a chance to fix the wrongs.


N.A.A.C.P. Chief Faces More Accusations
Lawyers for the N.A.A.C.P. and its executive director, the Rev.
Dr.
Benjamin F. Chavis Jr., held discussions earlier this year with a Cleveland woman in an effort to forestall a second sexual-harassment and wrongful-termination suit against Mr.
Chavis, according to the woman and a confidential report to the association's board.
The woman, Susan Tisdale, a former employee of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People, confirmed today that her lawyers had been in contact with lawyers for Dr.
Chavis over issues surrounding her employment at the organization and her subsequent departure.


American Dream Goes Down for the Count
"Sergei! Sergei! Over here!" A man's voice rose above the other sounds in the Russian supper club on Brighton Beach Avenue in Sheepshead Bay, Brooklyn, an enclave for Russian immigrants.
Sergei Artemiev had just entered the restaurant on a recent night and was squinting to find his caller.
Others in the restaurant turned, and some seemed to recognize Artemiev, the 25-year-old former lightweight boxer from Russia who nearly died of a blood clot on the brain from punches absorbed in a bout in Atlantic City in March 1993.


Idle Soldiers and the Devil's Playground
Huang Mingchuan's hallucinatory film "Bodo" revels in multiple meanings and blurred identities.
Its ambiguities begin with the title, a Taiwanese-dialect nickname for Taiwan.
Bodo is also the name of the film's fictional setting, an island off Taiwan, as well as the name of one of the film's main characters and of the actor who plays him.
These name games are only the beginning of the teasing ambiguities presented by "Bodo," an audacious but confusing film, which opens the series "Thunder From the East: New Visions From China, Taiwan and Hong Kong" at the Joseph Papp Public Theater today.
The series, which runs through Sept. 8, presents seven films by young independent film makers.
There are four from China, two from Taiwan and one from Hong Kong.


A Showcase for Artists Learning Their Business
The Bronx Museum of the Arts annually offers a 12-week crash course for emerging artists in the how-to's of their profession, from making art to organizing portfolios to figuring out whom to show the results.
It can't be an easy course to teach these days, with the market still becalmed, but the group exhibition that caps these "Artist in the Marketplace" sessions is a reward in itself, and this year's installment is a good one.
As might be expected in a show with 35 participants, eclecticism reigns and quality is uneven.
The show gets off to a nice start with Mindy Belloff's installation of dozens of tiny paintings, displayed on shelves or wall racks.
Images of flowers and faux Chinese landscapes crop up, although much of the painting is a kind of minuscule version of gestural abstraction.
Predominantly black-and-white, the installation has a mournful air, made literal when Ms.
Belloff writes on one painting, "I still get overwhelmed when I think about her" and the single word "endure" on another.


Ex-Salomon Chief's Costly Battle
John H. Gutfreund, once one of the most powerful men on Wall Street, has lost more than $5 million of his own money, and probably will lose a lot more before he is done dealing with the aftermath of the Treasury bond bidding scandal that cost him his job as chairman and chief executive of Salomon Inc.
In sharp contrast to the normal fate of ousted chief executives, Mr.
Gutfreund got almost nothing from Salomon after he left three years ago.
Although the company announced that he resigned -- which he insists was the case -- it now maintains he was fired and adds that he should have been fired for cause.
As a result, Salomon even decided to seize the stock options and restricted stock he had received in prior years.


Executive Joins Campbell Mithun
Steve Auerbach, a longtime media executive at DeWitt Media Inc., Ally &amp; Gargano and other agencies, has joined Campbell Mithun Esty in New York as director of national broadcast.
George Guimaraes, president and chief executive at Campbell Mithun, said yesterday that in addition to working for the agency, Mr.
Auerbach would be allowed to take on "noncompeting" outside media projects.


An Ever-Cool Portrait Of an Early Jazz Genius
What kind of man was the legendary New Orleans pianist and composer Jelly Roll Morton?
Was the musician who boasted that he had invented jazz the hot-headed, paranoid genius depicted by the Broadway musical "Jelly's Last Jam"?
Or was he the sly ever-cool proto-hipster portrayed by Vernel Bagneris in "Jelly Roll!," a two-man cabaret musical at the 47th Street Theater?
"Jelly Roll!," which Mr.
Bagneris wrote and directed, is a theatrical expansion of a successful nightclub revue that opened at Michael's Pub in Manhattan in 1992.
A collaboration with Morten Gunnar Larsen, a Norwegian pianist, music scholar and virtuosic interpreter of ragtime and early jazz, it interweaves reminiscences by Morton with Mr.
Larsen's robust, sparkling interpretations of more than a dozen Morton songs.
The program includes one instrumental showstopper, Morton's fiercely difficult "Fingerbreaker," which Mr.
Larsen executes with a sensational brio.


INSIDE
Crown Heights Witness Lied
A defense witness in the Crown Heights trial, who later changed his story and helped prompt a new inquiry, says he lied both times.
Page B3.
Quake Hits Rural Algeria
An earthquake struck northwestern Algeria, killing at least 150 people, injuring nearly 300 and leaving as many as 10,000 homeless.
Page A5.
Another Treasury Departure
The Treasury's general counsel, Jean Hanson, resigned and was immediately replaced by a long-time friend of Secretary Bentsen.
Page A16.
Owners to Join the Talks
Talks in the baseball strike will resume next week, and for the first time the owners agreed to join.
Page B7.
Nobel Novelist Dies
Elias Canetti, a novelist, playwright and cultural historian who won the Nobel Prize, is dead at 89.
Page A25.


Fox to Buy Memphis ABC Outlet
The Fox television network, once derided by its rivals for its lineup of hard-to-find UHF stations, has made another aggressive move onto the turf of the bigger broadcast networks by agreeing to buy WHBQ, the ABC affiliate in Memphis.
The deal, which was announced Wednesday, would make WHBQ the ninth station owned and operated by Fox, whose pursuit this year of television stations affiliated with CBS, ABC and NBC has dissolved links between networks and some affiliates that date to the earliest days of television.


Howard Bachrach; Lawyer, 81
Howard Bachrach, a New York lawyer who specialized in international law, died on Wednesday in New York Hospital.
Mr.
Bachrach, who lived in Manhattan, was 81.
The cause was pneumonia, said his wife, Ruth Bachrach.


Wary of Critics, Poland Sends Its Top Spy Back Into the Cold
Poland's intelligence chief formally resigned today, three days after his appointment was rejected by President Lech Walesa, who said it jeopardized relations with the United States and Warsaw's new ties with the West.
The Internal Affairs Ministry said it would accept the resignation from Marian W. Zacharski, who was sentenced to life in prison in the United States for espionage in 1981 and freed in 1985 in an exchange for Western agents held in the Soviet bloc.


John A. Baker, 66, Ex-U.S. Diplomat
John A. Baker, a vice president of the Atlantic Council and a retired Foreign Service officer who specialized in East European affairs, died on Tuesday at his home in Washington.
He was 66.
The cause was prostate cancer, his wife, Dr. Katherine Baker, said.


For Hitchcock, It's a Pennant Race in AAA
Sterling Hitchcock, the major league pitcher moonlighting in a minor league uniform with the strike persisting, was not flawless while wearing that uniform tonight.
Pitching for the Columbus Clippers, Hitchcock misplaced a changeup, gave up a long homer and trailed by three runs after three innings against the Charlotte Knights.
This moonlighting gig was no breeze.
But Hitchcock did not let the early problems overwhelm him; he usually never does.
He recovered and redeemed himself while his Yankee farm teammates unveiled an offensive air show with five homers in their 10-7 victory over Cleveland's AAA team at Knights Stadium.


Russia Treasures Plutonium, But U.S. Wants to Destroy It
To the Americans it is an albatross, an economic liability and a threat to global security that must be rendered untouchable or destroyed.
But to the Russians it is, as one official put it, "a national treasure," to be husbanded now and to produce boundless energy for future generations.
The object of these clashing views is prime, bomb-grade plutonium, produced during the cold war by each side at enormous cost in money, health and environmental damage.
With the arms race winding down, huge stocks of plutonium are coming out of bombs -- during the next decade at least 50 tons each in the United States and Russia, American officials say.
In Russia, that comes on top of plutonium stocks accumulated for use in power plants.


Officials Say Hospital Was Likely Source Of Boy's AIDS
An 11-month-old boy with a mysterious case of AIDS was most likely infected with H.I.V. in a New York City hospital when he was less than 2 weeks old, New York City and Federal health officials reported yesterday.
The case is baffling because the officials cannot precisely determine the source of the boy's infection.
His parents have both tested negative for H.I.V., the virus that causes AIDS, and he never received blood products, the officials said.


I.B.M. Urges 110,000 Workers To Help Defeat Health-Care Bills
The management of I.B.M. has urged the company's 110,000 workers in the United States to fight for the defeat of two Democratic health-care bills in Congress.
The memo, believed to be the first of its kind for a company with a tradition of keeping politics out of its communications with employees, was sent over the I.B.M.'s internal electronic mail network on Monday.
It came from the company's vice chairman, Paul J. Rizzo, with the approval of the chairman, Louis V. Gerstner Jr.


CHRONICLE
There is no cause to think that BOBBY BROWN, the singer who is married to WHITNEY HOUSTON, will go homeless.
But he is facing foreclosure on his Atlanta mansion for the second time in about a year, The Associated Press reported yesterday.
His 14,000-square-foot home, which he bought five years ago, is being advertised for public auction on Sept. 6.
The legal notice, published last week, said that Mr.
Brown is in arrears on an $850,000 second mortgage that he got to halt a foreclosure last summer.
The Internal Revenue Service has two tax liens against the property totaling more than $1.3 million, according to the notice.


Yeshayahu Leibowitz, 91, Iconoclastic Israeli Thinker
Yeshayahu Leibowitz, an iconoclastic philosopher, scientist and social critic who outraged Israelis with lacerating commentary on their country's political, military and religious practices, died today in Jerusalem.
He was 91.
Active until his last day, Mr.
Leibowitz died in his sleep of unknown causes, acquaintances said.


Don't Expect Congress to Protect Your Privacy; National Work Permit
To the Editor:
Do you realize that "A National Registry for Work" (editorial, Aug. 8) advocates that United States citizens be required to have a government permit to work?
Only the most totalitarian regimes such as Nazi Germany or the Soviet Union aggregated such power to themselves.


At the Bar; Lawyers with log-ons are sampling the Internet smorgasbord.
A group of lawyers were arguing the legal aspects of the O. J. Simpson case.
It was a lively, sometimes heated discussion, with each tidbit of the case chewed over endlessly.
The lawyers, however, were in different parts of the country, and the "discussion" took place electronically in a forum on CompuServe called the Law Special Interest Group (LAWSIG).
The LAWSIG is just one place where the legal eagles of the electronic ether flock.
They have joined doctors, pilots, scientists and other professionals who tap into the global communications network that is the Internet, cruising data bases and electronic bulletin boards for fun and profit.


4 Charged In Insider Trading Case
Two former directors of an Alabama electronics manufacturer and two of their business associates were charged with insider trading in a Federal court yesterday.
The move was the latest in a series of actions taken by the Securities and Exchange Commission following admissions of fraud by top executives of the Comptronix Corporation in 1992.
Comptronix, based in Guntersville, Ala., appeared to be a rapidly growing maker of computer circuit boards and other electronics when three of its executives said they had falsified records to inflate the company's profits.
After the fraud was disclosed on Nov. 25, 1992, Comptronix shares fell from $22 to $15.875.
In Nasdaq trading yesterday, the stock closed down 6.25 cents a share, to $1.75.


Even Ex-Communists Can Be Patriots
To the Editor:
A.
M.
Rosenthal is concerned about the emerging ghost of former Communists in Hungary and the state control and corruption they spread (column, Aug. 9).
Yes, Gyula Horn is a former Communist.
It is true that when the heroic children of Budapest faced down the tanks and mortally wounded the Goliath of Red tyranny in 1956, he was on the other side.
It is true that when I was in Russian captivity he was in the Soviet-installed militia.
But people change, the road to Damascus is wide, and sometimes true converts also travel on it.


Interracial Romance, Leavened by Humor
ANEWS report heard at the end of "Cafe au Lait" makes a dire prediction: racial mixing will yield "a bastardized, impoverished race in which black and white will have no place." But Mathieu Kassovitz, the director, writer and star of the French-Belgian "Cafe au Lait," has a better idea.
Mr.
Kassovitz's film, the warmly comic story of an interracial menage a trois, is filled with teasing epithets and stereotypes turned inside out.
In homage to the American director who most often addresses racial issues, Mr.
Kassovitz comes up with the unimaginable: Spike Lee Lite.
In this fond variation on Mr.
Lee's "She's Gotta Have It," Mr.
Kassovitz himself plays the Spike Lee role.
As the clowning, bicycle-riding loser who competes for the heroine's attentions, he has an irascible screen presence something like Mr.
Lee's.
But one difference between this film and "She's Gotta Have It" is that Felix (Mr. Kassovitz) is Jewish, and it is black-Jewish relations at which the film steadily pokes fun.
Remarks that would sound stinging in a more solemn film are delivered with disarming breeziness, even good cheer.


Home Video
Tapes are renting as strongly as ever this summer, but other formats are pushing ahead, too.
Take video on demand, the term for the instant delivery of any title at any time by various carriers, including telephone companies.
That level of service is many years away at best, but for early tests Bell Atlantic and the other so-called regional Baby Bells are beginning to stock up on movies and other titles from Hollywood studios.
Unlike cable operators, telephone companies have no ready-made pool of programming and need to build a supply of titles from scratch.
"We're looking for tens of thousands," said Bob Townsend, the president for interactive multimedia products in Bell Atlantic's video-services division.


Sibelius and Others by Visitors From Finland
What are the odds that a small city of 100,000 in a mountainous area of Finland would produce a first-class symphony orchestra?
Lahti, best known for its skiing facilities, has somehow accomplished the feat.
Its 60-piece orchestra, some of whose members appeared at St.
Peter's Church on Wednesday night for a chamber concert, has acquired an international reputation through a series of recordings on the Bis and Ondine labels, covering a rich swath of repertory from its homeland.
The best of these, on Bis, was the first complete recording of Sibelius's "Tempest" music, a gloriously inventive score that penetrates to the heart of Shakespeare's last play.
With the violinist Leonidas Kavakos, the orchestra also gave the world premiere of the original version of Sibelius's Violin Concerto -- indeed, the only performance and recording, since the Sibelius family has not allowed any others.
Other disks have presented the complete orchestral music of Joonas Kokkonen, the most distinguished of older Finnish composers, and the startling polystylistic scores of Kalevi Aho, who has become the orchestra's composer in residence and has written his Eighth, Ninth and 10th Symphonies in Lahti.


A Matter of Identity; What's in a Name Change? Everything You Can Imagine
Upon reflection, it is easy to understand why Hassan Romieh changed his name to George Washington America.
He was, after all, born in George Washington University Hospital in the District of Columbia.
Furthermore, and showing proper historical reverence, he was a Presidential candidate in 1980 and 1992. (What? Never heard of him? You're probably one of those oddballs who skips the Whitewater hearings on C-Span, too.)


Health Debate Has a Senator In a Crossfire
The health care battlefield around Senator John H. Chafee is littered with the corpses of good ideas gone bad.
The Rhode Island Republican, praised by Democrats for his moderate leanings but distrusted by some Republicans for his efforts toward bipartisan compromise, is leading the movement to get influential senators to devise a health care formula that is comprehensive, cost-conscious and middle-of-the-road.


Basketball at Midnight: 'Hope' on a Summer Eve
Not once this year has 16-year-old Aisha Cain missed a game of the Stateway Sonics in the city's public housing midnight basketball league.
She loves what happens at the end too much to stay away, and being at the games is a lot safer than walking to the corner store for a soda on a hot summer night.


An Update of 'Seven Days in May'
"The Enemy Within," which has its premiere tomorrow night on HBO, is a remake of "Seven Days in May," John Frankenheimer's 1964 political thriller that was adapted from the novel by Fletcher Knebel and Charles W. Bailey 2d.
The story concerns a plot to overthrow the American Government, hatched by the virulently anti-Communist Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff.
And even in this age of remakes, it is hard to figure out what was on the mind of whoever decided to remake the film.
It isn't that it's bad, just pointless, and in any case, it was bound to come up short in comparison.
The original was a terrific film, crisply directed, with a screenplay full of pithy vernacular by Rod Serling.
Its cast of stars -- including Burt Lancaster as the megalomaniacal chief conspirator, Ava Gardner as his scorned mistress, Kirk Douglas as his underling colonel who stumbles on the plot and spills the beans, Edmond O'Brien as a Georgia Senator with a drinking problem and Frederic March as the President -- were notably brilliant and generous, no one of them at the center of the tale, each stepping to the fore in turn and then gracefully handing off the spotlight.


Boatmen's to Pay $595 Million For Biggest Arkansas Bank
Boatmen's Bancshares of St.
Louis said yesterday that it would buy the Worthen Banking Corporation, the largest bank in Arkansas, for $595 million in stock.
The Stephens family, one of the most powerful in Arkansas and longtime backers of President Clinton, own 26 percent of Worthen's stock.
As a result of the acquisition, the family will now own 4.3 percent of Boatmen's.


Film Stills as Art in Their Own Right
The idea behind "Stills," at the Museum of Modern Art, is so smart and timely that sooner or later someone was bound to organize a show based on it.
In recent years, many artists, including Cindy Sherman and John Baldessari, have borrowed the distinctive style of movie stills, or incorporated the images themselves into their artworks.
"Stills" presents more than 200 black-and-white examples of the real thing, chosen from among the four million photos in the museum's Film Stills Archives.
The exhibition was organized for the museum's department of photography by Douglas Blau, a critic, curator and artist.
In recent years, Mr.
Blau has presented encyclopedic compendiums of magazine images and other pictures, organized into complex sequences based on subject matter and style.


Russians Suspect 3 Sites As Source of Seized A-Fuel
Russian atomic-energy officials are investigating three main sites from which they suspect diversions of weapons-usable nuclear materials of the kind recently seized in Germany, American nuclear experts said yesterday.
All the sites are in Russia, and all are involved in the production of a fuel for nuclear reactors known as Mox, or mixed oxide fuel, a combination of the oxides of uranium and plutonium.
A large shipment of Mox was recently seized in Munich, and has been at the center of a dispute between Germany and Russia over its provenance.


The Best of Enemies In Old Magazine Days
To the Editor:
"A Journal Is Sprouting From Seeds of the 60's" (Media page, Aug. 8) states that Warren Hinckle's year-old magazine, Argonaut, is dedicated to "Ambrose Bierce, a muckraking journalist and writer who founded the original Argonaut in 1877." Muckraker and writer Bierce may have been, but founder of The Argonaut he was not.
He was one of its first editors.


Senate Debate Dances To the Beats of History
Few places are as steeped in history as the United States Senate, and one revealing aspect of the health insurance debate is that some senators have actually lived through decades of its history -- not just the last few desultory days of torture by amendment.
That was clear the other day when Bob Packwood, the Oregon Republican who has backed an overhaul of the health system for years but is now leading the Republicans' efforts against President Clinton's proposals on the floor, waxed irate over a centerpiece of the Democrats' program: a package of standard benefits for health insurance nationwide.


Elias Canetti, 89, Nobel Winner Who Wrote of Social Forces
Elias Canetti, a novelist, playwright and cultural historian who won the Nobel Prize in Literature in 1981, died on Saturday in Zurich.
He was 89 and had homes in London and Zurich.
On Wednesday, he was buried next to James Joyce.


Nassau Gets Bill for District Map, and Gulps
Two months ago, a Federal judge warned the Nassau County Supervisors that it would be costly if they failed to agree on district lines for a new county legislature.
Now the six supervisors have seen the bill, and heads are spinning.


Country Pleasures on City Streets
O .K.
So this was the summer you would save money by forgoing a half-share on the Jersey shore or a rental in Columbia County.
You'd get by on the generosity of friends, you reasoned last spring.
And you could take advantage of a deserted metropolis where museums and movie theaters could be enjoyed on weekends without fuss.
But invitations to weathered cottages and sandy bungalows have dried up, you've overdosed on culture and all New York City stretches before you like a sea of concrete.
Admit it: You'd kill to hear a cricket.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
7.75
7.75
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
4.00
4.00
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
4.69
4.72
3.02
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.53
4.56
2.96
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.92
4.91
3.08
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.26
7.17
5.61
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.49
7.39
6.20
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.36
8.26
7.07
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.38
6.33
5.62
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Holocaust Memorial Museum To Rise in Battery Park City
With 13 years of false starts behind them, the creators of New York City's Holocaust memorial said yesterday that they would finally be able to start building the museum this fall in Battery Park City, at the tip of Manhattan, overlooking the potent symbols of Ellis Island and the Statue of Liberty.
Critical new financing -- indeed, half the construction cost -- would come from the Battery Park City Authority, under a lease that was signed yesterday.
The gray granite museum is to cost about $15 million.


Maxson Is Assailed
SHELLEY BERKLEY, a Nevada-Las Vegas regent, charged yesterday that ROBERT MAXSON, the school's former president, lied when he told regents that a $511,000 annual contract was all that was promised ROLLIE MASSIMINO to coach the basketball team.
Berkley said minutes of a 1992 meeting in which Massimino's five-year contract was approved by regents showed Maxson giving "absolute assurances" that the contract was Massimino's sole income.
She said Maxson had already completed a secret supplemental contract giving Massimino $375,000 more a year.


Deadline to Register for Primary
The deadline for registering to vote in the Sept. 13 primary election in New York State is midnight tonight.
Information about registration in New York City can be obtained at (212) VOTE-NYC, or (212) 868-3692.
Voters elsewhere may call (800) FOR-VOTE, or (800) 367-8683, or county election boards.


Treasury Securities' Prices Sag
Prices of Treasury securities sagged yesterday, after the market was again reminded that although inflation may be out of sight, it is not out of mind.
Concerns about inflation were revived after the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia reported that prices paid by area manufacturers for raw materials surged to a five-year high in August.


Sounds Around Town
Rappers of the Past
Old School Throwdown II, Paramount, Seventh Avenue at 33d Street, Manhattan, (212) 465-6741.
It has been 15 years since the Sugar Hill Gang brought hip-hop into the mainstream with the song "Rapper's Delight," which probably makes the band, along with others performing tonight like Afrika Bambaattaa and Whodini, dinosaur rappers.
Also on the bill are KRS-One, Biz Markie and Rakim (without his partner, Eric B.), who were all successors to the above but are seniors to the current crop of rappers.
These old-school rappers have worn some with age, but they've managed to keep their drumbeats simple, their voices strong and their boasts original.
The show tonight is to begin at 8; admission is $27.50 and $37.50.
NEIL STRAUSS Ultra Bide
Ultra Bide, Brownie's, 169 Avenue A at 10th Street, East Village, (212) 420-8392.
Ultra Bide is made up of three young Japanese rockers living in New York City and making hard and heavy music.
Its songs squeal in and out of tune, clattering as much as they rock.
Everyone in the trio sings in a sinister scream, making innocent lyrics like "I want to walk in the sunshine with you" seem more like threats.
The show is Saturday night at 1; admission is $6.
N.
S.
Holmes Brothers
Holmes Brothers, Celebrate Brooklyn Blue Weekend, Prospect Park Band Shell, Prospect Park West and Ninth Street, (718) 768-0699.
The Holmes Brothers' songs mix blues, soul, gospel and country.
The music moves slowly and painfully, much like the band's career.
It took the group three decades to release its first album, the bittersweet "In the Spirit," which came out three years ago.
Two albums later, the Holmes Brothers' wrenching tales of heartbreak and redemption, of private sorrows and small consolations, are starting to attract the audience they deserve.
The free concert begins at 7 P.M. on Saturday.
N.
S.


Abortion Foe Is Arraigned In 2 Killings
The man accused of killing a doctor and his escort outside an abortion clinic here was arraigned today on two counts of first-degree murder and one count of first-degree attempted murder in the wounding of the escort's wife.
He was also arraigned on one count of shooting into an occupied vehicle.
He pleaded not guilty to all charges.
As the defendant, Paul J. Hill, stood before Circuit Court Judge Frank L. Bell to hear the charges against him, security was tight.
Deputies in the courtroom wore semiautomatic sidearms and kept their hands on their guns as they scanned the spectators.


U.S., IN NEW POLICY, INTENDS TO DETAIN CUBAN IMMIGRANTS
With hundreds of Cubans continuing to flee each day in rafts and rubber dinghies, the Clinton Administration announced tonight, in a sharp change of policy, that it would detain Cubans for an indefinite period after they arrived in the United States.
The move, effective immediately, is a major departure from an open-door policy toward Cubans, who, for three decades, have usually been granted free entry into the United States after a brief interview by immigration authorities.


Giuliani Aides Told to Prepare Records for Rent Inquiry
The Giuliani administration said yesterday that 16 mayoral aides have been advised to prepare a host of documents for a city Department of Investigation inquiry into arrangements under which the officials paid no rent for the first five weeks to three months of their leases.
Randy M. Mastro, chief of staff to Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani, said some of the officials had already been interviewed by the Department of Investigation and that the investigation was under way.
He also said that Anthony Coles, the Mayor's deputy counsel, had notified the 16 administration officials of what documents to prepare.


C. Michael Lane, 46, Interior Finish Artist
C.
Michael Lane, a faux-finish artist whose work was featured in HG and American Homestyle magazines, died on Aug. 7 in a New York City nursing home.
He was 46 and lived in Manhattan.
The cause of death was AIDS, said a friend, Jacqueline Coumans.


Hayes Wheels Intl(HAY,N) reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Executive Changes
DAVOX CORP., Westford, Mass., appointed John J. Connolly vice president of finance and chief financial officer.
DONNA KARAN CO., New York, named J. Patrick Spainhour executive vice president and chief financial officer.


Hall Takes Title, but Doesn't Take It Seriously
His father won medals in three Olympics and broke 10 world records.
His mother was a national-class swimmer.
His maternal grandfather was a national champion.
So Gary Hall Jr. certainly had the genes.
Maybe he is only 19 years old, but people wonder how much better he would be if only he had his father's legendary commitment and fierce desire.
If only he showed signs of caring about swimming.
If only he would not rebel at everything logical or mainstream.


Sony's Operating Profits Up, But Net Plunges in Quarter
The Sony Corporation reported today that operating profits for the first quarter rose 25.7 percent from a year earlier.
Net income, however, plunged 49.2 percent, in large measure because the company did not make as much money as it did last year from currency hedging.
Sony said revenues for the quarter, which ended on June 30, increased 4.3 percent, to 864.5 billion yen, or $8.73 billion when translated at 99 yen to the dollar.
Operating income was 31.8 billion yen, or $321.2 million.
Net income dropped to 3.9 billion yen, or $39.5 million.


Antitrust Exemption Is Also in Question
Major league baseball and its players, locked in a labor dispute that has caused a week-old strike, have welcomed the sort of interest in Washington that has attracted Federal mediators attempting to help spur a settlement.
That baseball has also attracted the interest of members of Congress has resulted in a different kind of prod, one that threatens to renew calls for at least a partial rollback of protections provided to owners by their antitrust exemption.
Historically, baseball has never come close to having its unique immunity from antitrust laws repealed by Congress.
And the conventional wisdom is that Washington's preoccupation with issues such as crime legislation and health care reform, plus the special status baseball clubs enjoy among legislators, will render this issue moot before Congress takes its August break.


Clothes Unmake the Man, and Then Some
In the Canadian film "A Man in Uniform," opening today at Village East Cinemas, the trouble with Henry (Tom McCamus) is that he likes his work.
Not his dreary bank clerk's job, but his stab at moonlighting: playing a bit part as a policeman on a lurid television show.
A bashful aspiring actor, Henry begins to change dramatically once he is given a uniform, a nightstick and a new name (Flanagan).
Falling in love with his tough-guy dialogue, he even finds ways to use lines like "Shut up, punk: I'll ask the questions" in his workaday world.
At first, all Henry does is to impress a casting director with the extra gusto he brings to his hot-tempered audition scene.
Then Henry buys a police radio and begins showing up at crime scenes, wearing his actor's uniform and making the most of each improvisatory opportunity.
"You watch too much TV, kid," a real cop finally tells him, after watching Henry overdo it with one real-life perpetrator.
It hardly helps that Henry has also begun using words like "scum," "punk" and "dirt bag" at the bank.


Minority Rights in the Voting Booth
New York City's Chinese-Americans and the Justice Department in Washington are pressing the city's Board of Elections to transliterate candidates' names into Chinese characters on ballots in districts with large Chinese-speaking populations.
The board points out that it already supplies sample ballots and voting instructions in Chinese, and translators at polling places, but says the format of its mechanical voting machines does not have space to add a line of Chinese characters.
It seeks more time to introduce electronic voting machines that can handle the characters easily.
That sounds like the foot-dragging bureaucratic arguments that have been raised all over America at one time or another against giving minorities their rights.
It is no excuse for not obeying the law.


Long-Ruling Sri Lanka Party Makes Way for 3d in Dynasty
The governing United National Party agreed today to end 17 years of political dominance in Sri Lanka by making way for a new Government headed by Chandrika Bandaranaike Kumaratunga, who will become the third member of her family to be Prime Minister.
Mrs.
Kumaratunga, 48, whose People's Alliance party was the narrow winner of a general election held on Tuesday, will be sworn in on Friday.
She has promised new measures to alleviate poverty among those in the population of 17 million who have been left out of Sri Lanka's free-market economic boom, and a fresh effort to end the brutal war with Tamil rebels, who have carved out a separate enclave at the northern tip of this island nation.


Travers: With Six in Field, No Chance of Traffic Jam
"The only one missing," Jimmy Croll said as the 3-year-old colts gathered for the return match, "is Go for Gin."
He was right.
Go for Gin, who won the Kentucky Derby three months ago, will duck the stars and skip the distance on Saturday, and will wait four days to sprint seven furlongs in the Forego Handicap.


Mayor Giuliani's Surprise
Despite the current squabbling over the crime bill, shared fear may yet produce legislation of some sort.
Although eager to whack President Clinton, the Republicans know that the Democrats are trying to position them for a fall as the party that went soft on crime.
The White House, staring at the prospect of a crippled Presidency, will compromise or threaten, depending on what it takes to get the votes to move the bill.
Given the generally craven environment, it is refreshing to see Mayor Rudolph Giuliani of New York taking over the unoccupied high ground of a smarter, loftier bipartisan politics.
Stating that his obligations as Mayor outweigh party loyalty, he has been campaigning for the Clinton crime bill.
He is attracted by its promise of more money for police, but he has also defended the much-demagogued provisions controlling guns and financing crime-prevention programs such as night basketball.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  GIULIANI PLANS MORE BUYOUTS
With his efforts to pare New York City's payroll moving more slowly than hoped, Mayor Giuliani will offer a new round of severance packages to city workers to cut 3,000 to 4,000 more jobs, administration officials said.
A1.


Indresco Inc.(ID,N) reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Animated pots and pans clamor to be scrubbed clean in a new commercial for S.O.S from Clorox.
A SOAP commercial in which youngsters plead to be washed would be dismissed as bad advertising.
But a commercial in which dirty dishes, pots and pans demand to be scrubbed turns out to be good, clean fun.
The commercial is the first for S.O.S scouring pads from the Clorox Company, which bought the venerable brand from Miles Inc. in January.
It marks the start of a campaign that seeks to encourage use of the product among those who regularly buy S.O.S -- so-called reminder advertising -- rather than to increase sales or woo consumers from rival brands.


Reebok, Chiat/Day Are Target of Suit
Reebok International Ltd. and its former agency, Chiat/Day Inc., are being sued by a British rock band and its recording companies, which charge that one of the band's songs was used without permission in a "Planet Reebok" television commercial.
The group, Jesus and Mary Chain, and its recording companies, Honey Songs of London and Careers-BMG Music Publishing Inc. of New York, filed the suit on Tuesday in Federal court in New York City.
They charged Reebok with illegally using the band's copyrighted song, "Reverence," from an album called "The Jesus &amp; Mary Chain: Honey's Dead," and seek unspecified damages and a court order blocking use of the music in Reebok footwear commercials.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
Insurers could be ordered to refund as much as $1 billion to millions of California auto insurance customers after the state Supreme Court upheld a 1988 measure that required companies to roll back premiums.
The court also affirmed the authority of the state commissioner to require the 700 insurance companies operating in California to obtain approval for rate changes for all property and casualty insurance.  [ Page D1. ]


National Computer Systems Inc.(NLCS,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Ethics Law Required Breyer's Recusal
To the Editor:
Justice Stephen G. Breyer violated the Federal Disqualification Statute, despite the Aug. 8 letter to the contrary by Justice Rudolph Kass of the Massachusetts Appeals Court.


Cortines Gets Tough With Boards
Schools Chancellor Ramon C. Cortines, who for most of his first year in New York City preached cooperation with the community school boards, has changed tack in recent weeks, using his full powers to impose his will on three boards in disputes over administrators and classroom space.
In the last three weeks, Mr.
Cortines has suspended the powers of two boards in the Bronx because he could not reach agreement with them in long-running disputes, and a third in Queens to break a deadlock between local factions.


Fire Breaks Out Aboard a Passenger Ship
A passenger ship ended a five-day voyage abruptly yesterday after a smoky fire broke out near the main deck, chugging hastily into a midtown pier in New York Harbor and discharging more than 1,000 passengers.
The 41-year-old ship, the Regal Empress, which was finishing a cruise to New England and Canada, was greeted shortly after 8 A.M. at Pier 88 by a cavalcade of fire trucks, police cruisers and ambulances.
Fifteen minor injures were reported, fire officials said.


Castro's Refugee Weapon Has Been Wielded Before
The sudden flight of Cubans this week may have caught the United States by surprise and forced the Clinton Administration to reverse immigration policy, but experts say the influx was heralded in public threats by President Fidel Castro two weeks ago as his economic and political difficulties deepened.
No sooner had Mr.
Castro quelled the rioting that broke out on the Havana waterfront on Aug. 5, involving thousands of people who chanted "Down with Fidel!" and clashed with police and security forces, then he declared that the Clinton Administration had launched a "comprehensive offensive" and "subversive plan" against him and he threatened to allow all Cubans unhappy with conditions on the island to leave for the United States.


Kennel Club Doesn't Create Witless Canines; Breeders' Choice
To the Editor:
I should like to thank Donald McCaig (Op-Ed, Aug. 3) for bringing attention to the incursions of the American Kennel Club into the affairs of individual breed clubs.


; Hey, at Least the Kids Aren't on Strike


Midland Walwyn reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Kennel Club Doesn't Create Witless Canines; All Dogs Can Bite
To the Editor:
Re "Gone to the Dogs" (Op-Ed, Aug. 5) by the self-proclaimed savior of the border collie, Donald McCaig:


Proffitt's Inc.(PRFT,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to July 30


A Makeshift Superhero for Not-So-Super Times
Darryl Walker (Damon Wayans), the alter ego of "Blankman," a bumbling would-be superhero who grew up worshiping Batman, is a ditsy young inventor whose junk gadgets give Rube Goldberg's contraptions a run for their money in sheer silliness.
Darryl's zany mechanical concepts extend to his appearance.
His damaged eyeglasses are held up by a dinner fork that he wears tucked behind one ear.
One of Darryl's more amusing inventions is a buzzing, airborne device that looks something like a trash-encrusted model plane, whose purpose is to catch flies.
After taking off, it loops noisily around and crashes into everything in sight in pursuit of its prey.
Darryl's mechanical sidekick is an equally clumsy robot, who bumps into walls and tips over as it heeds electronic summonses.
This thing, which has a battered old tub for a body, is crowned with bright-blue tassels and a cap.


Increase in Home Gardening Yields Bumper Crop of Sales
Wendi Winters, passionate gardener, is growing tomatoes, peppers, beans, sage "and lots more basil this year," she said.
And for the first time she has even put in cilantro, "which we know is chic, even though it tastes like soap."
"Everyone has a garden this year, and in fact, the people next door just put one in," added Ms.
Winters, who has three garden plots at her Montclair, N.J., home.
She is not alone.
Despite higher-than-average rainfall and a later-than-usual spring, 10 million more Americans are growing vegetables this season in comparison with last year, according to a study of the nation's gardening business.


Big Companies Use Little-Company Arguments to Resist Insuring Workers
Over and over, giant corporations that employ low-wage workers offer the same reason for withholding company-paid health insurance from them: Millions of qualified applicants are willing to take the jobs without it.
While much of the debate over uninsured workers has focused on those at small companies, more than 4.5 million of the 22 million working Americans without any health insurance are employed at big corporations like Bank of America, Wal-Mart, Pepsico, J. C. Penney and Dayton-Hudson, surveys show.
These corporations are lobbying hard against any bill that would require them to insure all their workers.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball National League  FLORIDA MARLINS -- Signed Dan Vardijan, pitcher.
ST.
LOUIS CARDINALS -- Announced the retirement of Stuart Meyer, president.
Named Mark Lamping president.
Basketball National Basketball Association  SACRAMENTO KINGS -- Renounced their rights to Wayman Tisdale, forward.
Signed Frank Brickowski, center.
Football National Football League  ARIZONA CARDINALS -- Claimed Al Noga, defensive end, off waivers from the Minnesota Vikings.
CINCINNATI BENGALS -- Agreed to terms with Dave Cadigan, offensive lineman.
DETROIT LIONS -- Waived Raymond Batiste, guard.
Placed Tony Semple, guard, on injured reserve.
SAN DIEGO CHARGERS -- Re-signed Curtis Whitley, offensive lineman.
Hockey National Hockey League  MONTREAL CANADIENS -- Traded Guy Carbonneau, center, to the St.
Louis Blues for Jim Montgomery, center.
NEW YORK RANGERS -- Acquired Glen Featherstone, defenseman, from the Boston Bruins for Daniel Lacroix, center.
College  BALL STATE -- Named Sue Parks women's cross country and track and field coach.
CHARLESTON SOUTHERN -- Named Brett Hoffman assistant athletic director for medical services and athletic trainer.


Sceptre Resources (SRL,A) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Offering Shelter From the Storm of the Streets
At 9:30 on a muggy night in East Harlem, three youths were smoking crack on a park bench outside Junior High School 45.
Inside, a team of counselors and coaches tried to save dozens of youngsters from similar activities.
A basketball coach advised a teen-ager on finding the father he never knew.
A young mother sought counseling to better understand her boisterous 13-year-old daughter.
While watching television together, a group of boys discussed drugs and violence, led by counselors who set only one rule: No cursing.


Sentences in King Beating Are Too Short, Court Says
A Federal appeals court ruled today that the prison terms given two Los Angeles police officers for the 1991 beating of Rodney G. King were too lenient.
In a unanimous decision, a three-judge panel of the Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit in San Francisco upheld the civil rights convictions of the officers, Sgt.
Stacey C. Koon and Officer Laurence M. Powell, and ordered the trial judge in the case to reconsider the 30 months sentences he imposed on the officers last year.


CompUSA's Finance Chief Quits in Wake of Loss
CompUSA Inc. said today that its chief financial officer had resigned, only days after the computer superstore company reported a fourth-quarter loss that was much larger than Wall Street had expected.
Mervyn Benjet, 55, who also held the title of executive vice president, declined to comment on his resignation when reached by phone at his Dallas home.
He said that the resignation had taken effect on Thursday and that he had "no current plans" for the future.


Wildfires Continue Unabated in Western States


Age and the Agility of Experience
In 1991, Jiri Kylian, the director of the Nederlands Dans Theater, came up with the notion of forming a dance company for performers "between 40 and death," as he put it.
The result, Nederlands Dans Theater 3, is performing here this week at the Jacob's Pillow dance festival, in the Ted Shawn Theater.
On view on Tuesday night was a program of charming, haunting dance and theater created for performers whose artistry has been burnished by experience.
Each of the six dances on the program refers in some way to age or the passage of time.
The man and the woman in Hans van Manen's 1991 "Evergreens," danced to music by Saint-Saens, J. Pryronnin and Villa-Lobos, look like a pair of lovers who have lived through a great many ups and downs, all of them condensed in this piece.
He (Gerard Lemaitre) is at heart a boulevardier.
She (Sabine Kupferberg) has little patience for such time-wasting dreams.
She has had to play dream-woman, epitomized by her bobbing "Dying Swan" solo, for too long.
But at the end, this glamorous, tough woman offers her gentle man a chair in a poignant gesture of affection.


Corrections
An obituary yesterday about the writer Elias Canetti misstated the years in which two of his books were published in English.
"Crowds and Power" was published in 1962 and "Kafka's Other Trial" was published in 1974.


Corrections
An article on Wednesday about a dispute over police treatment of blacks in Battleboro, N.C., and a boycott of white businesses there misidentified a clergyman from Rocky Mount, N.C., who described how the success of the Battleboro boycott might benefit other communities in the region.
He is Dr.
Thomas L. Walker, not Dr.
Thomas L. Clark.


Israel's Volatile Market Braces for an Onslaught
ISRAEL'S stock market is the fastest-growing, most volatile, riskiest exchange in the risk-taking Middle East.
This week, its investors got an added shot of uncertainty.
The Israeli Government on Tuesday proposed a 10 percent tax on stock transactions, and braced itself for a donnybrook.
In the tax-heavy country, stock transactions are one of the few things that escape the tax collector.
The last time the Government tried to institute such a tax, 30 years ago, it roiled the market.


Giuliani Supports Independent Body To Monitor Police
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani said for the first time yesterday that he favored creating an independent agency to monitor corruption in New York City's Police Department, and he said he would try to reach agreement with the City Council on what powers to give it.
The creation of an agency with sweeping powers to pursue corrupt police officers was the core recommendation of the Mollen Commission, which concluded a two-year investigation in July with a scathing report criticizing a "willful blindness" to corruption in the Police Department.


Cunningham's 'Events' to Open the Joyce's Season
The Merce Cunningham Dance Company will open the 1994-95 dance season at the Joyce Theater with a program of "Events," sections of past, present and future dances that combine to form a new portable work that may be performed in any kind of stage space.
The Cunningham programs (Sept. 13-18) will include dance that was part of the first "Event," in Vienna in 1964, and will be performed with a Robert Rauschenberg set that changes slightly every day.
Highlights of the season at the Joyce, which runs through March 5 with 29 programs, also include the return to New York of the Los Angeles-based Lewitzky Dance Company after an absence of 15 years (Oct. 4-9), the New York debut of Smuin Ballets/SF (Oct. 11-16) and a rare New York performance by Hubbard Street Dance Chicago, a jazz-dance troupe that has become a repository for work by Twyla Tharp (Oct. 18-30).


Vaulting the Boundaries of Late Beethoven
So entrenched is our idea of Beethoven dividing his creative life into three parts that we can almost imagine him awakening one morning and announcing that his middle period was over and that the late one would begin that afternoon.
Such boundary lines, of course, were drawn after the fact, and the lines are anything but straight.
Where, for example, are we to place the "Archduke" Trio?
Its opus number (Op. 97) signals lateness, but its extraordinary generosity and sense of leisure occupies a period all its own.
The "Archduke" came to the Mostly Mozart Festival at Avery Fisher Hall on Thursday, preceded by an early Mozart Flute Quartet in C (K. 285B) and followed by the Mendelssohn E-flat Octet.
The musicians included members of the Chamber Music Society of Lincoln Center.
Among their guests were the bright young players of the Miami String Quartet.


If Budget Is Not Agreed On, Yonkers Must Cut Spending
This city always seems to do things the hard way.
Torn by racial and political divisions, Yonkers has been under a court order to desegregate its housing since 1988 and has teetered on the brink of bankruptcy three times in the last 20 years.


A Summer Afternoon To Decide Racing Year
It was 9:45 on a misty morning when the horse van stopped outside the stakes barn today and Holy Bull stepped down the ramp after nearly five hours on the road.
It was his first visit to Saratoga, and it brought him face to face with the perils of the track's history of upsets, the rigors of the 125th Travers Stakes and the grit and speed of Tabasco Cat.
He was greeted by Jimmy Croll, his owner and trainer, who had arrived five minutes earlier from their home base at Monmouth Park on the New Jersey Shore.
And Croll quickly checked his imposing gray horse, inspected the Clark Stakes Barn, where he took up residence for 48 hours and said with satisfaction: "It's like the Waldorf-Astoria here."


John J. Bonica, Pioneer in Anesthesia, Dies at 77
Dr.
John J. Bonica, an anesthesiologist and leader in the effort to understand pain and cope with it, died on Monday at St.
Mary's Hospital in Rochester, Minn., where he was being treated at the Mayo Clinic.
A resident of Mercer Island, Wash., he was 77.
The cause was a cerebral hemorrhage, said the University of Washington School of Medicine, where the doctor was a professor and chairman emeritus of the Department of Anesthesiology.


Whitewater Inquiry Turns To Later Clinton Financing
In the weeks before he was replaced as the independent counsel investigating the Whitewater case, Robert B. Fiske Jr. substantially broadened his inquiry to examine the way Bill Clinton had financed his political career, particularly his 1990 campaign for governor of Arkansas, witnesses and outside lawyers familiar with the inquiry say.
The new focus is the latest development in a continuing expansion of the work by the independent counsel's office.
What began as a smaller investigation into the personal finances of Mr.
Clinton and his wife, Hillary -- in particular their real estate partnership with a savings and loan operator from 1978 through the mid-1980's -- has now grown to include several hundred thousand dollars in personal loans that the couple obtained for campaigns and other political activities.


Corrections
A brief report by The Associated Press in the Company News column in Business Day on Thursday, about a new Federal law limiting lawsuits in crashes of older small planes, misstated the reaction of Arthur E. Wegner, chief executive of the Beech Aircraft Company.
Mr.
Wegner said the law would give Beech an opportunity to reassess the single-engine airplane market; the company says it is not immediately considering increasing production of any model.


George Gewirtz, Psychiatrist, 37
Dr.
George Gewirtz, a psychiatrist at the Columbia University College of Physicians and Surgeons, died yesterday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 37.
The cause was AIDS, his family said.


Canadiens Send Carbonneau to the Blues
GUY CARBONNEAU, the outspoken and at times controversial captain of the Montreal Canadiens, was traded to the St.
Louis Blues yesterday for the rookie center JIM MONTGOMERY.
Carbonneau, 34, had been with Montreal for his entire career, after being drafted in 1979, and led the Canadiens to the Stanley Cup in 1993.
But his age and run-ins with management may have made him expendable.
Carbonneau was the Canadiens' player representative and was involved in negotiations Thursday with Commissioner GARY BETTMAN.


Excerpts From the Senate Debate on Revisions in the Health Care System
For much of this week, Senate Democrats have repeatedly argued that Congress should pass a health insurance overhaul that provides all Americans with coverage equal to what Congress itself enjoys under the Federal Employees Health Benefits program.
Republicans have just as consistently replied that the Federal plan is nothing extraordinary and dismissed the argument as demagogic.
But the strategy of the Democrats, played out for the C-Span television audience, has clearly annoyed their opponents.


Frank J. Anderson, 82, Author, Curator and Botanical Scholar
Frank Joseph Anderson, one of the horticultural world's preeminent authors and scholars of medieval and Renaissance botany, and honorary curator of rare books and manuscripts at the New York Botanical Garden, died on Monday at the New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center.
He was 82 and lived in Jackson Heights, Queens
He died of complications after an extended illness, said Harry Morriss, his brother-in-law.


Public Toilets in New York: Maybe This Time
People circle it warily, as though it were a spaceship that had crashed down in City Hall Park.
Tentatively, they slip a quarter into a slot, its rounded doors swoosh open, and they step inside.
This futuristic object of curiosity is that most mundane of human necessities, a toilet.


Mexican Women Courted for Votes
She knows the majority of Mexican voters are women, and she knows they have a crucial role to play in Sunday's presidential election, but Consuela Ramirez can't help but feel that none of the candidates has done more than pay them lip service.
"There has been very little focus on ideas of importance to women, very little," said Mrs.
Ramirez, a 46-year-old psychologist from Merida.
She wore a long white embroidered dress called a hipil that is traditional in her home state of Yucatan, and she carried a cellular telephone for making business calls.


Roamin Rachel Surprise Victor
Roamin Rachel, the less heralded half of an entry saddled by Shug McGaughey, not only ran away from her celebrated stablemate Educated Risk today, she also ran away from everybody else, winning the Ballerina Handicap by a length and a quarter.
Roamin Rachel, a 4-year-old filly owned by the Tri Honors Stable, was running last in the field of six after half a mile while Mike Smith and Julie Krone were staging a speed duel up front aboard Twist Afleet and the favored Classy Mirage.
They ran six furlongs in 1:084/5 , but Roamin Rachel shot through the stretch from fourth place to first.


Police to Reinstall an Art Exhibit That Angered Officers
The New York City Police Department has agreed to reinstall an art exhibition that was removed from its headquarters two years ago after police officers complained that two paintings in it were offensive, according to a consent agreement reached to settle a Federal lawsuit.
The exhibition, installed in the lobby of One Police Plaza for Hispanic Heritage month in November 1992, featured works by black and Hispanic artists, including a diptych by Christian Cortes titled "Train Number Seven," whose panels depicted a wounded police officer and an officer eating a doughnut.


One Accuser Of Chavis Withdraws Sex Charge
As the N.A.A.C.P. board prepares to meet on Saturday to decide the fate of its executive director, the Rev.
Dr.
Benjamin F. Chavis Jr., a woman who had once accused Dr.
Chavis of sexual harassment said today the charge had been a "misunderstanding."
The woman, Susan Tisdale, appeared with Dr.
Chavis at the N.A.A.C.P.'s headquarters here at a news conference at which he lashed out at detractors and critical news reports.


Bridge; On some exasperating hands, the best bidding signals might be flashing amber lights.
There are some hands on which every bid represents a headache, and at the end of the day it is not clear what the contract should have been.
An example is the diagramed deal played in the Regional Senior Stratified Pairs Championship in Rye, N.Y., in January.
It was reported by Al Pagan of Washington Township, N.J., who sat North.
Study the North-South hands and select a contract.
Four spades and five clubs are obvious possibilities and succeed, but neither is safe.
Three no-trump is best, although even that might fail after a heart lead and hardly anyone would find that contract in real life.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY GIULIANI SUPPORTS POLICE MONITOR
Mayor Giuliani said for the first time that he favored creating an independent agency to monitor corruption in New York City's Police Department, and he said he would try to reach agreement with the City Council on what powers to give it.


RESULTS PLUS
TRACK AND FIELD Christie Wins and Torrance Pulls Upset  Two days after outsprinting the best field assembled this year, in Zurich, Linford Christie of Britain won another 100-meter race yesterday, beating Dennis Mitchell of the United States at the Van Damme Memorial track meet in Brussels.
But the winning streak of a Russian, Irina Privalova, in the women's 100 was ended by another American, Gwen Torrance.
The 34-year-old Christie won in 10.03 seconds even though he was somewhat slow out of the blocks because of wet conditions.
Torrance ran the second best women's time of the season, 10.83 seconds, in easily beating Merlene Ottey of Jamaica.
Privalova, who beat Torrance in Zurich, was well back.
The British hurdler Colin Jackson stayed on course for the pot of gold to be awarded to any athlete who can win his or her event in each of the Golden Four meets in Oslo, Zurich, Brussels and Berlin.
The German meet will be held on Aug. 30.
Jackson won the 110-meter hurdles in 13.22 seconds. (AP) GOLF Plus-14 Vaults Lowery Into Lead  Showing little fear of sand and little regard for his better-known competitors, Steve Lowery carded seven birdies in a bogey-free round yesterday to take the lead at the halfway point of the International in Castle Rock, Colo.
Lowery, whose best finish in seven seasons on the PGA Tour was a second at San Diego this year, earned 14 points and had a two-round total of 21 points under the modified Stableford system.
Equaling Lowery's plus-14 as the day's best score was Dave Stockton Jr., who was at plus-20 along with Mike Reid.
First-round leader Bruce Lietzke, dropped from 16 points to 14 under the scoring system in which a player receives 8 points for a double eagle, 5 for eagle, 2 for birdie, 0 for par, minus-1 for bogey and minus-3 for double bogey or worse. (AP) Putt Canceled on Account of Tornado Threat: Ellie Gibson didn't get a chance to attempt a 25-foot birdie putt for the lead on the final hole yesterday because lightning and the threat of a tornado forced the suspension of play at the L.P.G.A.
Chicago Challenge.
Gibson, who began the day a shot behind first-round leader Katie Peterson-Parker, was tied for the lead with six others at 7-under par when play was halted.
She was among 11 players scheduled to complete the second round this morning.
Peterson-Parker, who shot a 72, was tied with Kathryn Marshall, Janice Gibson, Michelle Estill, Dale Eggeling and Jane Geddes at 137. (AP) My Son, the Caddie: With his golf pro son, Tad, serving as his caddy, Dick Rhyan shot a 6-under-par 66 yesterday to take a one-stroke lead after the first round of the Burnet Senior Classic in Coon Rapids, Minn.
"Tad was on the (PGA) Tour last year but he lost his card. He's getting ready to go to tour qualifying school. He's been caddying for me for three weeks and we haven't been over par." Rhyan said.
Tom Weiskopf and George Archer were one stroke back. (AP) ROLLER HOCKEY New Jersey Loses in Playoff Opener
The Buffalo Stampede pushed the New Jersey Rockin Rollers to the brink of playoff elimination last night with a 9-6 victory before 5,431 spectators at the Brendan Byrne Arena.
Buffalo was led by its goaltender, Nick Vitucci, who made 34 saves, and Len Soccio, who scored 2 goals.
New Jersey got a pair of goals from both Yves Heroux and Chris Belanger.
The Rockin Rollers will face the Stampede in Game 2 at the Buffalo Auditorium tomorrow night, and must win that contest to keep their playoff hopes alive.
If New Jersey is victorious, a 12-minute mini-game will be played right after to decide which team advances in the International Roller Hockey League playoffs.


Schult Homes Corp.(SHC,A) reports earnings for Qtr to July 2


Regency Health Services Inc.(RHS,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


You're in Driver's Seat Or in the Nascar Pits In Traveling Sideshow
After winning the Brickyard 400 on Aug. 6, Jeff Gordon did what many Super Bowl stars have done.
He went to Disney World.
But he and a lot of his fellow drivers went somewhere else that weekend: NascarWorld.
Essentially a traveling sideshow built around a racing theme, NascarWorld made its debut the same weekend as the Brickyard 400 a few miles away from the Indianapolis Motor Speedway in downtown Indianapolis.
It was scheduled to reappear -- like a Brigadoon plastered with sponsor logos -- in Atlanta at the season-ending Winston Cup race on Nov. 13, but bad weather experiences there at that time of year in the past have forced cancellation.
At least for this year.


Harman Intl Industries(HAR,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Kennel Club Doesn't Create Witless Canines; Let Mutts Compete
To the Editor:
Re Donald McCaig's "Gone to the Dogs" (Op-Ed, Aug. 3): It seems clear to me that the most serious border collie people are afraid that traditional "conformation" dog showing might "take the sheep out of the dog." Their nightmares are about millions of watered down black-and-white border collies.
The popularity of the breed is already out of control, due to Mr.
McCaig's own books and public television.


Kennel Club Doesn't Create Witless Canines
To the Editor:
Donald McCaig's "Gone to the Dogs" (Op-Ed, Aug. 3) is a pitiful attempt to discredit the country's second oldest sports governing organization.


Allou Health &amp; Beauty Care Inc.(ALU,A) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


; Hey, at Least the Kids Aren't on Strike


Illinois Indicts a Congressman In a Sex Case Involving 2 Girls
For the second time this year, a Democratic member of Congress from the rough-and-tumble world of Chicago politics has been indicted on felony charges that could ruin him and further tarnish his party on the eve of the November elections.
Representative Mel Reynolds, 42, a member of the House Ways and Means Committee, was indicted today on state pornography charges involving 15- and 16-year-old girls, and on charges of criminal sexual assault, aggravated criminal sexual abuse of a child and obstructing justice.


Castro's Refugee Weapon Has Been Wielded Before
The sudden flight of Cubans this week may have caught the United States by surprise and forced the Clinton Administration to reverse immigration policy, but experts say the influx was heralded in public threats by President Fidel Castro two weeks ago as his economic and political difficulties deepened.
No sooner had Mr.
Castro quelled the rioting that broke out on the Havana waterfront on Aug. 5, involving thousands of people who chanted "Down with Fidel!" and clashed with police and security forces, then he declared that the Clinton Administration had launched a "comprehensive offensive" and "subversive plan" against him and he threatened to allow all Cubans unhappy with conditions on the island to leave for the United States.


Morgan Keegan Inc.(MOR,N) reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Cobb County, America
To the Editor:
Your report on the "New South and Old" leaves a false impression of Cobb County and suburban metro Atlanta (front page, Aug. 1).


'Godfather' Of Chinatown Is Laid to Rest
With the red flag of a Chinese secret society draped over his body, and a favorite gray fedora laid next to his head, Benny Ong took his last trip through Chinatown yesterday.
A parade of more than 120 black limousines extended like a long exclamation mark on his role as the godfather of New York City's most enduring ethnic neighborhood.
The normally noisy, teeming sidewalks slowed to a near-silence as residents paused to stare at Mr.
Ong's beflowered funeral procession snaking through Chinatown's tiny streets, stopping outside his home on Pell Street, at his tong's headquarters a few doors away, and again at the restaurant where he held court at lunchtime each day.


Local Waters Please the Finest Palates


There's No Place Like Home
WHEN John Maybank moved into his two-room apartment in July, he had trouble falling asleep.
"There I was with this brand-new box-spring bed," said the 57-year-old New Yorker, who had spent the previous six years sleeping on grates around John Jay College.
"The bed was real comfortable and I was in my own place but I couldn't sleep. The only way I could get some shut-eye was to get my old sleeping bag out and lay down on the floor."


Kings Tell Tisdale No and Brickowski Yes
The Sacramento Kings renounced their rights to free agent WAYMAN TISDALE yesterday and signed the journeyman forward/ center FRANK BRICKOWSKI, who will join his sixth N.B.A. team in 10 seasons.
Brickowski, 35, averaged 13 points and 5 rebounds per game last season for Milwaukee and Charlotte.
Terms of his contract were not released.
The departure of Tisdale, 30, had been expected since the end of the season.
The 6-foot-9-inch forward played five and a half seasons for Sacramento, averaging 18 points and 7 rebounds per game.
The team never won more than 29 games in a season during his stay.


Kukoc's Contract Is Rejected
The National Basketball Association yesterday disallowed a contract between the Chicago Bulls and TONI KUKOC, charging that it violates the league's salary cap rules.
Last year, Kukoc signed an eight-year contract with the Bulls that called for a first-year salary of $1.1 million, the largest figure the team could pay under the salary cap.
After exercising a one-year opt-out clause this summer, Kukoc re-signed with the Bulls for six years at an average of $4.1 million.


Cuban-Americans Ambivalent on Shift
Cuban-Americans today appeared to be of two minds on changing American policy on Cuban refugees.
Many railed against closing the door on 28 years of special status for Cubans fleeing Fidel Castro that enabled any who reached these shores to remain here.


Luigi Chinetti Sr., 93, Automobile Importer and Champion Racer
Luigi Chinetti Sr., a race driver who was the first importer of Ferrari automobiles into North America and an essential figure in the early success of the Italian automaker, died Wednesday at home in Greenwich, Conn., at the age of 93.
Mr. Chinetti died of natural causes, said his son, Luigi Chinetti Jr.


One Owner Will Join The Talks, Not Five
When talks aimed at ending the baseball strike resume next week, only one club owner is expected to be among the group of five "owners" who will join players at the bargaining table.
A high-ranking club official said yesterday that Bud Selig, the acting commissioner, and the executive council had selected a pool of 11 owners or club executives from which the group would be selected for the bargaining sessions.
A lawyer close to the talks said they further had tentatively designated the five who would attend the first session.


Linus C. Pauling Dies at 93; Twice Winner of Nobel Prize
Linus C. Pauling, a brilliant chemist and an untiring political activist who received one Nobel Prize for chemistry and another for peace, died on Friday at his ranch in the Big Sur area of Northern California.
He was 93 years old.
The cause was cancer, said Steve Lawson, chief executive officer of the Linus Pauling Institute of Science and Medicine in Palo Alto.


AAA Ball a Waiting Game for Frustrated Davis
Russ Davis was once the poster boy for the Yankees' minor league system.
With his robust power, strong arm and improved glove, he was supposed to be the rookie most likely to make an impact this year or the rookie most likely to be traded for a quality pitcher.
Davis did not look like a poster boy today; a 20-year old shortstop named Derek Jeter has obviously wrested away that distinction.
No, Davis looked grumpy, frustrated and uncertain as he tried to decipher why he has been nudged into the background and how he can emerge again and crawl into the majors.


INSIDE
F.T.C. Clears Macy Deal
The F.T.C. has effectively approved the merger of R. H. Macy and Federated Department Stores, removing another potential obstacle to a combination of the companies.
Page 37.
Ruling in King Case
A Federal appeals court upheld the convictions of two Los Angeles police officers for the beating of Rodney King and said their prison sentences had been too lenient.
Page 7.
Rabbi at Arafat's Side
An anti-Zionist rabbi is the only Jewish aide to Yasir Arafat, but both the Israelis and the Palestinians are puzzling over his role.
Page 2.
A Revamped Crime Bill
Democrats and moderate Republicans worked feverishly to sort out the details of a revamped crime bill proposed by the White House.
Page 9.
Less Time for the Pastime
Maybe it's the strike, maybe it's an increasing apathy toward the game, but a poll shows that many fewer Americans are interested in baseball than five years ago.
Page 31.


S.&amp; P. Outlook on Revlon Debt Is Negative
The Standard &amp; Poor's Corporation unexpectedly changed its outlook yesterday on the Revlon cosmetics empire and its $2.2 billion of debt to negative, from positive.
S.&amp; P., the credit rating agency, cited the snail-like pace of Revlon's recovery since the company began a series of restructurings in 1991 and refinanced some debt in 1993.


German Engineering At Volvo Semifinals
Far and away the most popular players remaining in the ill-starred Volvo International tennis tournament going into today's quarterfinals were Boris Becker and MaliVai Washington.
Unfortunately for the beleaguered promoters, Becker and Washington faced each other in one of the day's rain-interrupted matches, insuring that the Volvo would lose one of its two biggest attractions.
Not surprisingly it was Washington.
He was probably the more popular of the two at the Volvo, where he first gained attention in 1990, when he upset top-seeded Ivan Lendl in the first round and then reached the final the next year.
Becker never lost his serve and broke Washington's three times in recording a 6-2, 6-4 victory at the Connecticut Tennis Center.


Corrections
An obituary on Aug. 11 about Thomas Laverne, a former Republican State Senator from Rochester, misstated his age.
He was 77, not 88.


No Headline
I've got curtains.
But I didn't have curtain rods.
I didn't know about curtain rods.
I didn't know where you get them and how they go on the wall.
That may not sound like much to you, but you know what I had while I was out on the street?
I had my sleeping bag and I had some spare underwear.
That's it.
I never thought about curtain rods. -- JOHN MAYBANK, homeless until last month.  [ 27:1. ]


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
7.75
7.75
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
4.00
4.00
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
4.69
4.70
2.95
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.54
4.53
2.97
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.90
4.92
3.09
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.25
7.26
5.61
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.49
7.49
6.22
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.36
8.36
7.06
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.40
6.38
5.62
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Look Who's Dominating the Arms Trade
The Clinton Administration has yet to announce a policy on arms sales.
Under this Administration the U.S. is dominating the market for arms as no other country has in recent history.
The American share of new arms deals in the third world soared to 73 percent in 1993 from 56 percent in 1992.
Given the dramatic rise, the failure to develop a policy is truly a missed opportunity.
The U.S. could use its market dominance to try to get other leading producer countries to agree to restrain the arms trade.
It could offer to limit its own sales in return for similar restraint from other countries, starting with the sale of the most advanced weapons to the world's most volatile region -- the Middle East.


Gaza Journal; Rabbi on the Messiah's Team, and Now Arafat's
Rabbi Moshe Hirsh, the only Jew in Yasir Arafat's Palestinian government, believes he is charged with a divine mission in this era of peace and reconciliation.
"I pray daily for the demise of the demonic, Zionist state," he said, holding his black beaver hat in his hands as he sat outside Mr.
Arafat's office the other day.


Health Care Developments
YESTERDAY  The coalition of moderate Senators that is devising a compromise health plan described its proposal, but a growing chorus of Republicans pushed for delay.
CONGRESS  The moderates, the "mainstream coalition," said that they were still working on their plan's subsidy provisions, but that they intended to cut $100 billion from the deficit over 10 years while increasing health insurance coverage from 85 percent to about 92 percent of Americans.
The group separately briefed both George J. Mitchell, the Senate majority leader, and the Republican leader, Bob Dole of Kansas.
President Clinton has said he could not support a proposal that did not provide coverage for 95 percent of Americans by 2000.
But as debate continued on the Senate floor, Republican senators, including Mr.
Dole, continued to insist that lawmakers be allowed to go home and talk to the voters before making any decisions.
WHITE HOUSE  At a news conference, President Clinton urged Congress to continue trying to reach a compromise.
"I would say to them, 'Keep working, keep working at it, because if you delay, you may lose it altogether,' " he said.
On the substance of proposals made so far, Mr.
Clinton said: "We need to let this thing unfold a little more. I wouldn't prejudge it yet."


Corrections
An article about a 7-year-old Belarussian girl hospitalized in New York was omitted from some copies yesterday, and a duplicate article about the Crown Heights killing appeared in its place.
Readers wishing copies of the omitted article may write to Production Quality Control, The New York Times, 229 West 43d Street, New York, N.Y. 10036.


Stocks Take 'Witching' In Stride, Ending Mixed
The stock market closed mixed but essentially unchanged yesterday, despite a "double witching hour" and fallout from the Federal Reserve's steep increase in interest rates earlier in the week.
Such witching-hour days, when options on stock indexes and individual stocks expire at the same time, usually lead to hectic sessions and many trading imbalances, as traders hurry to buy and sell stocks before their options expire.
But the New York Stock Exchange reported no trading imbalances yesterday, and the trading volume of 279.7 million shares was below average.


Too Little Money for Mandates
Last year's motor-voter act requires states to arrange for registering people to vote when they apply for driver's licenses.
That is a proper matter for Federal law, strongly supported by this page.
But it was also another case of Washington ordering state action without money to pay for it -- an "unfunded mandate" that will cost states tens of millions of dollars a year.
The cost of such mandates has become so burdensome for state and local governments that they are lobbying for relief; state and local authorities seek relief in Congress, while local authorities also seek relief in their state capitals.
But it is wrong to demand, as some do, that governments pay for all they decree.
As a matter of national policy, some things -- like civil rights -- are local responsibilities but governed by Federal statute.
Unemployment insurance is another example.


Interest in Baseball Declining, Poll Says
Interest in major league baseball has continued its recent erosion, dropping by one-third over the last five years, while those who still consider themselves fans support the owners over the players almost two to one in the current labor impasse and are riding out the players' strike quite well.
Those were among the findings of a telephone survey of 1,076 Americans conducted on Tuesday and Wednesday by CBS News.
The baseball poll, which was part of a broader survey, has a statistical margin of error of plus or minus 3 percentage points over all, and plus or minus 5 points for the 419 respondents who described themselves as baseball fans.


Effort to Solve Energy Woes Clashes With Nuclear Safety
If the collapse of nuclear controls in Russia poses the near-term threat that terrorists could seize plutonium to make nuclear weapons, longer-term fears arise from nuclear energy programs launched by America's closest allies: Japan, Britain and France.
Over the next two decades these countries, as well as Russia, plan to vastly increase the world's stockpiles of plutonium.
They are producing it to fuel a generation of nuclear power plants whose time has never quite come.


U.S. Halts Hundreds of Cubans At Sea in Abrupt Policy Change
The United States today plucked hundreds of Cuban refugees from rafts and boats off the Florida coast and began to transfer them to detention camps in Guantanamo Bay as President Clinton ordered an end to the longstanding policy of welcoming fleeing Cubans with open arms.
With more Cubans taking to the seas than at any time since 1980, the abrupt change of American policy was aimed at averting a new Caribbean exodus, much as the Administration has sought to discourage Haitians from leaving their country by denying them entry to the United States.


Sampras, Short of Play, Still to Compete at the Open
The United States Open, already in talent trouble because of the absence of the four-time champion Martina Navratilova, the two-time champion Monica Seles and the 1991 semifinalist Jennifer Capriati, was relieved to learn yesterday that its men's champion, No. 1-ranked Pete Sampras, has every intention of defending his title and collecting a third Grand Slam crown in 1994.
"I've come to the conclusion that even if there's a bit of pain, the Open is the last Grand Slam of the year and I'm going to do everything I can to play," Sampras said by telephone from his home in Tampa, Fla., where he has spent the last month recuperating from tendinitis in his left ankle.


Bank of America Is Upheld On Customer Arbitration
A California judge has upheld the Bank of America's requirement that its checking account and credit-card customers use arbitration rather than the courts to settle complaints, a decision that has broad implications for the way banks resolve disputes with their depositors.
The ruling, which will affect about 12.4 million of the bank's clients, was released late on Thursday by Judge Thomas J. Mellon of the state's Superior Court in San Francisco.
It followed a three-week trial that ended in May.


Top Rates and Best Deals On Certificates of Deposit
WITH interest rates rising and the stock market stagnating, certificates of deposit provide a soothing choice for conservative investors.
Some banks are dusting off C.D.'s with gimmicks, like rates that adjust or that track the stock market, for wider appeal.
But these souped-up products often carry below-average rates and may lock in investors for long terms.
"Go short term and roll over," said Robert K. Heady, publisher of The Bank Rate Monitor in North Palm Beach, Fla.
"Don't lock in at long-term rates, because you'll be able to get higher numbers down the road."


Settling an Insurance Claim Through Arbitration
Bonnit Braxton, a transportation planner for the State of California, totaled her car in a traffic accident last year.
When she filed an insurance claim for what she considered the car's fair value, her insurer countered with a much small offer.
"They were offering me less than my outstanding loan," she said "No matter how much I argued, they wouldn't budge."


Q &amp; A
Withdrawing I.R.A. Shares
Q.
When I start withdrawing from my I.R.A., if I want to accept shares, by what procedure are they transferred to my name?
HENRY B. HUNT JR., Baltimore.
A.
You are allowed to receive shares, instead of cash, from an individual retirement account through a process known as an "in-kind" distribution.
But you must specify which shares are to be distributed and either a dollar amount or the number of shares.
"The distribution of securities or mutual funds is generally made by re-registering the shares into the individual name or personal account of the I.R.A. participant," said Joseph J. Seymour, senior vice president of the Quest For Value mutual funds.
"The participant rarely receives the shares physically. The shares are generally transferred to a regular account in the individual's name."


Cuban-Americans Divided
Miami's Cuban community expressed ambivalence over ending a policy that had allowed refugees to remain in the United States.
Page 10.


Final Farewell for a Chinatown Leader


No Headline
The Federal Reserve's chairman, Alan Greenspan, appears to have been more reluctant than some of his colleagues to raise interest rates earlier this summer, judging from the notes of a meeting in July of top Fed officials.
The central bank's top interest-rate policy panel voted at its July meeting to allow Mr.
Greenspan to raise interest rates at his discretion during the following weeks rather than wait for the next meeting of the group, according to minutes of the meeting released today.


Weirton Steel Corp.(WS,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Bond Prices Track Dollar And End Flat
Prices of Treasury securities were slightly mixed yesterday, tracing the dollar's course in the currency markets.
The dollar's early weakness caused the bond market to slump, and nearly erased all of the market's gains since the Federal Reserve increased interest rates on Tuesday.


Increasingly, Employers Offer Benefits To All Partners
Thirteen years ago, The Village Voice was the only company in New York that offered insurance benefits to the unmarried partners of its employees, making the weekly newspaper a pioneer in a province where most companies thought it too expensive to go.
But now -- despite fears of high costs, concern over possible abuses by employees and political pressures from conservatives -- dozens of universities, companies and municipalities in the New York region have quietly begun offering insurance packages to their gay employees and in some cases to unmarried heterosexual couples.
The number appears to be increasing steadily each year.


North American Mortgage Co.(NAC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Darrel Austin, 88, Visionary Painter Of Mythical Scenes
Darrel Austin, whose thickly painted imaginary landscapes continued the visionary romantic tradition of William Blake and Albert Pinkham Ryder, died on Tuesday at his home in New Fairfield, Conn.
He was 88.
He had been ill for several years, said a friend, Robert H. Ellsworth.


Going Back in Time With Blues Legends
The Blues Festival '94, which stopped at the Paramount on Thursday night for an exhausting five hours of performances, should have been titled the What Has Become of the Blues?
Festival.
Its four-act lineup -- B. B. King, Little Feat, Dr.
John and a Muddy Waters tribute band made up of the bluesman's former sidemen -- was extremely diverse, showing the various paths the blues has taken through popular music in its slow, centurylong evolution.
The three bona fide bands on the roster hit their career peaks at least 20 years ago.
In the 46 years since B. B. King's first blues hit, an adaptation of Lowell Fulson's "3 O'Clock Blues," the singer and guitarist has become and remained a blues giant and a consummate entertainer.
He has not, however, become a great mathematician.
"For 44 years, I've been trying to play the blues," he said, humbly introducing a medley of hits that began with "3 O'Clock Blues" and ended with an abridged, uptempo version of "The Thrill Is Gone."


Sidbec-Dosco reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Pharmacist Counseling Saves Health Dollars
To the Editor:
Your Aug. 2 Business Day article on Upjohn Company's agreement to repay eight states over its drug marketing plan incorrectly characterizes the pharmacy information program that Miles Inc. undertook in support of Adalat CC, a new, less expensive medication for treating hypertension.


Anderson Exploration Ltd. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Gaz Metropolitain reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


U.N. Reports Serbian Violations at Sarajevo
A United Nations report said today that Bosnian Serbs had fired artillery within the area around Sarajevo from which heavy weapons are banned and had aimed antiaircraft guns at relief planes from a weapons depot that was supposed to be guarded by Ukrainian peacekeepers.
"They have been shelled by heavy weapons mainly from the direction within the 20-kilometer zone around Sarajevo," the United Nations report said, referring to artillery attacks on Thursday by Bosnian Serbs on Bosnian Army forces east of the town of Breza.


Observer; Near Rope's End
Age continues to have her way with me.
Nothing can be done about it, not even by Science, which I capitalize not to denote the name of a magazine but out of respect for one of the world's more civilized religions.
Just as insufferably wise men predicted years ago, age has driven me from smiling residence in a tolerant Christian liberalism to the sour and prickly solitude which is the natural habitat of the reactionary mossback.


CHRONICLE
The book party circuit usually shuts down for the summer, but the brunch tomorrow for BARBARA SEAMAN is no routine "congratulate the author" event.
Her book, "The Doctors' Case Against the Pill" (Peter H. Wyden), was published 25 years ago.
The brunch, at the East Hampton, L.I., home of AUDREY FLACK, an artist, is the first in a series of events honoring the author, who is a founder of the National Women's Health Network.
The book described the side effects of birth control pills and called for warnings to be packaged with them.
Senate subcommittee hearings a year after the book came out resulted in mandatory package inserts.


Ukraine, Resisting Pressure, Is Increasing Energy Production at Chernobyl
In the summertime Chernobyl is lush.
Wildflowers of yellow and purple sprout where the asphalt ends around the monstrous cement and steel sarcophagus covering the remnants of the world's worst nuclear accident.
Radiation levels have fallen considerably since the explosion in 1986.
Many of the workers and engineers skip radiation checks at designated meters despite the random patches of high contamination in the area.
Buses and cars now move freely between Chernobyl and the rest of country.


Mother and Daughter Killed in Hit-and-Run Accident in Queens


COMPANY BRIEFS
BANK OF BOSTON CORP., Boston, a bank holding company, said it had completed the acquisition of privately held Pioneer Bank, Chattanooga, Tenn, a subsidiary of Pioneer Bancshares Inc., for $118 million in cash.


CHRONICLE
While MICK JAGGER is playing to huge audiences in this country, his daughter KARIS JAGGER, 23, is in Scotland making her debut as a theatrical director at the Edinburgh Festival.
Although her father can't be on hand, her mother, MARSHA HUNT, is not only there but is performing the one-woman play, an adaptation of her first novel, "Joy," published in 1990 by Plume.
In the 75-minute performance, Ms.
Hunt, who is 48 and white, plays her creation, Baby Palatine, a black 60-year-old God-fearing woman who becomes the wardrobe mistress to a female pop group.


Rwandans' Exodus From Safe Zone Swells
The approach of a Monday deadline for completing the withdrawal of French troops from Rwanda sent refugees streaming across the border into Zaire today at a rate of nearly 2,000 an hour.
The exodus was swelled by a threat by Zaire to close the border if the flood of refugees became overwhelming.
Rwandans were also fleeing out of fear that the new Rwandan Government would immediately send its army into the "safe zone" in southwestern Rwanda that the French troops are leaving.


Junk-Bond Yields Lift the Income Category
The income fund category is a grab bag for funds that do not really fit elsewhere.
Its biggest components are income funds, which devote less than half their portfolios to stocks and put the rest in bonds, and strategic income funds, which own junk, government and foreign bonds.
Of the two, income funds lead this list because their top performers have large concentrations in junk bonds.
Berwyn Income, for example, recently owned 15 percent stocks, 20 percent junk bonds and 40 percent convertible securities, which are usually low-rated securities.


From a Ditch, A Ray of Sun; Clinton Exudes Cheer Despite Many Crises
To hear President Clinton's recent visitors tell it, he is frustrated with Congress, the news media and the whole Washington political culture.
He speaks, those who have talked with him say, with weariness and some bitterness about his difficulties.
More openly than ever, his senior aides admit that he and they have made serious mistakes, some of them again and again, and they freely concede that Mr.
Clinton is in a political ditch (which is, after all, no more than an acknowledgement of what the polls say).
Change now, they suggest, or it may soon be too late.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
The Federal Trade Commission has effectively approved the merger of R. H. Macy and Federated Department Stores, removing another potential obstacle to a combination of the two department store companies.  [ Page 37. ]


For People With Citidollars, It's Use Them or Lose Them
Bonuses sometimes lure consumers into choosing a particular credit card or other product.
Just look at the popularity of frequent-flier programs and the airline-linked credit cards, which accumulate free miles.
But, all too often, there is a catch: the programs can change at any time or be discontinued.


NEWS SUMMARY
Dr. John J. Bonica, anesthesiologist.
Luigi Chinetti Sr., race-car driver.
Frank J. Anderson, author curator and botanical scholar.
Editorials/Op-Ed 22-23  Editorials  How clean in Mexico?
Too little money for mandates.
U.S. dominating the arms trade.
Letters  Russell Baker: Near rope's end.
Robert F. Wagner Jr. and Julia Vitullo-Martin: A place to call home.
Yelena Khanga: Overrrun by ugly Americans.
Charles Rembar: When Justice Holmes swung and missed.
Bridge 14 Chronicle 24 Crossword 19


No Nostalgia This Time as Jets and Giants Get Down to Business
For one more night, Big Apple football fans can wring the last bit of nostalgia out of that season of 25 years ago, when the young, long-haired Jets beat the aging, Establishment Giants.
It was the Jets' brash Joe Namath versus the Giants' Fran Tarkenton, the glib preacher's son.
Now the Giants' quarterback is only 24 years old, and a Duke man yet.
The Jets' quarterback is 30-something, and Namath is the broadcaster.
So much for history.


Sports of The Times; New Rules Give Offenses Big Lead
TOILING through preseason games and grappling with free agency and the salary cap have kept each National Football League team on edge.
There is more, however, on each team's plate.
Each has been forced to adjust to a new package of offensive-minded rules changes.
Thus far, the nays and yeahs divide smack down the middle.


BIPARTISAN GROUP IN SENATE OFFERS NEW HEALTH PLAN
A bipartisan group of nearly 20 senators today proposed health care legislation aimed at reducing the Federal deficit by $100 billion over 10 years and atincreasing insurance coverage from 85 percent of Americans today to 92 or 93 percent by 2004.
The proposal by the self-styled "Mainstream Coalition" has been described by its members as the best hope for leading the Senate to action on health care legislation this year.
Some other senators shared that hope.
But the immediate reaction to the plan in the Senate provided no clear indication of whether the group would succeed.


Moon Set for Return to Alma Mater
WARREN MOON, who arrived at the University of Washington campus as a 19-year-old sophomore in 1975, returns to Husky Stadium today when the Minnesota Vikings play the Seattle Seahawks in an exhibition game.
Since the 1978 Rose Bowl, in which he was the game's most valuable player, Moon has spent 6 seasons in Edmonton of the Canadian Football League, 10 in Houston in the National Football League and is starting his first season in Minnesota.


Corrections
A chart on Aug. 16 about carbon dioxide emissions in various countries listed its sources incompletely.
The figures were calculated and distributed by Population Action International, from data provided by the United Nations and the Carbon Dioxide Information Analysis Center.


Steel Gains in Home Building
For more than 50 years the American steel industry has been promoting its product for residential construction -- with a stunning lack of success.
According to the National Association of Home Builders, as recently as 1990, 94 percent of new homes were built with wood framing, with concrete block the most frequently used alternative.
But things are changing.
According to the American Iron and Steel Institute, an industry trade group, the number of steel-framed homes increased to 15,000 last year from 500 in 1992, with 75,000 projected this year.


Beliefs; A messenger of the apocalypse (the end is coming in September) still enjoys her blintzes.
It was not exactly the best of days when Eva Schwartz phoned to say that the world was going to end in September.
A few hours earlier another caller had identified herself as the reincarnation of King Ludwig II of Bavaria and announced that Richard Wagner and the Empress Elizabeth of Austria had been reincarnated as Donald Trump and John Denver.
This may explain why Ms.
Schwartz's plea for a newspaper article about a recent book titled "1994?" -- proving that the world would end and Christ would return between Sept. 15 and Sept. 27 -- was received with a certain impatience.


How Clean in Mexico?
Mexicans vote tomorrow for a new president and Congress in their most important election since single-party dominance took hold in 1929.
The ruling Institutional Revolutionary Party, or PRI, still enjoys huge advantages in campaign finance, media access and raw institutional power and remains, polls suggest, the likely overall winner.
But thanks to reforms adopted this year under intense internal and external pressure, opposition parties now have a chance of something like an honest count, and can hope to see their candidates for other offices assume their posts when they win.


Russia Moves on Cholera Epidemic in South
After weeks of inaction, Russian officials today acknowledged the seriousness of the cholera epidemic spreading across the southern regions of the country, and have announced a campaign to combat it.
More than 1,000 cases have been reported in Dagestan, and after long debate public health officials enacted a quarantine there this week, although they acknowledged that it would do little good.
There have been reports in the Russian press that the clean health certificates that people need to leave the region are for sale to anyone for $20.


Panel in Accord on Bill to Save U.S. Billions by Better Buying
House and Senate negotiators reached agreement today on legislation that would streamline the way the Government buys $200 billion worth of goods a year, from office desks to aircraft carriers, and could ultimately save billions of dollars annually.
The legislation, which would bring the most sweeping changes in Government purchasing in more than a decade, would mostly affect Pentagon spending, which accounts for 75 percent of all Government purchases.
A Defense Department advisory panel has estimated that the changes could save the Pentagon up to $20 billion a year.


Kennel Club Doesn't Create Witless Canines; Purebred Problems
To the Editor:
As an owner of an arthritically inflicted German shepherd, whose temperament restricts his exposure to family and friends, I applaud Donald McCaig for his Aug. 3 Op-Ed article on the reprehensible state of affairs of the American Kennel Club.


CHRONICLE
Martha's Vineyard?
East Hampton?
Where, oh where will the Clintons spend their summer vacation?
In fact, with the ongoing health care and crime bill debates in Congress, will they even have a vacation?
CHELSEA CLINTON hasn't been sitting at home waiting for them to decide.
The President's 14-year-old daughter has been in Newport, R.I., this week learning to tack, jibe and reef during an intensive series of sailing lessons, The Associated Press reported yesterday.


Korea Must Act To Protect Itself
To the Editor:
"South Korea's Self-Inflicted Wound" (editorial, Aug. 9) contends that alleged repression in my country poses a graver threat to democracy than any subversive scheme hatched in Pyongyang, North Korea.
No free society can tolerate such acts as setting fire to police stations, attacking uniformed officers and even hijacking a train carrying civilian passengers.
Ordinary criminal laws serve for most of those charged in student radicalism and violent labor disputes.


F.T.C. Ends Inquiry Into Macy Deal
The Federal Trade Commission has effectively approved the merger of R. H. Macy &amp; Company and Federated Department Stores Inc., removing another potential obstacle to a combination of the two department store companies.
Federated said yesterday that the F.T.C. had terminated its investigation into possible antitrust issues raised by the merger.
While the agency does not formally approve such deals, the end of its inquiry effectively clears the way for the Federated-Macy union to go forward.


Canstar Sports (HKYIF,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Big Board's Uncovered Short Sales Reach a High
Uncovered short sales of stock on the New York Stock Exchange reached another high in the latest month, while short sales on the American Stock Exchange rose for the first time in three months, the two exchanges reported yesterday.
The total number of shares sold short on the Big Board and not yet covered rose nearly 1.3 percent, to a volume of 1.625 billion shares, the 10th straight monthly rise.
The total on the Amex rose five-hundredths of 1 percent, to a total of 107.27 million.
The figures cover trades settled by Aug. 15, which reflect transactions concluded by Aug. 8.


A Place to Call Home
Public housing was born during the Great Depression, a time of despair and hope.
It was viewed then as young, innovative, forward-thinking, attracting the country's best architects and thinkers.
Today, public housing is seen by many as dismal, tired, corrupt.
Huge projects have deteriorated beyond habitability in many cities and are being torn down in Newark, St.
Louis, Providence, R.I., and elsewhere.
Now several energetic, even charismatic local leaders are trying to bring about a renaissance in public housing.
In Chicago, for example, Vince Lane, who has led the nation's second-largest housing authority since 1988, has won national attention for his efforts to revive the projects he oversees: rehabilitation programs that train and employ tenants, conversion of abandoned lakefront apartments into mixed-income housing, establishment of a private school headed by the pioneer educator Marva Collins, and aggressive police searches for illegal tenants, weapons and drugs.


Merger of Retail Giants Will Mean More Jobs
To the Editor:
Re "When Retail Giants Merge" (editorial, Aug. 8) on the proposed merger of R. H. Macy &amp; Company and Federated Department Stores:


Astra Capsa reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Different Folks Have Different Strokes
The team of 22 men and 19 women that will represent the United States in next month's world swimming championships in Rome was completed tonight.
It includes a superstar in Janet Evans and prodigies in Gary Hall Jr., Chad Carvin, Tom Dolan and Allison Wagner.
Typical in essentially amateur sports, it also includes survivors who have overcome physical, financial or other problems.
Their world includes no million-dollar baseball players on strike, no million-dollar tennis players gone stale and no million-dollar basketball players mugging for cameras rather than playing defense.


Sea Containers Ltd.(SCRA,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Playtex Products Inc.(PYX,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 25


Some Finnish Folk Fiddlers Oompah and Drone Along
Finnish folk music hovers between Celtic and Slavic music, and like other folk styles played by fiddlers the music never underestimates the power of the drone.
On Wednesday night at the Fez in the East Village, two leading lights of the current Finnish folk revival, JPP and Maria Kalaniemi, performed pieces that honor and warp traditional materials.
JPP, from Kaustinen in eastern Finland, uses four violins, a harmonium and a bass fiddle.
The music oompahs along, with the four fiddles united in octaves, splayed along richly consonant chords or split between drones and melodies; harmonies resonate.
Many tunes are akin to the jigs, reels and waltzes of Celtic music, and albums by JPP, Ms.
Kalaniemi and other Finnish groups are now being released here by Green Linnet Records, primarily a Celtic-music label.


Ferguson Collapses in Court After Scorning Insanity Plea
A dispute over Colin Ferguson's mental state took several bizarre turns today, as he told a Nassau County judge in a rambling discourse that he rejected his lawyers' efforts to have him declared mentally unfit to stand trial, and then, moments later, collapsed and had to be dragged from court.
His lawyers, William M. Kunstler and Ronald L. Kuby, said that Mr.
Ferguson's behavior in court provided only a superficial glimpse of the mental instability that they say has made it nearly impossible for them to construct any kind of defense for their client, who is accused of killing six people and wounding 19 others on a Long Island Rail Road train last December.


Negotiators Work on Details That Could Save Crime Bill
Democrats and moderate Republicans in the House worked tonight to sort out the details of a crime bill compromise accepted by the White House on Thursday.
The chief feature of the plan endorsed by President Clinton is an across-the-board cut of about $3 billion, or 10 percent, in the original $33.5 billion package.
The negotiators' goal was a proposal that could attract at least a half-dozen Republicans who voted last week to block the bill, while keeping the support of the Democrats and the 11 Republicans who sided with the Administration on the first vote.
The compromise would not delete any programs from the bill; instead, each program would be trimmed.


Theodore Conrad, 84, Modeler And Architecture Preservationist
Theodore Conrad, who distilled modern architecture as a model maker and defended historic architecture as a preservationist, died yesterday at his home in Jersey City.
He was 84.
He died of congestive heart failure, said a friend, Colin Egan.


Moscow Marks the Anniversary of the Soviet Coup, With Subdued Fanfare


Sunstates Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Political Notes
It's a common enough promotional device: a special advertising section to tout a state's economy and attract new businesses.
But when Fortune magazine recently discussed doing just such a section on New York State, some potential advertisers balked.
Their concern: the 10-page section was scheduled to appear in the Oct. 3 issue -- smack in the middle of a gubernatorial race.


Two Rookie Owners Just Can't Stay Still
Rookie owners, like rookie players, must pay their dues before speaking out.
This is one of the unwritten rules of the major league baseball jungle.
Peter Angelos of the Baltimore Orioles and Jerry McMorris of the Colorado Rockies think they have paid their dues.
One hundred and seventy-three million of them in Angelos's case.
And about $150 million in expansion fees and startup costs in the case of the ownership of the two-year-old Rockies, which McMorris heads up.


Corrections
An article on July 31 about Davids Island described its history incorrectly.
The island was not abandoned after World War I. It was used by the Federal Government for decades after that, until 1966, when Fort Slocum was deactivated.


After 20 Years, Goodspeed Opera's 'Shenandoah' Back Again
IF "Shenandoah" is erroneously thought of as an epic show, don't blame it on the Goodspeed Opera House.
Here is the musical's birthing place and here is where it has returned, 20 years later.
In the time intervening, "Shenandoah" has played in 1,000-plus seat theaters, a couple of them on Broadway, which meant oversized productions and the sort of blustering performances that misshape a musical big only in heart.


This Week's Numbers
Last
Consensus
Period
Estimates
(I.D.E.A. INC.)
Tuesday
Housing starts, July, mils., ann. rate
1.35
1.34
Wednesday
Durable-goods orders, pct. chg.
1.2
0.5
Thursday
Weekly jobless claims, thousands
327
325
Existing-home sales, July, mils., ann. rate
3.80
3.88
Friday
Import prices, July, pct. chg.
0.7
0.7
G.D.P., provisional, 2d qtr., pct. chg.
3.7
3.8
G.D.P. deflator, 2d qtr., pct. chg.
2.9
2.9
*4*This Week's Developments
Monday
Tuesday
Johnson Redbook Report released
2-year Treasury note auction
Wednesday
5-year Treasury note auction


ALSO INSIDE
MAKING IT WORK 3
Teaching cycling to adults is a balancing act: stroking their egos when they fall, stoking their courage to try again.
NEW YORKERS &amp; CO. 4
125th Street hair wars: Amid criticism from established shops, immigrants weave braids in makeshift "salons."


Another View Of an Airport
The article describing the expansion plans at Sikorsky Memorial Airport ("Aftermath of a Crash: Should an Airport Grow?" July 31) left out several important issues.
The airport is geographically challenged.
It is surrounded on all sides by the Town of Stratford, Long Island Sound and the Housatonic River.
There is very little room for a lengthened runway, an access road and the existing structures.


Steak to Seafood on the East Side
AN AMERICAN PLACE *** (212) 684-2122; 2 Park Avenue, entrance on 32d Street; $$$$; all major credit cards
The compelling cuisine of Larry Forgione, the celebrated chef with a dedication to home-grown ingredients, is a steady lure.
The dining room is spacious, softly lighted and has large, well-separated tables that allow plenty of privacy.
The appetizer list offers deviled crab cake and avocado with smoked tomato salsa; grilled asparagus with a citrus dressing, and a napoleon of three smoked fish and crispy potato topped with sturgeon caviar and chive oil.
Entrees include seared soft-shell crabs with remoulade dressing and spicy slaw; cedar-planked salmon with asparagus and wild mushroom risotto, and roasted rack of lamb au jus with arugula pesto, potato-artichoke hash browns and watercress. (Review: 3/20/92; article: 6/14/94)


Inside the World's Most Profitable Bank
IF money talks, then the local currency here says it all.
Four out of every five bills in Hong Kong bear the image of the erector set-style headquarters of the Hongkong and Shanghai Bank, the most powerful financial presence in this British colony and by far, the most visible and influential bank in Asia.


Law School Calls Bias Ruling a Victory
Officials at the University of Texas Law School were claiming a near complete victory yesterday, after a Federal judge ruled on Friday that, although the school's affirmative action policies were technically unconstitutional, the school did not have to admit the four students who had challenged those policies.
Judge Sam Sparks of Federal District Court in Austin, deciding a case tried before him in May, said the law school had been wrong to use separate admissions committees to evaluate minority and non-minority applicants.
The case was brought by four whites who applied for admission to the law school in 1992 and later sued the university claiming they were victims of reverse discrimination.


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: August 21, 1994
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
27
THE CLIENT, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $6.99.) Just before he kills himself, a lawyer reveals a deadly secret to an 11-year-old boy.
2
8
WITHOUT REMORSE, by Tom Clancy. (Berkley, $6.99.) John Kelly tries to rescue prisoners held in North Vietnam.
3
5
FORREST GUMP, by Winston Groom. (Pocket, $5.50.) A slow-witted man makes his way through three decades of American history.
4
19
CLEAR AND PRESENT DANGER, by Tom Clancy. (Berkley, $6.99.) The C.I.A.'s Jack Ryan fights drug lords in Colombia.
5
9
A CASE OF NEED, by Michael Crichton writing as Jeffery Hudson. (Signet, $6.99.) A 1968 novel about the death of a surgeon's daughter.
6
10
THE SHIPPING NEWS, by E. Annie Proulx. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $12.) A man mourns his adulterous wife in Newfoundland.
7
4
SACRED CLOWNS, by Tony Hillerman. (Harper Paperbacks, $6.99.) Two Navajo tribal policemen and a web of politics and murder.
8
4
POT OF GOLD, by Judith Michael. (Pocket, $6.99.) A mother wins $60 million in a lottery.
9
1
NIGHTMARES &amp; DREAMSCAPES, by Stephen King. (Signet, $6.99.) Stories (mostly about the macabre), a teleplay, an essay and a poem.
10
4
FINNEGAN'S WEEK, by Joseph Wambaugh. (Bantam, $6.50.) A San Diego cop tracks a crime that results in horror south of the border.
11
4
SNAGGED, by Carol Higgins Clark. (Dove/Warner, $5.50.) While in Miami, Regan Reilly contends with a variety of crimes.
12
4
GUARDIAN, by John Saul. (Fawcett, $5.99.) A single mother strives to protect her children from a stalking, unseen killer.
13
5
A SIMPLE PLAN, by Scott Smith. (St. Martin's, $5.99.) Madness besets a man who plans to pocket a fortune on which he stumbled.
14
13
PLEADING GUILTY, by Scott Turow. (Warner, $6.99.) A lawyer pursues his firm's missing partner and a multimillion-dollar fund.
15
1
LIKE WATER FOR CHOCOLATE, by Laura Esquivel. (Anchor/Doubleday, $5.99.) Frustration, love, hope -- and recipes -- sampled by a woman on a Mexican ranch.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
NonFiction
1
32
CARE OF THE SOUL, by Thomas Moore. (Harper Perennial, $12.) A psychotherapist discusses spirituality and everyday life.
2
563
THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $10.95.) Psychological and spiritual inspiration by a psychiatrist.
3
16
MAMA MAKES UP HER MIND, by Bailey White. (Vintage, $10.) Life in a tiny Georgia town, as seen by a first-grade teacher.
4
32
WHERE ANGELS WALK, by Joan Wester Anderson. (Ballantine, $10.) Stories about angelic intervention in human affairs.
5*
79
I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS, by Maya Angelou. (Bantam, $4.99.) The poet's depiction of her childhood and adolescence.
6*
15
GIRL, INTERRUPTED, by Susanna Kaysen. (Vintage, $10.) A memoir of a young woman's mental illness.
7
13
REENGINEERING THE CORPORATION, by Michael Hammer and James Champy. (Harper Business, $13.) A manifesto for business innovation.
8
14
LISTENING TO PROZAC, by Peter D. Kramer. (Penguin, $12.95.) A psychiatrist reflects on mood-changing medications and their effects.
9
5
A BOOK OF ANGELS, by Sophy Burnham. (Ballantine, $10.) Encounters with celestial beings as recorded by people in the present and in the past.
10*
1
THE LAST BROTHER, by Joe McGinniss. (Pocket, $6.99.) A biography of Senator Edward M. Kennedy.
11*
20
YOUNG MEN &amp; FIRE, by Norman Maclean. (University of Chicago, $10.95.) An account of a disastrous fire in a Montana forest in 1949.
12
149
A YEAR IN PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Vintage, $10.) A sojourn in the south of France.
13*
16
RACE MATTERS, by Cornel West. (Vintage, $9.) Issues affecting black Americans.
14*
42
THE TAO OF POOH, by Benjamin Hoff. (Penguin, $9.) Taoism as seen through the A.A.
Milne character.
15
63
THE SILENT PASSAGE, by Gail Sheehy. (Pocket, $5.50.) The psychological and social significance of menopause for today's women.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Advice, How-To and Miscellaneous
1
179
THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE, by Stephen R. Covey. (Fireside/S&amp;S, $12.) Principles to practice in the pursuit of success.
2
12
RAND MCNALLY ROAD ATLAS. (Rand McNally, $8.95.) The 1994 edition of a guide to the United States, Canada and Mexico.
3
4
EAT MORE, WEIGH LESS, by Dean Ornish. (Harper Perennial, $14.) Counsel from a physician about diet and nutrition.
4
41
WHAT TO EXPECT WHEN YOU'RE EXPECTING, by Arlene Eisenberg, Heidi E. Murkoff and Sandee E. Hathaway. (Workman, $10.95.) Advice for parents-to-be.
Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending Aug. 6, at 3,050 bookstores plus wholesalers serving 38,000 other retailers, statistically weighted to represent sales in all such outlets nationwide.
An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.


Zaire Closes a Border to Staunch the Flow of Rwandans
The border here was closed early this afternoon by the Zairian authorities after nearly 20,000 Rwandans crossed into Zaire, leaving thousands on the Rwandan side, weary and frustrated after several days of walking.
Some tried swimming into Zaire while others started across Lake Kivu in wooden dugouts, and some got through although Zairian soldiers were attempting to stop them.
Most remained calm behind a cordon put up by French soldiers who will be gone within 24 hours.


She Looks Familiar . . .
Has Anna Wintour, the editor in chief of Vogue, been turned into a fashion icon by the competition?


Bad Behavior
To the Sports Editor:
"Dream Team or Ugly Americans" (The Times, Aug. 11) by Harvey Araton fully captures how utterly perverse the dominant "style" in the National Basketball Association has become.
I have been an ardent basketball fan for more than 30 years, but the arrogance and trash-talking so common in the N.B.A. these days have turned me off.


Andrew Kandel and Jaclyn J . Levin
Jaclyn Jean Levin, an associate producer in New York for "Dateline NBC," a network news program, was married last evening to Andrew Kandel, a senior special counsel for the enforcement division of the New York Stock Exchange.
Rabbi Rolly Matalon performed the ceremony at the Hudson Theater in New York.
Ms.
Levin, 28, who is keeping her name, graduated from the University of Illinois.
She is a daughter of Moreyn and Leroy Levin of Morton Grove, Ill.
Her parents own Diversey Plaza Deli in Chicago.


A Fine Mess They've Got Us Into
SELF-INFLICTED WOUNDS From LBJ's Guns and Butter to Reagan's Voodoo Economics.
By Hobart Rowen.
Illustrated. 447 pp.
New York: Times Books/Random House. $25.


Denville Journal; Debate Over a New Park: Birds or Ball Fields?
THE Morris County Park Commission's plans to turn a 50-acre tract in the picturesque Rockaway Valley here into a recreational park are meeting with mixed reviews.
Birders in the metropolitan area call the tract Sparrow Fields and say it is a habitat for endangered species that should not be disturbed.
Officials in nearby Mountain Lakes want the land treated with extreme care, since it sits atop that borough's primary groundwater aquifer.
The administrations of Denville and Boonton Township have eagerly endorsed a soccer field planned for the site to ease their overburdened athletic programs, but they too have potable water sources in the area and insist on environmental precautions.


The Blinds Are Drawn, But the Eyes Are Open
The young waitress glanced nervously through the rain-streaked plate-glass window as an unmarked police car slowly pulled into the Burger King parking lot at 9:35 P.M.
She quickly stepped from view.
Two weeks ago, at about the same time of night, a bullet shattered the same window and critically wounded another waitress, the third victim of a sniper who has killed one person and who remains the target of the largest manhunt ever in Suffolk County.


The Age of Maintenance
The Preservation Society of Newport County's benefit for the upkeep of its landscapes, Newport, R.I., Aug. 13.


Police Enlist Park Users In Safety Drive
The New York Police Department is starting a program to enlist hundreds and eventually thousands of citizens to deter crime in the city's parks, beginning with Prospect Park in Brooklyn and Marcus Garvey Park in Harlem.
Starting Tuesday, the department will pass out cellular telephones and bright blue vests marked "Safe Parks" to hundreds of regular park users who have volunteered to be the program's eyes and ears.
The volunteers will not be armed or trained in any way, officials said, they will simply be on the lookout for trouble.
The phones are programmed to reach only 911, the emergency number.


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
PLAIN PEOPLE QUILTS
Amish Country Quilts and Crafts of Strasburg, Pa., will be in White Plains on Saturday from 9 A.M. to 5 P.M. for a show and sale of folk art made by the Amish, Mennonite and other Plain People of Lancaster County.
It will be held in the Westchester County Center at Central Avenue and the Bronx River Parkway.
Up to 400 quilts will be on display, ranging from $400 to $1,300, and about 1,000 wall hangings will be for sale at $35 to $250.
Loomed cotton reversible throw rugs measuring up to 2 by 6 feet, and furniture pieces, including cabinets, small desks, end tables, magazine racks and quilt racks, books, and T-shirts with Amish farm scenes and quilt squares will be available.


Rape Charges in a Child Abduction Case
Two children, apparently kidnapped by a custodian of a Harlem church, were found locked in a closet at an apartment occupied by the man yesterday morning, 19 hours after they had disappeared, the police said.
The children, a boy, 6, and his sister, 13, were taken to Harlem Hospital, where doctors determined that the girl had been raped, the police said.
The boy was not physically harmed.


K. M. Golden, T. J. Mangan 4th
Kathleen Mary Golden, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Frank J. Golden of New City, N.Y., was married yesterday to Thomas Joseph Mangan 4th, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas J. Mangan 3d of Chatham, N.J.
The Rev.
Thomas E. Gilleece performed the ceremony at the St.
Francis of Assisi Roman Catholic Church in West Nyack, N.Y.
The bride is the vice president of creative affairs at the Manhattan Project, a film production company in New York.
She graduated from New York University.
Her father is a retired New York City firefighter.


Corrections
A chart on Aug. 7 with the continuation of a front-page article about problems in the mutual fund industry misstated the average daily trading volume for Crown Laboratories.
For the period shown in the chart, it was 2,691 shares, not 269 shares.


Leslie A. Carson, Alden H. Sulger 3d
Leslie Allison Carson, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Richard P. Carson of Greenwood Village, Colo., was married yesterday to Alden Harwood Sulger 3d, a son of Mrs.
Bruce L. Roberts of New London, N.H., and the late Mr.
Sulger Jr.
Judge Anthony B. Lettunich, a municipal judge in Steamboat Springs, Colo., officiated atop Mount Warner in Steamboat Springs.
The bride, 30, is an account executive at Information Resources Inc., a marketing research company in Chicago.
She graduated from the University of Chicago and received an M.B.A. from Loyola University of Chicago.
Her father is an internist and cardiologist in private practice in Denver, where her mother, Sandy Carson, is an art consultant and gallery owner.


PRESIDENT MOVES TO PUNISH CASTRO FOR CUBAN EXODUS
President Clinton today prohibited Americans from sending cash to Cuba and cut off charter flights to the island as part of an effort to bring economic and political pressure on Fidel Castro's already shaky Communist government.
A day after Mr.
Clinton shut the main valve of flight for Cubans, the decision to sever other links represented another major change in course in American policy toward Cuba, whose people until now could see the United States as offering salvation.


Aug. 14-20: Dealing for Votes; Clinton Hopes a Compromise Will Save the Crime Bill
When Republicans pushed crime legislation during the Watergate scandal 20 years ago, nightclub comics had a field day: "Richard Nixon took crime off the streets and put it in the White House." Now Bill Clinton is pushing a crime bill amid the jetsam of Whitewater, and again the comics can't resist.
Take last week.
After a stinging defeat by House Republicans, who united on August 11 to keep Mr.
Clinton's $33 billion anti-crime package from reaching a floor vote, he decided to ram the bill past them anyway.
He gave a passionate sermon on guns and violence at a black church outside Washington, and convinced three black Democrats -- unhappy with the crime bill's 66 new death-penalty offenses -- to switch to his side.


Rebels Marching to Their Own Tunes
FOR CLASSICAL MUSICIANS of a certain age, playing in a rock band has an allure that playing in, say, a string quartet does not.
Part of it, certainly, is that rock bands draw bigger, younger audiences than conventional chamber groups do.
They also allow greater freedom in stage behavior and dress.
But most important, rock bands generally compose their own music, and chamber ensembles do not.
Young ensembles have been rebelling against these strictures for some time.
First they challenged the sartorial rules (Tashi in the 1970's, Kronos in the 80's).
Lately they have been mixing works composed either individually or collaboratively by group members into programs that include other contemporary music or standard repertory.
And record companies are finding this rebellion eminently marketable.


THE PRESIDENT'S PAST
Michael Kelly writes that Bill Clinton has a "chameleonesque habit of becoming whoever he was with. . . ." My God, Leonard Zelig is President!
JEROME B. AGEL New York, N.Y.


Sports of The Times; The Rabbit Doesn't Stop Holy Bull
THERE is nothing illegal, immoral or unethical about entering a rabbit, a pace setter, as one of five horses in a stakes race.
But you could not blame Jimmy Croll if he took D. Wayne Lukas's tactics a trifle personally.
However, Croll is 71 years old, just inducted in the Racing Hall of Fame, and yesterday he shrugged off the question about whether it was very nice of D. Wayne to send out a rabbit to try to burn Holy Bull out.


Mixed Notices, in Advance, For Memorial to Malcolm X
Sometime this fall, three artists -- a muralist and two sculptors -- are expected to emerge from their studios with final plans for a memorial to Malcolm X.
Selected from among nearly 100 applicants, the artists have won the right to place their works in an area of the Audubon Ballroom where Malcolm X was assassinated.
That section of the ballroom, which is on Broadway between West 165th and 166th Streets, will be preserved while Columbia University builds a long-disputed biomedical research complex around it.


Put In Minimums
To the Sports Editor:
The answer to the frightening incidence of anorexia nervosa and dangerous weight loss in young, female athletes ("When Thin Is In, Disaster Can Strike," The Times, Aug. 1) is obvious.
Governing athletic associations should wield the authority they have been given and establish minimum weight standards for certain sports, especially sports in which the primary competitors are pubescent (e.g., gymnastics and figure skating) and therefore most likely to be permanently injured by extreme weight problems.


In Search of Diana of Ephesus
AS LABOR DAY APPROACHES, AM- ericans burdened with jet lag and tchotchkes straggle through customs wondering whether their hand-woven rugs and designer clothes will make it home duty free.
Tucked into the corners of their suitcases are the world's treasures in a form forever safe from taxes or even close inspection: a pint-size Eiffel Tower, Big Ben or Taj Mahal, and the great gods from Osiris to Buddha to Zeus, bought for pennies in stalls and schlock shops.
These Munchkin-size reminders of the broadening effects that travel owes us have become a kind of secular icon to the power of the jet engine.
People who would not dream of making a shrine to a saint happily display deities that once held millions in thrall but now command reverence chiefly for attesting to the power of frequent-flier programs.


THE PRESIDENT'S PAST
What a splendid and quotable article "The President's Past," by Michael Kelly, is (July 31).
And what a shame that you did not print it two years ago.
But then, only Rush Limbaugh seemed to know what Clinton's problem was.
Now we all know.
JOHN C. SCHOTT Malvern, Pa.


Favorites Fill Trophy Cases
Janet Evans won her 42d national title and Tom Dolan his fifth as the seven-day Phillips 66 national swimming championships ended today at the Indiana University Natatorium.
The 22-year-old Evans led from the start of the women's 1,500-meter freestyle.
She beat 14-year-old Brooke Bennett of Tampa, Fla., by 18 meters in 16 minutes 24.24 seconds.


Angela Chang, Beng-Hong Lim
Dr.
Angela Elizabeth Chang, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Young S. Chang of Browns Mills, N.J., was married yesterday to Beng-Hong Lim, the son of Eng-Cheng Lim and Phaik-Lin Kee of Penang, Malaysia.
Roger Dinella, a Roman Catholic deacon, performed the ceremony at the Princeton University Chapel in Princeton, N.J.


Corrections
An article in the Postings column last Sunday about the sale of two town houses incompletely described the negotiations for the house bought by New York University.
Ambrose-Mar Elia Company represented the university; the Corcoran Group represented the seller.


The Nation; Is Suffering in Silence The Democrats' Cross?
A FUNDAMENTAL instinct in politics is knowing when to fight and when not to.
The rules seem simple enough: Fight when a rival may be hurting you, or when his attacks are too vicious to overlook.
Otherwise ignore them.
It would seem pretty hard for the Democrats to ignore how religious conservatives have increasingly come to dominate Republican Party machinery at the state and local level.
And if a conservative religious leader with a significant following calls the Democratic President a liar and a murderer, retaliating would seem the obvious course.
But in these days of religious politics and political religions, it isn't that simple anymore.
Democrats are deeply divided on whether going after the Christian right offers opportunity, danger or both.


Suns and Green Work to Resolve Dispute
Lawyers for A. C. GREEN and the Phoenix Suns have negotiated a deal with N.B.A. lawyers that both parties hope will speed their contract dispute to a conclusion by early next month.
In papers filed Friday with United States District Judge ROGER STRAND in Phoenix, the Suns and Green have agreed not to challenge the N.B.A.'s request to move the case to United States District Court in Newark, where the league wants the case heard by Judge DICKINSON DEBEVOISE.


Cuban Players Star in Card Series
In a commercial world where timing can be crucial, imagine publishing a new baseball card issue at the very moment the players strike has undercut the promotional appeal of major league stars?
Don't shed a tear for Norman Garcia.
His new baseball card issue is devoted to Cuban baseball stars, and the major league's loss could be his gain.


A Taste of San Juan On the East River
Posted like silent sentinels all around the town, stand thousands upon thousands of mortal men fixed in ocean reveries.
Herman Melville, "Moby Dick"
ONCE the city's raison d'etre and the inspiration of poetry and song, the waterfront has fallen to the status of civic embarrassment, its jagged edges and fearsome highways acting as if under divine order to keep us from an expansive view or a salty breeze.


Abigail Asher, Marco De Martino
Abigail Asher, a production editor at Abbeville Press, was married last evening to Marco De Martino, a correspondent for Panorama, an Italian news magazine.
Both work in New York.
Shirley Fingerhood, a former justice of the New York State Supreme Court in Manhattan, officiated at the home of the painter Robert Dash in Sagaponack, L.I.
The bride, 30, will keep her name.
A graduate of the University of Chicago, she is a daughter of Aaron and Linda Asher of New York.
Her father was until recently the publisher of Aaron Asher Books, an imprint of HarperCollins in New York.
Her mother is a fiction editor at The New Yorker.


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
MARINE ART IN MYSTIC
The Mystic Maritime Gallery, official publisher of America's Cup prints, is celebrating its 15th anniversary with an exhibition that will run through Sept. 11.
Owned and operated by the Mystic Seaport, the gallery originated with an exhibition on the walls of the museum book shop.
Since then it has grown to a 3,500-square-foot area with more than 1,000 paintings, drawings, sculptures, scrimshaw, ship models and prints.
The current show features new works by 50 leading American and European artists and ship modelers.
Among the paintings are John Stobart's oil, "Liberty Ship John Brown, June 6, 1944," commemorating the Normandy landing and priced at $90,000, and Elizabeth Mumford's naive-style "Rolling Home to Dear New England" in oil, at $3,200.
Lloyd McCaffery's model of the United States Brig Argus, 1803, scaled 16 feet to 1 inch, is priced at $30,000; Ron Patterson's "Galway Hookers at Low Tide," scrimshaw on fossilized walrus artifact, is $2,750, and Donald Stoltenberg's "Taut Sails," a striking, stylized oil is $8,200.


Al Dente
In their recent or upcoming movies, three of this country's biggest box office draws -- Jim Carrey (in "Ace Ventura: Pet Detective"), Jack Nicholson (in "Wolf") and Tom Cruise (in "Interview With the Vampire") -- all can be seen biting other people.
But lost in the media whirl surrounding these fictional accounts of biters is this important fact: celebrities bite people in real life, too.
Sylvia Plath did; and so have Mike Tyson, Marcello Mastroianni and Sam Donaldson.
Biting other people is a habit that is, at best, unattractive.
It lacks sublety and nuance.
It bespeaks an inability to deal in commodities like discretion and unrewarded valor.
It says, "I am Liza Minnelli and everyone else is Lorna Luft." But while most of us are able to confront the rigors of life such that our lapses of decorum are relatively tame -- we whine, we chat idly on the phone, we sob in restaurants -- celebrities require the exhilarating release that only perforation can deliver.


Family Farming Lures a New Generation


Q and A
Alaska's Inside Passage
Q.
I'm thinking of taking a trip to Alaska via the Inside Passage.
Do the Alaska Marine Highway ships spend much time near the coast, or are coastal views just a distant rumor? -- Eliot Kalman, Athens, Ohio


Iraq Bans Public Use Of Alcohol
With little food available after four years of sanctions, eating out in Baghdad is not much fun these days.
But President Saddam Hussein made it even gloomier recently by abruptly banning the sale of alcohol in hotels, bars, clubs and restaurants.
Drinking at home is still permitted.
But in the future only members of the minority Christian population and other non-Muslims will be allowed to stock alcohol in stores, which must be at least 200 yards from any mosque.


Japan to Open Costly But Convenient Airport
HERE'S the good news about Japan's biggest and most spectacular airport, scheduled to open on a man-made island in Osaka Bay on Sept. 4: The island has stopped sinking.
The bad news is that the price tag of keeping the 1,300-acre atoll above the waterline -- a yearlong effort that required dumping millions of tons of additional landfill into the bay -- along with the cost of building a spectacular, milelong terminal at the Kansai International Airport, came to $14 billion.
Travelers are likely to be paying the price as soon as they step inside.


CHILDREN ARE ALONE
I have a 12-year-old daughter.
She has seen more things in her short lifetime than I ever did ("Children Are Alone," by Peggy Orenstein, July 24).
She has been a witness to my getting fired (a few times), divorce (a nasty one) and other things.
But she perseveres.
She graduated valedictorian from her sixth-grade class and won a creative-writing award.
After reading Orenstein's article, I wonder if this success streak will come to an abrupt halt.
It is hard to remember that she is only a little girl and not the adult she can appear to be.
Your article made me more aware of my behavior and how it affects her.


Data Bank/August 21, 1994
Data Bank/August 21, 1994
Industrial Production Index
July
June
May
Monthly percent change
0.2
0.5
0.3
Capacity Utilization
Output as a percentage of capacity
83.9
83.9
83.7
Housing Starts
Thousands of units, annual rate
1,415
1,351
1,497
Merchandise Exports
June
May
April
In billions
$58.2
$56.2
$56.2
Merchandise Imports
In billions
$67.5
$65.7
$64.7
Weekly Jobless Claims
Aug. 12
Aug. 5
July 29
In thousands
327
324
315
Steel Production
Thousands of tons, weekly total
1,798
1,795
1,769
Coal Production
Thousands of tons, weekly total
20,393
19,539
19,925


Karin Carlson, Robert Vincent Jr.
Karin Rahm Carlson and Robert C. Vincent Jr. were married yesterday at the Presbyterian Church in Mount Kisco, N.Y.
The Rev.
Jack S. Miller performed the ceremony.
Mrs.
Vincent is the manager of Small Joys, a gift boutique in Bedford, N.Y.
She graduated from Michigan State University.
She is the daughter of Vera Anderson Rahm of Boca Raton, Fla., and the late Dr.
Lambert Rahm.


Measuring Heads
To the Editor:
Regarding Robert Wright's review of "The Evolution of Racism," by Pat Shipman (July 31): I was astounded to read Mr.
Wright's characterization of Carleton S. Coon's writings on "innate mental differences among the modern races" as "oblique." Coon was a firm believer in racial hierarchy, and he was hardly subtle about it.


Woodstock Redux, Still Smoking
With the sweet aroma of marijuana wafting across the fields of the Woodstock '94 festival last weekend, and tabs of LSD changing hands as easily as candy bars, it was as if there had never been a drug war.
Woodstock 25 years later was still a big, sprawling party with plenty of drugs.
Experts say that is intriguing, since even though casual drug use had dropped significantly since the 1970's and 80's, it is on the rise again.
Woodstock may be an indication of that, they say.


SUNDAY, August 21, 1994; Horns of Plenty
Consider the elk: living emblem of America's natural beauty?
Or hairy freeloader of the high plains?
Four ranchers in Wyoming (or at least their lawyers) have argued that the beasts are stealing them blind.
The elk -- and other wildlife -- wander off state and Federal land onto private property, where they eat private grass.
Because Wyoming law declares all wildlife to be state property, held in trust for the citizenry, the ranchers want compensation from the state.
All those freeloading government-owned antler-carriers, the reasoning goes, constitute a "taking" by the state without just compensation, in violation of the Fifth Amendment. (The "taking" argument has often been applied to regulations that affect the value of property, like zoning and restrictions on building by the seashore.)


Kate Reavey, Thomas Harris
Kate Reavey, the daughter of Peter M. Reavey and Judge Rosemary Karcher Reavey of Metuchen, N.J., is to be married today to Thomas Hayward Harris, a son of Mary Ann Hayward and Dr.
Edward D. Harris Jr., both of Palo Alto, Calif.
The bride's mother, who serves on the New Jersey Superior Court in New Brunswick, is to officiate at Allaire Chapel in Wall, N.J.
The bride, 27, is a poet and an associate instructor at Peninsula College in Port Angeles, Wash.
She graduated cum laude from Trinity College in Hartford, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa, and received a master's degree in poetry from the University of California at Davis.
Her father retired as a teacher of English at the Edgar School in Metuchen.


Rascals and Grunts, a Pup and a Match for Dad
Airheads  Brendan Fraser, Steve Buscemi Directed by Michael Lehmann PG-13: 91 minutes


Beyond Fishing: The Lives of a 'Dying' Waterfront


Just the Ticket
To the Editor:  I have just the Wagner piece for Bernard Holland  [ "New Rules, but Wagner Loses Again," Aug. 7 ] : the Grand Sonata for Piano (Op. 1), composed in 1831, when Wagner was 18.
It's in B flat, the key that doesn't lie, cheat or steal, and it's "just there," the way Mr.
Holland prefers.
While he enjoys it, critics who don't mind having to confront the intellectual and moral issues that important artworks inevitably raise can go on grappling with "Lohengrin," "Die Meistersinger" and "Parsifal." RICHARD TARUSKIN El Cerrito, Calif.


Deal and Discounts
IN GEAR IN SWITZERLAND The Kemwel Group and Swissair offer a fly-drive plan that combines a round-trip flight from New York or Boston to Geneva, Zurich or Basel with a week's car rental.
Prices range from $589 to $829 a person, based on two people traveling together, depending on departure dates, and include a minimum-category car -- a Fiat Panda, which is a two-door hatchback with manual transmission, or equivalent.
The rate is $589 for travel from Nov. 1 to Dec. 14 and Dec. 26 to March 30; $719 from Sept. 16 to Oct. 31, and $829 from Sept. 1 to 15.
Departures must be Sunday through Thursday and returns Monday through Friday.
Ticketing and payment must be completed three weeks in advance; there is a $100 fee for each passenger for cancellations within 21 days of departure.
There is a minimum stay of six days, and a maximum of 21.
Airport tax, value added tax and optional collision damage waiver insurance are extra.
Information: Kemwel, (800) 933-1221.


Corinne Fortune, Andrew Bernard
Corinne Elizabeth Fortune, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Archibald R. Fortune 2d of LaFayette, Ga., was married yesterday to Andrew Barnes Bernard, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
David G. Bernard of New York.
The Rev.
Bernard J. Campbell performed the ceremony at SS.
Peter and Paul Roman Catholic Church in Chattanooga, Tenn.
The bride, 27, is studying for a master's degree in social work at Boston University.
She graduated cum laude from Middlebury College.
Her father formerly owned Fortune Mills, a textiles maker in LaFayette.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
ART CRITICISM  MAKING IT NEW  Essays, Interviews, and Talks.
By Henry Geldzahler.
Turtle Point, $21.


Mutual Funds; Readers' Mail: Admitting a Mistake
Question.
I own an Individual Retirement Account that is partly invested in the Colonial Trust IV Utilities Fund, class B shares.
The fund has lost a lot of money, but my broker told me to hold on for now.
Please advise.
Answer.
The fund has been a significant underperformer, losing 12.7 percent this year compared with a 9.1 percent loss for all utilities funds.
For the 12 months ended June, it fell 13.7 percent, compared with a 5.8 percent drop for its group, and lagged by nearly two percentage points for the three years ended then (8.1 percent, compared with 9.8 percent), according to Morningstar Inc., fund researchers in Chicago.


Sea Hero Returns, To Turf
A year after he won the Travers at odds of almost 7-1, Sea Hero was back at Saratoga today, but this time it was all he could do to finish third in a $50,000 handicap at nine furlongs on the turf.
The start was the 1993 Kentucky Derby winner's fourth on the grass out of his last five races.
Today he rallied from last place after six furlongs to miss out by nearly two lengths behind the winner, Dominant Prospect.
Royal Mountain Inn was second.


How the Bronx Acquired That Mysterious Article
To the Editor:
Your explanation is that the Bronx "was named after the Bronx River. Rivers always take the article." True.
Then may we assume Hudson, N.Y., was named after the explorer and not the river?
How about Albany, et al.?
GERALD A. KOVAL  Manhattan


Raymond J. Burke; Admiralty Lawyer, 81
Raymond J. Burke, a founder of the law firm Burke &amp; Parsons in Manhattan, died Friday at Good Samaritan Hospital in West Palm Beach, Fla.
He was 81 and had lived in Palm Beach.
The cause was cancer, his son Raymond Jr. said.


SUNDAY, August 21, 1994; A Buddha and His Bear
What do you get a 3-year-old boy who has everything, even his own secretary?
Especially when he knows all his stuff is a part of an illusion that keeps him attached to the endless cycle of rebirth, preventing him from attaining Nirvana?
Talk about pressure.
When he was an infant, Ratak Puntsok, who turns 4 next month, was declared the reincarnation of a revered Tibetan lama, Kalu Rimpoche, who died in 1989.
The Dalai Lama confirmed it last year, when the boy was 2 1/2.
Some 2,000 people watched Ratak's formal enthronement last month at the Kagyu Ling temple, which Kalu Rimpoche founded in the Burgundy region of France.
The boy's father, who had been the old lama's secretary, has his job back.
He now works for his son.


Lynda Doctoroff, Jeffrey Bussgang
Lynda Ann Doctoroff, a daughter of Honey and Michael Doctoroff of Natick, Mass., is to be married today to Jeffrey Joseph Bussgang, the son of Fay and Julian Bussgang of Lexington, Mass.
Rabbi Cary Yales is to perform the ceremony at the Hyatt Regency Hotel in Cambridge, Mass.


What Is Poetry?
To the Editor:
In her review of Edward Chalfant's "Better in Darkness: A Biography of Henry Adams. His Second Life, 1862-1891" (July 3), Gillian Beer writes, "Mr. Chalfant has attempted to tell through one figure, deemed heroic, the story of a nation: Adams's own history of the United States, he maintains, 'sooner or later will be recognized as our nation's epic.' . . . But where's the poetry?"


Airport Bus Service Extended to Broadway
The route of the M-60 bus, which links 125th Street in Manhattan and La Guardia Airport in Queens via the Triborough Bridge, has been extended to Broadway.
The new stop, which is at 118th Street, is handy to the 116th Street station of the 1 and 9 service on the Broadway-Seventh Avenue IRT line.
The bus makes stops at the 125th Street stations of the IND A, B, C and D lines, the 2 and 3 IRT lines and the Lexington Avenue line.
The extension to Broadway means that the bus now connects to all subway lines that pass 125th Street.
The buses, which have wheelchair lifts, also provide transfers to north-south bus routes with lifts.
The bus leaves the new Broadway starting point twice an hour between 5:49 A.M. and 12:18 A.M., generally at 14 minutes past the hour and 16 minutes before.
At La Guardia, the route starts twice an hour at the Delta terminal, calling at the main and marine terminals before following Astoria Boulevard to the bridge.


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS Graf Beats Pierce and Next Faces Sanchez  Top-ranked Steffi Graf moved into today's final of the Matinee International with a 6-3, 6-4 victory over fourth-seeded Mary Pierce, who routed her at the French Open in June.
Graf faces second-seeded Arantxa Sanchez Vicario, who advanced by defeating third-seeded Kimiko Date of Japan, 2-6, 6-1, 6-2.
Date, ranked ninth in the world, was dominant in the first set, playing with pinpoint precision against Sanchez Vicario.
But, following a rain delay of an hour, Sanchez Vicario came out refreshed. (AP)


A Report on Graffiti Gives Aid and Comfort to Enemy
To the Editor:
I was dumbfounded by the stupidity that led you, in the article, "James Vacca, the King of Clean," in the Aug. 7 issue, to divulge information about an anti-graffiti measure instituted by Mr.
Vacca, the district manager of Community Board 10.
By giving criminals a helpful bit of intelligence, which I dare not repeat here, you have possibly undermined the success of that measure.
JOSEPH DE ROSE  The Bronx


Henry Czerny, Reluctant Bad Guy
HENRY CZERNY'S EYES are so piercingly blue you need something with an SPF of 15 just to sit across from him.
"He's got the best blue eyes I've seen since Paul Newman," says the producer Mace Neufeld.


The Nation: Baseball Walkout Is a Throwback; Strikes: They Don't Make 'Em Like They Used To
BASEBALL, with its memories and heroes and old records to be broken, brings so much of the past into American lives.
Certainly the Major League baseball strike is out of the past: a traditional, fist-in-the-face defiance of management that seldom succeeds anymore for other striking workers.
For them, strikes -- the few that they try -- are becoming a different animal.
The press coverage of the 760 striking players is prolific.
And since many lives are touched by the absence of baseball in August, the players have leverage.
But contrast that with another old-time strike.
Nearly 8,000 workers walked out in July at four tire manufacturers.
These companies account for nearly 10 percent of all American-made tires.
But who hears much about their plight?
Tires are so plentiful they often sell for a discount.


Ideas &amp; Trends; For Today's Pilgrims There Is No End of Holy Grails
ON Feb. 2, 1959, the Surf Ballroom in Clear Lake, Iowa, hosted a "Winter Dance Party," featuring the talents of Buddy Holly, the Big Bopper and Ritchie Valens.
Early the next morning, their chartered plane crashed east of town, killing everyone.
The tragedy lives on in legend as "the day the music died," and a steady stream of visitors from around pays homage at a small memorial outside the Surf.
The visitors come as pilgrims, defined by Webster's as "a person who travels about, a wanderer." But pilgrims are more than tourists.
For their enterprise to make sense, there must be a destination, a goal: communion with one's beliefs and aspirations.
Muslims must make the Haj to Mecca.
Hindus journey to Benares, Jews and Christians to Jerusalem, theosophists to Walden Pond.
In Russia, literary pilgrims visit Pushkin's grave on his birthday to hear each other recite his poetry.


Hair Wars: Underground on 125th Street
IT IS 10 A.M., and 125th Street is choked with people trying to weave past vendors selling T-shirts, African trinkets and jewelry.
Mounas G. and several other women in colorful African print dresses stand outside a storefront that has no sign and eye the passing parade.
In particular, they look for those lingering at the photographs on the storefront's windows.
"Miss, Miss, do you want to get your hair done?" Mounas asks one shopper, who immediately points to a photo of an elaborate braid style.


Whose Problem Is It Anyway?
To the Editor:  I am not sure that Lenny Bruce was right: repeatedly breaking a taboo does not necessarily eliminate the taboo.
It is obvious that "shock tactics" are not necessarily funny and that not all comics are social critics.
But one should seriously consider Bruce's view that if the audience is made uncomfortable, then it may be the audience that has a problem.
SOL SAPORTA Seattle


Deion Sees Buccaneers Dominate Dolphins
Buccaneers 29, Dolphins 14
The Miami Dolphins brought Deion Sanders to town last night to convince him they are his ticket to the Super Bowl.
But the Tampa Bay Buccaneers spoiled the Dolphins' party with a 29-14 preseason victory marred by numerous penalties and fights.


Why Big Guns in War of Ideas Line Up on Right
To the Editor:
Whether or not the "public intellectual" is an original addition to American civic life or a variant on a familiar tune, your Aug. 9 news article ignores the serious dangers that privately financed think tanks pose to a democratic society.


Trying to Solve Passport Puzzles
IT'S been one of those summers for passports.
The computer in the New Orleans regional Passport Agency, one of 13 national centers, collapsed on July 9 and 10 when someone turned off the air-conditioning, for one thing, and the work had to be dispersed to other regions.
But the main cause of trauma, according to Gary Sheaffer of the Bureau of Consular Affairs in Washington, applications for new and renewed passports have been running 23 percent ahead of last year.
In 1993, 2.3 million were processed through June; this year the figure for the same period is put at 2.9 million.
The total of 1993 applications, 4.2 million, itself represented a 10 percent increase over 1992.
On a hot day at the end of July, at the New York Passport Agency at 630 Fifth Avenue, which handles only people who have made appointments because of an emergency or because they are holding tickets for the next few days, the line ran half the length of the block from Fifth Avenue to Sixth.
William Collins Jr., manager of the New York region, said that the increase at Fifth Avenue was greater than 23 percent, although a comparison with 1993 is not valid because he closed an office at 201 Varick Street in February and transferred the staff uptown, raising the office's capacity from 750 passports a day to 1,250.
In the peak week, the week of July 4, he said, the office worked at capacity, turning out 1,250 a day.
The figures are still high; on July 22, the total was 767 and on July 25, 882.
A Hard Time
So this is not an easy time to get a passport.
January might have been a good time, or February perhaps.
But the best-organized people seem to be disheveled this summer; among those who have told me recently that they were scurrying to get passports at the last minute are a relative, a co-worker and even an official in the Consular Affairs Bureau, all of whom neglected to check the expiration dates until the last minute.
Mr.
Collins's book of souvenir thank-you notes and photos shows the rich and the mighty, even influential Government employees, have had to get passports at the last minute this year.


Heather Shamsai, Basil Williams 3d
Heather Rider Shamsai, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Javad Shamsai of Weston, Mass., was married yesterday to Basil Williams 3d, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Williams Jr. of Englewood Cliffs, N.J.
The Rev.
Ernest Blougouras officiated at the Greek Orthodox Cathedral of St.
John the Theologian in Tenafly, N.J.
The Rev.
Dr.
John Townsend, an Episcopal minister and an uncle of the bride, took part in the ceremony.
The bride, 26, graduated from Smith College and received a law degree from New York University.
She is to become an associate at Christy &amp; Viener, a New York law firm, in the fall.
Her father is an anesthesiologist at Brigham and Women's Hospital in Boston.


New Plays? Not in This Theater's Philosophy
ON the New Jersey theater map, it is clear that the road to Millburn leads to the million-dollar musical at the Paper Mill Playhouse.
Head to Princeton for a prestigious new play or a new take on an old one at the McCarter.
From there, travel to New Brunswick, the something-for-everyone cultural stop, with the Crossroads Theater Company, the George Street Playhouse next door and the State Theater, the door after that.
But where to find the oldfangled with no new takes?
A real shot of early Americana?
A play like "Effie Whittlesy"?
Maybe an O. Henry sampler?


North Korea Turns Away From Nuclear Inspection Condition
In a potentially significant policy turn, North Korea has thrown cold water on a week-old nuclear agreement with the United States by rejecting American demands that it permit international inspections of two critical nuclear sites.
American officials reacted with concern to the report, broadcast by the official Korean Central News Agency on Saturday, and said that it only underscored the fact that the agreement the countries made in Geneva on Aug. 12 was contingent on a long string of complex steps that could well come apart.


Simpson Case Has California Debating Muzzles for Lawyers
Most states have either laws or bar association rules governing pretrial publicity, though enforcement is usually lax.
California, however, has no such regulations to enforce, and now, because of the O.J.
Simpson spectacle, some of the state's lawmakers are moving to change that.
Noting that judges in the Simpson proceedings have had to step in twice to halt leaks by lawyers on both sides, State Senator Quentin L. Kopp, an independent from San Francisco, has introduced legislation that would forbid prosecutors and defense lawyers to say anything outside court that might adversely affect a case.
Trial participants, especially witnesses and jurors, would be barred from selling their stories to the news media until 90 days after the close of a trial.


An Angry Man Found Himself In 'Tom Jones'
In Tony Richardson's engagingly chatty memoir, "The Long-Distance Runner," the English film director who died three years ago expresses surprisingly negative feelings about "Tom Jones," the movie that many consider his masterpiece.
While allowing that its success was "a very agreeable thing to have to deal with," Richardson adds: "I felt the movie to be incomplete and botched in much of its execution. Whenever someone gushes to me about 'Tom Jones,' I always cringe a little inside."
Richardson's disappointment in the movie is unusual considering that it gave him the kind of perfect career moment most directors only dream of. ("Tom Jones" will be shown as part of a two-and-a-half-week Film Society of Lincoln Center retrospective of Richardson's work that begins on Friday; on Wednesday, there will be a benefit showing of Richardson's last film, "Blue Sky.")


Discouraging Cubans
Low politics, not high principle, inspired President Clinton's ditching of the double standard that for the last 28 years gave Cuban refugees near automatic entry to the United States.
Now, fleeing Cubans risk being stopped at sea by the Coast Guard or Navy and returned to, of all places, the U.S. base at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba.
It is a hasty, harsh and unnecessary move.
But at least it brings a semblance of equality to Washington's treatment of those fleeing impoverished Caribbean tyrannies.
And it implicitly recognizes that, with the cold war over, Cuba is no longer a special case.
The next logical step, which the Administration unfortunately shows no sign of taking, would be to formulate constructive diplomatic policies toward Cuba that could help ease the way to a democratic post-Castro future.


The Azores
To the Editor: After reading your article about the Azores ("Nine Atlantic Islands of Balmy Beauty," Feb. 6), we decided to visit one island, Sao Miguel, in late June.
We took a charter flight from Providence, where we were almost the only non-Portuguese aboard.
We stayed in Ponta Delgada at the new Hotel Ponta Delgada, which was excellent.
It even had a 110-volt outlet for electric razors and a built-in hair dryer.


There's No Need to Act Big
To the Editor:
The premise of "How to Look Like a Million When You're Not" (July 10) bothers me.
For the last five years, I have operated a public relations business from my home.
I believe that I am successful because my clients appreciate that I, and I alone, do their public relations.
I run a professional operation without pretense.
My clients are local businesses and nonprofit agencies that want someone with knowledge of the community.
They appreciate my smallness and my personal touch.
I make them look like a million because I am in their own backyard.
JUDITH MEYER  Tarrytown, N. Y., Aug. 2


Frengiz R. Surty and Lee S. Wolosky
Frengiz Rohinton Surty, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Rohinton J. Surty of Menlo Park, Calif., is to be married today to Lee Scott Wolosky, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Joel M. Wolosky of Riverdale, the Bronx.
Rabbi Joel Goor is to perform the ceremony at the Water Club in New York.
The bride, 27, is an associate in public finance at Dillon, Reed &amp; Company, the New York investment bank.
She graduated cum laude from the University of California at Los Angeles and received a master's degree in public and private management from Yale University.
Her father is a director of engineering at Sea Gate Magnetics, a manufacturer of computer hard disks in Milpitas, Calif.
Her mother, Villoo R. Surty, is a graphic designer in San Francisco.


Plan for Jewish Community Center Meets Opposition in Kings Point
A PROPOSAL to build a Jewish community center in Kings Point has become a source of controversy since the community learned that the sponsor of the center is the Great Neck Chabad, a chapter of the Chabad-Lubavitch organization.
The Lubavitch sect are Hasidic Jews.
Many residents of Kings Point, a waterfront community of 5,000 families in Great Neck, say they fear that the center would lower property values.
Other residents said they were uncomfortable with the practices of the group and were concerned that a center might attract Hasidim from Brooklyn.


No Headline
"Frequent-flier miles, in many ways, have become an alternative currency." DAVID J. REIBSTEIN, a professor of marketing at the Wharton School at the University of Pennsylvania.  [ 36:1. ]


What Does It Mean to Be Tired?
THE JUKEBOX And Other Essays on Storytelling.
By Peter Handke.
Translated by Ralph Manheim and Krishna Winston. 167 pp.
New York: Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux. $21.


Miss Bolger, Mr. Curnin
Annemarie Bolger, a daughter of Anne and Richard Bolger of Larchmont, N.Y., was married yesterday to Kevin John Curnin, a son of Miriam and Thomas Curnin of Larchmont.
The Rev.
Daniel E. Johnson, the bridegroom's uncle, performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at Our Lady of the Valley Church in Sheffield, Mass.
Mrs.
Curnin, 29, is a nurse-midwife at North Central Bronx Hospital.
She graduated from St.
Vincent's Hospital School of Nursing.
She also graduated from Columbia University, from which she received a master's degree in nursing.
Her mother is a medical coordinator at a dermatology practice in Mamaroneck, N.Y.
Her father is a sales representative for Austin, Nichols &amp; Company, wine importers in New York.


Decision Time For Empire Stores
After decades of grand plans gone awry, the latest scheme for revamping a cluster of nine state-owned warehouses on the Brooklyn waterfront is fast approaching a watershed.
Last week, officials of the New York State Office of Parks, Recreation and Historic Preservation said they would choose a developer for the buildings, known collectively as the Empire Stores, next month.
The state agency wants to transform the ground floors of three of the buildings into a cultural and retail center that would house art galleries, artists' studios, boutiques, cafes and a theater.


The Roof: A Way to Rise Above Summer
AS the sweltering summer heat envelops the city like a steam shower left running in a tiny room, New Yorkers traditionally look skyward in search of a breeze -- or a spot of roof they can call their own.
It doesn't have to be a $3 million terraced penthouse on Park Avenue.
Apartment hunters will pay a premium -- as much as 50 percent more, according to brokers -- for a private roof deck atop a tenement in Greenwich Village or a warehouse building in TriBeCa.
They'll even pay extra for access to a well-planned common roof.


Jennifer Levy and Alon Markowitz
Jennifer Faith Levy, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Laurence Levy of New York, was married on Thursday to Alon Moshe Markowitz, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Israel Markowitz of West Hartford, Conn.
Rabbi J. Rolando Matalon performed the ceremony at the Water's Edge restaurant in Long Island City, Queens.
Mrs.
Markowitz, 28, graduated from Brown University and received a master's degree in English education from Columbia University.
She was until recently an English teacher at Christopher Columbus High School in the Bronx, and she expects to begin teaching at the Ramaz Upper School in New York next month.
Her father is a real estate investor in New York.


Suspenders Appear as Fall Approaches
Suspenders have come to the rescue of oversize trousers, and not a minute too soon, as hip-hop-style pants are falling so low that they display a man's underwear.
For some, suspenders provide the solution for the opposite problem.
They are worn with high-waisted pants that bypass the waistline by six inches, rendering a belt useless.
The fad for suspenders has spread to women's clothing, too.
Consider Chanel's monogrammed black and white designs, top left, which can be seen from a block away.
Other women are using suspenders attached to trousers with traditional waistlines.


Some Cubans Wait in Detention Center
Despite the Clinton Administration's decision on Friday to deny them entry to the United States, Cuban refugees continued to stream into the Florida Straits today.
The Coast Guard plucked 1,074 refugees from rafts and other small vessels by midnight and was planning to take them to the United States Navy base in Guantanamo Bay, Cuba.
The number picked up today nearly doubled the 579 picked up on Friday and was equal to a third of the Cuban refugees who came to the United States in 1993.


Crime
"There were times," according to Charlie Resnick, "when what you didn't do was play Billie Holiday singing 'Our Love Is Here to Stay.' " In John Harvey's COLD LIGHT (Holt, $22), this moody English copper comes to realize that Christmas is one of those perilous times.
Resnick's seasonal depression gets so bad that he crawls into bed with the roommate of a young social worker who disappeared from an office party on Christmas Eve.
This fumbling romantic encounter does nothing to advance the investigation, but it is one of many painfully detailed variations on the themes of love and loneliness that connect the multiple subplots of this harrowing story.


Budget Director, the Conscience of Congress, Turns Ideas Into Dollar Signs
There are moments in this final phase of the health care struggle when people yearn, just a little, for the old leap-of-faith days of policy-making.
Before the Congressional Budget Office was tallying up the costs, the risks and the impact on the deficit of every good intention.
Robert D. Reischauer, the 53-year-old director of the budget office, is smack in the center of the legislative action these days.
Mr.
Reischauer, a tall, ascetic-looking economist, strides from the meetings of the "mainstream coalition" in the Senate to the huddles of the Democratic leaders in the House.
He and his 20 health analysts are supposed to function as a careful, wary superego in the Congressional psyche. (Do you realize the subsidies it takes to reduce the number of uninsured from 15 to 10 percent of the population? Do you recognize the difficulty in turning over vast new regulatory responsibilities to the states?)


Western Influence in Korean Sculpture
A QUICK survey of recent group exhibitions suggests that the custom of listing artists alphabetically is on the way out -- much to the inconvenience of those charged with imposing order on chaos.
Whether the reason is lethargy or simply fear of appearing elitist is unknown.
But now the Paterson Museum has gone one better.
In its present display of sculpture by 39 artists from Korea, the museum provides information -- on labels and in the catalogue -- for only one work per sculptor.
Accordingly, visitors must infer as best they can who produced the remaining pieces.


Islam Without Militance
RETHINKING ISLAM Common Questions, Uncommon Answers.
By Mohammed Arkoun.
Translated and edited by Robert D. Lee. 139 pp.
Boulder, Colo.: Westview Press.
Cloth, $59.95.
Paper, $19.95.


New Breed Of Farmers Sees Future In Onions
A light rain pelted the coal-black dirt that farmers in Orange County call "black gold."
Days before the onion harvest, which began in early August for most farmers in the area, two brothers, Joe and Dave Morgiewicz, ran their fingers through the nutrient-rich soil.
It is the same land that their great-grandfather George Pawliczak first farmed in the 1920's.


New School's Opening Makes Its Neighbors Nervous
A pile of fetid garbage and a rusty kitchen sink sit on the front steps of Public School 85 in East Harlem, evidence of the dumping ground it has become since it was closed, more than a decade ago.
But new windows have been installed in the fourth and fifth floors and the din of construction can be heard these days as classrooms are prepared to receive students once again.
The new students will be part of a program called Youth Options Unlimited, a joint venture of the Board of Education and the Department of Juvenile Justice to educate young people, mostly teen-age boys, awaiting trial on criminal charges.


Inspiration From Sunny Lands for a Good Cold Soup
INEVITABLY, summer demands cold soup.
There are the classics, like gazpacho, vichyssoise and borscht.
Cold cucumber soup is also fairly common.
Recently, the thick Tuscan tomato-and-bread soup, pappa al pomodoro, has become popular.
But there are also more inventive possibilities.
They can be based on vegetable purees, broths with ingredients added or even fruit.
All manner of leftovers can be thinned, smoothed and seasoned to make a good cold soup.


POSTINGS: Restoration and Reconstruction; Making Grand Central Grander
Grand Central Terminal's grandeur has been uncovered slowly in recent years, step by step.
This week, the Metropolitan Transportation Authority and its development teammates, LaSalle Partners and Williams Jackson Ewing, will submit for public review a sweeping restoration and reconstruction plan that aims to increase the terminal's role as a marketplace and enhance its landmark status.


Julie C. Winter, Simon Western
Julie Carole Winter, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Irwin Winter of New York, is to be married today to Simon Richard Anthony Western, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Dennis Western of Hayling Island, England.
Acting Justice Harold Silverman of State Supreme Court in the Bronx is to officiate at the Lotos Club in Manhattan.
The bride, 26, was until recently an early childhood teacher at the Rockefeller University Children's School in New York.
She graduated from the University of Vermont and received a master's degree in elementary education from the Bank Street College of Education.
Her father is a financial vice president of the Phillips-Van Heusen Corporation, the New York apparel and footwear company.


Henry Francis du Pont's Forgotten Collection
TO HENRY FRANCIS DU PONT, famous for filling his Winterthur home in Delaware with classic treasures from Philadelphia, New York and Newport, R.I., there was more to collecting than Americana.
His private preference for foreign furniture was never publicized, but it surfaced early and continued until his death at 88 in 1969.
When he decorated his family's first apartment in Manhattan in 1923, for example, du Pont chose the eclectic style popular in the period: Italian Renaissance chests and torcheres for the foyer, English Chippendale chairs and tables in the dining room and French 18th-century sofas, clocks and carpets in the parlor.


Celebrations and Protests for the 30th Birthday of G. I. Joe


Correction
An article on July 31 about Nairn, Scotland, misstated the composition of the seafront promenade in Nairn and misidentified the owner of Brodie Castle, which is nearby.
The two-mile promenade is mostly pavement, not boardwalk.
The castle is owned by the National Trust for Scotland, not by the current occupant, Brodie of Brodie.


THE DISAPPEARING DUCHESS
Although both Junius Spencer Morgan and his son, J. P., were indeed great art collectors, their 25-year obsession with acquiring the Thomas Gainsborough portrait of the former Georgiana Spencer (the notorious fifth Duchess of Devonshire) had more to do, perhaps, with family pride than mere connoisseurship ("The Disappearing Duchess," by Ben Macintyre, July 31).
In the early 1870's, a genealogist was hired by Junius Morgan to trace his Spencer ancestry (his mother, Sally Spencer, 1787-1859, was descended from a prominent Hartford family that had settled in America in 1633).
When the genealogist unearthed a connection with the aristocratic English ancestors of Lady Georgiana, Junius Morgan had books printed and charts drawn displaying his new-found pedigree (copies of which this writer possesses).


Business Diary: August 14 - 19
COMPANIES Reform or Not, Here Comes the Latest, Largest Drug Merger  Health reform may come in fits and starts in Washington, but in the private sector it chugs along nicely.
Last week saw the biggest drug merger yet, with American Home Products buying American Cyanamid for $9.7 billion -- a heady $101 a share for Cyanamid, which traded under $60 just a month ago.
American, which makes Advil, Anacin and Dristan, and Cyanamid, which makes Centrum vitamins and Fibercon laxatives, have combined sales of $12.6 billion.
The deal will create "significant synergies," said John Stafford, American's chief, and analysts heard in that phrase coming job cuts and other economies.
Some fault the horizontal merger, though, saying it is smarter to marry a managed-care company or a strong innovator.
Either way, private health reform proceeds apace.
Can D.C. catch up?
Last week's other news -- that I.B.M. urged its 110,000 workers to resist the pending reform bills -- won't help.


Julie B. Lefkowitz, Todd L. Mendik
Julie Beth Lefkowitz, the daughter of Helen and Judge Joel Lefkowitz of Setauket, L.I., is to be married today to Todd Lansing Mendik, a son of Bernard H. Mendik of New York and the late Annette Mendik, and an adopted son of Susan Mendik.
Rabbi Moshe Edelman is to officiate at the Woodbury (L.I.) Jewish Center.
The bride, 26, graduated from Syracuse University and received a law degree from Brooklyn Law School.
She is an assistant district attorney in Brooklyn.
Her father serves on Suffolk County Court in Riverhead, L.I.
Her mother is a partner in Lekfowitz &amp; Poulos, a law firm in Hauppauge, L.I.


Measuring Heads
To the Editor:
Interested readers should seek out Carleton Coon's delightful travel book, "Measuring Ethiopia and Flight Into Arabia" (1935).
It chronicles an expedition sponsored by Harvard's Peabody Museum to collect ethnological specimens and rare frog skins, along with medicinal and food plants.
Coon also practiced his hobby, measuring heads.
In this early book, he doesn't seem to take it too seriously.
JAMES W. KASCH, M.D.
Oakland, Calif.


Dudley Says No to Offer by Kings
CHRIS DUDLEY turned down a lucrative offer from the Sacramento Kings and said he was ready to re-sign with the Portland Trail Blazers.
Dudley, who exercised an one year opt-out clause in the free agent deal he signed with Portland last summer, is an unrestricted free agent.
The center said he turned down a six-year offer from Sacramento worth about $24 million.


Even Books Hit Hard This Football Season
Baseball books are usually sunny paeans to our national goodness, which is why football books are more fun.
Football books celebrate our national swamps.
Violence, rough sex and dangerous drugs are explored in the same delicious detail that ex-coaches give to diagramming plays on television.
In these books, dysfunctional men play for dysfunctional teams that mirror the dysfunctional families that have produced the piggish owners, fascistic coaches, psycopathic linebackers and narcissistic quarterbacks.
This will be a good season for football books.
The first four I've read are oddly complementary.
A team I didn't much follow, the 1992 Philadelphia Eagles, provides the story line for "Bringing the Heat" (Knopf), Mark Bowden's juicy, funny, harrowing broken-field run through class, race and gender.


Fear of West Side Plans: Park Or K-Mart-on-the-Hudson?
As the state moves ahead on plans to rebuild the West Side Highway, the debate over a park alongside it has deeply divided the West Side.
Most agree that the waterfront should be spared major development; what divides them is the suspicion by some that any development will open the door for large-scale commercial projects.


Anna Coquillette, Erik Caspersen
Anna Rebecca Coquillette, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Daniel Coquillette of Cambridge, Mass., was married there yesterday to Erik Morris Westby Caspersen, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Finn M. W. Caspersen of Andover, N.J.
The Rev.
Louise Conant performed the Episcopal ceremony at Christ Church.
Mrs.
Caspersen, 24, is a law student at Boston College, where her father, a former dean of the law school, is a professor of law.
The bride graduated from Barnard College.
She and her husband received master's degrees from the London School of Economics, she in modern British history and he in economics.


Habitats/Stockton, N.J.; An Old Farmhouse, a Barn, a Meandering Stream . . .
AN old farmhouse without the rudiments of modern sanitation -- and a barn filled with bales of hay.
A meandering stream.
A small cream-colored outhouse with dark green trim and shirred curtains up a narrow pathway in the back field.
A few scraggly head of cattle drinking from the stream would complete the picture for a director seeking the perfect setting for a film on a pioneer woman's struggle for survival in the hills of Appalachia.


Frame of Mind
A few weeks ago, while writing cover headlines for an article about the transformation of a suburban high school near Chicago, the editors of The Times Magazine learned something about applied linguistics.
The specific lesson involves race and politics; underlying it is a larger principle of cultural context, something scholars call framing.
Listeners bring different frameworks of understanding to the same words.
In his study "Frame Analysis," the sociologist Erving Goffman related an incident at the nursery school of a 3-year-old whose grandfather owned a baseball team.


2 Aliens (American Variety) Train for Russian Space Mission
Four floors above the apartment where Yuri Gagarin lived after his pioneer space flight in 1961, an American astronaut sat down to dinner recently with Russian teachers.
It had been a long day for the astronaut, Norman Thagard, starting with a lecture on the Russian space station, Mir, and ending with four hours of basic Russian.


The Way We Are
To the Sports Editor:
The roar of the crowd . . . the smell of peanuts . . . the hot sun on your face . . . the crack of the bat . . .
"it's going, going, gone" . . . the sight of fathers and sons . . . laughing and cheering with strangers for a common cause . . . learning to keep score, the right way . . . hearing the public address announcer resoundingly state, "now batting Mickey Mantle" and wishing so deeply it was you instead . . .
This is what baseball should be.


Villa With a View and a Garden
ON our first evening in the Umbrian countryside of Italy, a violent storm blew over the town of Montecchio, and a lightning bolt caused all the lights of the town to go out.
The Etruscans, who thrived in Umbria in the seventh century B.C. when Rome was nothing more than a bunch of huts, divined omens from bolts of lightning and peals of thunder.
Lightning on the left promised good fortune; the villa we were renting was one hill over from the town, the storm was indeed to our left, and we toasted our luck as we watched one pearly strand after another flicker on again.
The villa, on a hill called Poggio Sant'Angelo, was 20 minutes from Orvieto and overlooked the wide Tiber Valley.
Friends from England were returning there for their vacation last summer, and invited us to join them.


THE PRESIDENT'S PAST
Kelly's profile hit the nail on the head.
As a gay man who became enthusiastic about Clinton the candidate, voted for him, was ecstatic at his election and then hugely disappointed by his lack of resolve on the issue of homosexuals in the military, I believe your article has helped me to accept that it's O.K. to have the love-hate relationship I do with President Clinton.
SEAN SAWYER New York, N.Y.


Evans Becomes Older, Wiser, Taller, Heavier and, Best of All, Happier
Janet Evans remembers when she was 14 years old, when she started swimming against the world's best, when generously muscled East Germans and Soviets laughed at this ungainly string bean, not even 5 feet tall, with a windmill stroke.
She remembers a year later, when she started beating them and the world records started to come and people started to realize that this California tyke might be a swimmer for the ages.


Kathryn Barclay And James Coyne
Kathryn Douglas Barclay, a daughter of H. Douglas and Sara Barclay of Pulaski, N.Y., was married there yesterday to James Malachy Coyne, the son of Daniel and Anne Coyne of Rochester.
The Rev.
James Tschudy officiated at the Pulaski Congregational Church.
The Rev.
Anthony Keeffe, a Roman Catholic priest, took part in the ceremony.
Mrs.
Coyne is the director of marketing at Heluva Good Cheese Inc. in Sodus, N.Y.
She graduated from St.
Lawrence University.
Her father, a partner in the Syracuse law firm of Hiscock &amp; Barclay, was a Republican member of the New York State Senate from 1965 to 1984.


Hats, Horns and Hopalong, With Chili
A RESTAURANT as redolent of an old-time Texas tavern as Ash Creek Saloon in Fairfield tends to bring out the drawl in most of us.
Consider: you enter the restaurant through a noisy, old-time bar, complete with a brightly colored nickelodeon (crowned by a saddle) that is going full blast.
The somewhat quieter dining room, a long, narrow storefront, has a pressed-tin ceiling, Tiffany-style hanging lamps, dark wood paneling, one brick wall and accouterments like cowboy hats, horns, almost-lifesize cut-outs of Roy Rogers and a picture of Hopalong Cassidy.


The World: Who Will Buy?; Plutonium For Sale. Call 1-800-TERROR
AS the French authorities were announcing the arrest and extradition from the Sudan of the long-sought Marxist mercenary known as Carlos, the German authorities last week were demonstrating just how short-lived, if not chimeric, this victory over terrorism was likely to be: They disclosed that an international gang of smugglers had been peddling for $250 million nearly nine pounds of plutonium-239 from Russia -- quite possibly close to enough for a nuclear bomb.
This time, the smugglers actually delivered more than half a pound of it to police undercover agents posing as potential customers.
The end of the cold war was the undoing of Carlos and of the Marxist ideology that motivated him, and it lifted the threat of global nuclear war.
But it also unraveled the repressive security system that kept close check on Soviet nuclear weapons and the fissionable material that goes into them.
Now, paradoxically, freedom could soon give terrorists or the maverick states that support them the possibility of acquiring the massively destructive power they never had a chance of getting in a bipolar world.


A New Hurdle As a Deal Nears On a Crime Bill
In a marathon bargaining session, Democratic leaders in the House moved close to agreement on Saturday night with a group of moderate Republicans on a $30 billion crime bill, but faced a sudden, separate challenge from another bipartisan coalition.
In talks that lasted all Friday night, most of Saturday and into the early hours of today, the Democratic leadership agreed to make deeper cuts in preventive social programs that President Clinton had urged and to accept other Republican proposals.
The Republicans, in turn, dropped some demands, including more money for state prisons.


Aug. 14-20: Avoiding Another Mariel; The U.S. Pulls In The Welcome Mat For Fleeing Cubans
With more than 2,000 Cubans fleeing on rafts and small boats since Monday, President Clinton's big fear was that the exodus would explode into a replay of the chaotic 1980 Mariel boatlift, in which 125,000 Cubans left for the United States.
So Mr.
Clinton decided to get uncharacteristically tough.
Removing the welcome mat that Washington set out for Cubans in 1966, he ordered that all those picked up in the Florida straits would be detained in Guantanamo Bay.
No longer would the Coast Guard ferry them to Florida so they could be quickly turned over to relatives.
The White House said the stern new policy aimed "to demagnetize the United States" and discourage new rafters, many of whom have drowned.


Sondheim's 'Passion': A Jigsaw Puzzle Of Elegant Fragments
LISTENING TO THE BROADWAY CAST album of the Stephen Sondheim-James Lapine musical "Passion" is a little like slipping into a fever dream.
As the show's 19th-century characters chatter obsessively about the nature and meaning of romantic love, the music continually circles back on itself as if trying to redefine the terms of an argument that has no resolution.
Mr.
Sondheim's rhapsodic score belongs to the same school of romantic minimalism as his music for "Sunday in the Park With George." Its pieces mesh like fragments in a finely cut jigsaw puzzle that is different shades of the same color.
For the album, the Broadway orchestrations have been gorgeously augmented by Jonathan Tunick with the addition of 26 strings.


THE PRESIDENT'S PAST
After reading your article, I am wondering which nickname is more appropriate for Bill Clinton -- Slick Willie or Three-Dollar Bill?
A.
BRAUNFELDS Bronx


Irvan on Life-Support Systems After Head-On Crash Into Wall in Practice
Ernie Irvan, one of the leading drivers in stock car racing, was in critical condition and on life-support systems last night after crashing during practice yesterday morning at Michigan International Raceway in Brooklyn, Mich.
Irvan, 35 years old, was driving his Ford Thunderbird on the high-banked, two-mile oval during practice for today's Goodwrench 400 Winston Cup race when he hit the wall nearly head-on at the exit to Turn 2.
Witnesses said the crash was apparently caused by a cut right front tire.
He had been running laps at about 176 miles an hour.


The Complete Urban Angler
A BIG green turtle surfaced to the left of Glenn Brown's fishing line, which he had plunked below a half-toppled pier on Staten Island.
He mumbled something about chasing it, then worried about keeping his fingers.
Mr.
Brown has had enough pain recently.
Pain, in fact, inspired him to fish in New York Harbor, a few hundred yards south of a rusted ferryboat named Verrazano.
"I started fishing because of this," said the 41-year-old Mr.
Brown, lifting his round sunglasses to reveal two purplish swollen eyes.
"I was mugged in my neighborhood, and I bought a fishing pole. Back to the outdoors."


In the Twilight of Deng, China's Rising Stars Jostle
With his 90th birthday two days away, his hearing almost gone and his body racked by Parkinson's disease, Deng Xiaoping is still playing an active, though more limited, role as China's paramount leader, United States officials say.
At the same time, they say, President Jiang Zemin has taken important steps to consolidate his power in advance of Mr.
Deng's death, as other contenders for China's Communist Party throne maneuver for influence, or even to challenge Mr.
Deng's chosen heir.


Two Chorale Events Close Summer Season
SUMMER is rapidly fading, but some enticements remain for concertgoers before the fall season starts.
At 5:30 P.M. today the Caramoor Festival in Katonah offers the violinist Elmar Oliveira, a Westchester resident, playing Vivaldi's "Four Seasons" with the Chamber Orchestra of St.
Luke's.
The program includes two other works for strings: Mendelssohn's Sinfonia (sometimes called String Symphony) No. 8 and the "Adagio" of Samuel Barber.
The number to call for tickets is 323-1252.
St.
Luke's Episcopal Church in Somers is the site of the final two 8 P.M.
Summer Sings sponsored by the Taghkanic Chorale.
On Tuesday the choir's former music director, Dennis Keene, returns to lead the audience- choir in a double-header of Haydn's "Lord Nelson" Mass and the Faure Requiem.
On Aug. 30, Harold Rosenbaum conducts a reading of Brahms's "German Requiem." For more information, call 621-1240.


Expertise on Refugees Amplifies Reno's Voice
On Thursday morning, Attorney General Janet Reno told reporters at the Justice Department that refugees leaving Cuba posed no emergency and could easily be absorbed into the population.
That night, at a hastily called White House news conference, she announced that everything had changed.
Any Cubans found in international waters would be sent on Coast Guard vessels to a tent city at the American Navy base at Guantanamo Bay.
By the next morning, she was warning any Cuban trying to leave the country, "The odds of ending up in Guantanamo are going to be very, very great and the odds of ending up in the United States are going to be very, very small."


Noelle Cournoyer, Robin Doumar
Noelle Marie Cournoyer, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Roger N. Cournoyer of Barrington, R.I., was married yesterday to Robert George Doumar Jr., a son of Judge and Mrs.
Doumar of Norfolk, Va.
Msgr.
Oscar Ferland performed the ceremony at the Cathedral of SS.
Peter and Paul in Providence, R.I.
Mrs.
Doumar, 30, is an assistant vice president at Citicorp Venture Capital Ltd., in New York.
She graduated from Tufts University and received an M.B.A. from Columbia University.
Her father is a veterinarian in East Providence, R.I.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, a review in The Times Book Review last Sunday, about "The Assault," by Rei naldo Arenas, misstated the cause of the author's death.
It was suicide, not AIDS.


Laura D. Wilchek, Eric T. Bradlow
Laura Diane Wilchek, the daughter of Thomas and Esther Wilchek of Gambrills, Md., is to be married today to Eric Thomas Bradlow, a son of Frieda K. Bradlow of New York and the late Dr.
Paul A. Bradlow.
Rosalie Obara, the Clerk of the Peace of New Castle County, Del., is to officiate at a nondenominational ceremony at the Du Pont Country Club in Wilmington, Del.
The bride, 25, is a logistics coordinator at E. I. du Pont de Nemours &amp; Company in Wilmington.
She graduated from Pennsylvania State University.
Her father is the chief of the authorization programming group at the Federal Communications Commission in Washington.
Her mother is the manager of contract property programs at the National Aeronautics and Space Administration in Washington.


A Run to Moonlight For Food and More
To Manuel Luna Guitierez, there's only one good reason to run a 100-mile race.
"I run for my pueblo," said the wiry, 31-year old Tarahumara Indian, a native of northwest Mexico's Copper Canyon.
"I run for the food we will win."
But to most of the nearly 300 other runners in today's Leadville Race to the Sky, the motivation for undertaking one of the world's most grueling foot races is less pragmatic.
Most ultrarunners are American engineers, nurses, business consultants and the like in their 30's, 40's and even 50's.
And though a few top runners have corporate sponsors, the lack of prize money insures that most competitors are strictly amateurs.


Svea A. Herbst, George Bayliss
Svea Alwine Herbst and George Palmer Bayliss, journalists in Frankfurt, were married yesterday in Oldwick, N.J.
The Rev.
Thomas L. Gotsch and the Rev.
Dr.
Otmar Hesse, an uncle of the bride, performed the ceremony at Zion Evangelical Lutheran Church.
The bride is a reporter for Knight-Ridder Financial News.
She graduated magna cum laude from Mount Holyoke College, where she was a Mary Lyon scholar.
She and her husband received master's degrees in international affairs from Columbia University.


Such Good Friends
To the Editor:
In her review of "Intimate Letters" (July 31), the collection of correspondence between the composer Leos Janacek and Kamila Stosslova, a young woman he met in 1917 when he was 63 years old, Eva Hoffman says that Janacek's devotion never flagged, but that during the 11 years of its duration "the friendship remained almost certainly un consummated."


New Water Tests Heighten Fears About L.I. Sound
IN Mamaroneck Harbor late last month, scientists on a routine water-sampling mission became alarmed.
Their findings -- three milligrams of dissolved oxygen in a liter of water in some areas -- indicated the early arrival of hypoxic conditions in Long Island Sound.
In laymen's terms that means that water quality in the estuary has deteriorated and devastating algae blooms and fish kills will become more likely as summer wears on.


The Man Who Tried For Bacon
A defiant and fearless Representative Jack Brooks has spent the last week clutching his lapels, rocking back on his heels and alternately laughing and thundering at his adversaries, who, at this moment, consist of much of official Washington.
The 71-year-old Mr.
Brooks stands 5 feet 10 inches.
But he comes from Texas, and that makes him seem bigger.
He is also the chairman of the House Judiciary Committee, and that makes him powerful enough to have inserted his own bit of pork into the gargantuan crime bill without a vote.


Julia S. Elliman, Stephen A. Crout
Julia Smither Elliman, the daughter of Mrs.
John E. Bagalay Jr. of Cambridge, Mass., and Peter B. Elliman of Warrenton, Va., was married in Houston yesterday to Stephen Andrew Crout, a son of Mrs.
G.
Stanley Crout of Santa Fe, N.M., and the late Mr.
Crout.
The Rev.
John A. Logan Jr. performed the Episcopal ceremony at Christ Church Cathedral.
Mrs.
Crout, 30, is the membership director at the University Club in Washington.
She graduated from Mount Vernon College.
Her father is the vice president and a founding director of Prime Capital Inc., a venture capital company in Warrenton.
She is a great-granddaughter of Douglas Ludlow Elliman, the founder of the Douglas Elliman, Gibbons &amp; Ives real estate company in New York.


Residential Sales
In the following reports, the "listed at" price is the asking price when negotiations began that ended in the sale.
Time on market is from most recent listing to contract.
MANHATTAN
CHELSEA $515,000
161 West 15th Street
1-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,800-sq.-ft. co-op in a prewar building; elevator, sauna, Jacuzzi, exposed-brick walls, 2 exposures; maintenance $1,107, 70% tax deductible, listed at $549,000, 1 week on market (Brokers: Delson-Ginsberg; Douglas Elliman)
GREENWICH VILLAGE $1.225 million
78 West 12th Street
8-bedroom, 4-bath, 4-family, Greek Revival town house to be converted to one-family use; professional office on first floor; taxes $12,000, listed at $1.395 million, 17 weeks on market (Brokers: Wells &amp; Gay/Sriblings &amp; Associates; Cantor-Peccorella)
UPPER EAST SIDE $205,000
1001 Fifth Avenue (81st St.)
1-bedroom, 1-bath, 625-sq.-ft. prewar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, concierge, dining el, balcony, Central Park view; maintenance $957, 50% taxdeductible, listed at $215,000, 1 1/2 years on market (Broker: Corcoran Group)
UPPER WEST SIDE $595,000
140 Riverside Drive (86th St.)
(Normandy)
2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,300-sq.-ft. prewar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, renovated kitchen and bath, Hudson River view; maintenance $1,326, 40% tax deductible, listed at $575,000, 1 week on market (Brokers: Argo Corporation Real Estate; Stribling &amp; Associates)
BRONX
ALLERTON AVENUE AREA $144,000
2585 Steadman Avenue
3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 33-year-old semi-attached brick house; dining room, eat-in kitchen, finished basement; taxes $1,559, listed at $165,000, 13 weeks on market (Brokers: Century 21/Metro Star; Fassons Realty)
WILLIAMSBRIDGE $265,000
1605 Chester Street
3-family, 4-year-old semi-attached brick house; 3 bedrooms, 2 baths, dining room, eat-in kitchen in two lower-floor units; 1 bedroom, 1 bath in other; finished basement, 1-car garage; 100% tax abated, listed at $325,000, 26 weeks on market (Broker: ERA/Besmatch Real Estate)
BROOKLYN
PARK SLOPE $410,000
424 8th Street
3-family, 4-story brownstone; 3 bedrooms, 1 1/2-bath, dining room, Jacuzzi in primary duplex; 2 bedrooms, eat-in kitchen, 1 bath in 2 simplexes ; listed at $425,000, 6 weeks on market (Brokers: John P. Burke Inc.)
PROSPECT PARK SOUTH $370,000
109 Rugby Road
5-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, neo-Georgian Flemish-brick town house; dining room, vaulted ceilings, parquet floors, fireplace, African-marble columns, 2-car garage; taxes $3,397, listed at $399,000, 17 weeks on market (Broker: Mary Kay Gallagher)
QUEENS
EAST ELMHURST $136,000
24-13 96th Street
2-family, 45-year-old attached brick house; 3 bedrooms, dining room, eat-in kitchen in primary unit; 1 bedroom, 1 bath in other; 1 bath in each; 1-car garage; taxes $1,400, listed at $144,900, 1 1/2-years on market (Broker: Kremer Realty)
FOREST HILLS $445,000
69-25 Exeter Street
5-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 65-year-old detached brick colonial; dining room, fireplace, powder room, finished basement, 2-car garage; taxes $2,714, listed at $449,000, 5 weeks on market (Broker: Terrace Realty)
STATEN ISLAND
NEW DORP $300,000
94 Eighth Street
2-family, 8-year-old raised-ranch; 4 bedrooms, 2 1/2 baths, dining room, eat-in kitchen, den in primary unit; 1 bedroom, 1 bath in other; c/a, finished basement, 1-car garage, 50- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,700, listed at $319,000, 4 weeks on market (Broker: Salmon Realty)
RANDALL MANOR $228,000
8 Devon Place
2-bedroom, 2-bath, 40-year-old stone and vinyl-sided ranch; dining room, eat-in kitchen, den, fireplace, finished basement, 1-car garage, 106- ft 67-ft. lot; taxes $1,600, listed at $239,900, 22 weeks on market (Brokers: Vitale-Sunshine Realty; Frandor Realty)
NEW JERSEY
BERGENFIELD $240,000
78 Momar Drive
4-bedroom, 4-bath, over-44-year-old expanded Cape Cod; 3-car garage, inground pool, finished basement, c/a; taxes $8,539, listed at $270,750, 21 weeks on market (Brokers: Prudential Higgins Realtors; Howard Koval Realty Inc.)
FAIR LAWN $187,000
3-14 29th Street
5-bedroom, 2-bath, 40-year-old Cape Cod; family room, 2-car garage, office; taxes $4,994, listed at $200,000, 4 weeks on market (Brokers: T.P. Mabey Realty; Prudential Lambert)
HOPEWELL $220,000
29 Aunt Molly Road
3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 32-year-old ranch; 1-acre lot, c/a, 2 fireplaces; taxes $3,692, listed at $227,000, 5 weeks on market (Broker: Richard A. Weidel Corp., Realtors)
WHIPPANY $239,900
45 Adams Drive
4-bedroom, 2-bath, 38-year-old split level; 1-car garage, full basement, deck, c/a; taxes $3,051, listed at $242,000, 1 week on market (Brokers: The Prudential New Jersey Realty; Weichert Realtors)
WESTCHESTER
KATONAH $350,000
16 Barrett Road
3-bedroom, 2-bath, 34-year-old ranch; stone fireplace, library, multilevel deck, dining room, den, greenhouse; 1 acre; taxes $8,296, listed at $389,900, 5 months on market (Broker: Coldwell Banker)
MOUNT VERNON $310,000
235 Pennsylvania Avenue
4-bedroom, 3-bath, 69-year-old colonial; heated sunroom, stained-glass window, modern eat-in kitchen, finished basement; taxes $7,528, listed at $350,000, 53 weeks on market (Broker: Lindsey Real Estate)
SOUTH SALEM $349,900 177 Main Street
4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 15-year-old colonial; center hall, dining room, solarium; 1 acre; taxes $7,045, listed at $349,900, 7 weeks on market (Brokers: Coldwell Banker; Houlihan/ Lawrence)
WHITE PLAINS $405,000
101 Greenridge Avenue
4-bedroom, 3-bath, 57-year-old colonial; den, deck, maid's room, eat-in kitchen, detached 2-car garage; 0.5acre; taxes $6,195, listed at $419,000, 2 months on market (Broker: Century 21 Wolff &amp; Son)
LONG ISLAND
BAY SHORE $412,000
36 Lawrence Lane
5-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, 6-year-old contemporary; dining room, eat-in kitchen, atrium, fireplace, deck, 3-car garage; taxes $11,800, listed at $439,000, 104 weeks on market (Brokers: Matherson Associates; Eric G. Ramsay Jr. Associates)
MINEOLA $282,000
212 Linden Road
3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 75-year-old center-hall colonial; dining room, eat-in kitchen, den, sunroom, finished basement, fireplace, 2-car garage; taxes $3,700, listed at $279,990, 1 day on market (Brokers: Rowan Real Estate; Atanas Realty Corporation)
OLD WESTBURY $710,000
114 Wheatley Road
5-bedroom, 3-bath, 37-year-old farm ranch; dining room, den, fireplace, pool, 2-car garage, 2 acres; taxes $15,000, listed at $795,000, 28 weeks on market (Brokers: Douglas Elliman-Jane Hayes; Sterling Properties)
SAYVILLE $97,500
251 Terry Road
2-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 67-year-old ranch; dining room, den, 1-car garage; taxes $3,700, listed at $105,900, 9 weeks on market (Broker: Prudential Long Island Real Estate)
CONNECTICUT
BETHEL $150,000
87 Dodington Road
2-bedroom, 2-bath, 157-year-old Cape Cod; dining room, 2-car garage, 0.6-acre lot; taxes $2,660, listed at $159,000, 15 weeks on market (Broker: William Pitt Real Estate)
FAIRFIELD $276,000
29 Ridgeview Avenue
4-bedroom, 3-bath, 60-year-old wood-frame colonial; dining room, family room, 6-year-old roof, 2-car garage, 102- by 130-foot lot; taxes $3,968, listed at $299,000, 4 weeks on market (Brokers: Coldwell Banker/Schlott Realtors)
GREENWICH $1.65 million
356 Round Hill Road
3-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, 84-year-old stone and shingle colonial; dining room, family room, den, 4-acre lot; taxes $5,220, listed at $1.995 million, 8 weeks on market (Brokers: Preferred Properties Inc.; William Pitt Real Estate)
NEW CANAAN $366,600
31 Hoyt Street
3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 65-year-old wood-frame colonial; dining room, new kitchen and roof, fireplace, porch and deck, 0.21 acre lot; taxes $3,320, listed at $379,000, 6 weeks on market (Brokers: Preferred Properties Inc.; William Pitt Real Estate)


Wall Street; A Creative 'Personal' Resignation
AMONG the more predictable producers of winks and nods in Corporate America is the old "resigned for personal reasons" line -- the can't-miss guarantee that there must be something going on.
Tea-leaf readers make great sport of divining just what led to such a resignation even at ho-hum companies.
But when the resignation is "personal" and the company is this year's candidate for Most Likely to Blunder, it's all the more fun to take a peek at the business dealings of the exiting executive.
Spectrum Information Technologies Inc. said earlier this month that Dennis R. Williamson had resigned from its board of directors for "personal reasons." No further explanation was forthcoming.
But Mr.
Williamson, with only three weeks as a board member under his belt, hardly needed an excuse in his personal life to be abandoning the board of a company with little room for more bad publicity.
Creative Resources Inc., the public company for which Mr.
Williamson works as president and C.E.O., is enough of an eyebrow-raiser on its own to beg the question of why Spectrum took him on in the first place.


Corrections
Two of the three pictures of vehicles published with an article last Sunday about the Emergency Services Unit at Floyd Bennett Field were reversed.
The bottom picture showed an armored personnel carrier; the one in the middle showed an amphibious vehicle.


Decision Is Near on Route 1 Link to Turnpike
After 56 years, a highway spur intended to ease congestion along the Route 1 corridor in central New Jersey has finally reached the point at which it will be built or scrapped.
The road, Route 92, was originally conceived as an east-west freeway cutting across some of central New Jersey's busiest north-south routes to link Route 206 near Princeton with Route 33 near Hightstown.


Mr. Monroe's Neighborhood
THE LAST YEARS OF THE MONROE DOCTRINE, 1945-1993 By Gaddis Smith. 280 pp.
New York: Hill &amp; Wang. $25.


2 Polish Generals Acquitted in Killing of Priest
Two generals of the former Communist secret police have been acquitted by a Warsaw court in connection with the 1984 slaying of a priest linked to the Solidarity movement.
The trial of Gen.
Wladyslaw Ciaston and Gen.
Zenon Platek was seen here as a test case for bringing former Communists to account for past repressions.


FASHION


2 Trials Later, Mystery Lingers in Arson Case
On a January day in 1992, Justice Joseph J. Slavin of Supreme Court reopened hearings in a bitterly fought case: Once more he would try to determine whether Eric Jackson, whom he had sentenced to 158 years for setting fire to a Waldbaum's supermarket in which six firefighters died, deserved a new trial.
Prosecutors in the 1980 trial, the judge had already ruled, had not turned over materials that could have been vital to the defense.


Mr. Monroe's Neighborhood
THE LAST YEARS OF THE MONROE DOCTRINE, 1945-1993 By Gaddis Smith. 280 pp.
New York: Hill &amp; Wang. $25.
THE Monroe Doctrine, first proclaimed by President James Monroe in a message to Congress in December 1823, is perhaps the most revered pronouncement of American foreign policy.
Originally a statement that the United States opposed the establishment of monarchical governments and new colonial regimes in the Western Hemisphere by European nations, the doctrine went largely unnoticed at first by the European powers.
Yet as American strength grew over the years, so did foreign respect for Monroe's warning, and by the beginning of the 20th century it had assumed a mythical place in the national consciousness.





Vivaldi's 'Four Seasons' Closing Caramoor
SUMMER is fading but some enticements remain, among them the last of the Caramoor Festival concerts in Katonah.
Today at 5:30 the violinist Elmar Oliveira plays Vivaldi's "Four Seasons" with the Chamber Orchestra of St.
Luke's capping a program that also lists two other works for strings: Mendelssohn's Sinfonia (sometimes called the String Symphony) No. 8 and the "Adagio" of Samuel Barber.
Call 914-323-1252 for tickets or driving directions.
Twenty-five years ago, Elsa Redlich invited musicians to perform at a creative arts camp on her estate on Chestnut Hill, in Killingworth, her idea being both to present the finest in chamber music and to involve young people in the listening experience.
The goals have remained essentially the same, but as the concerts grew in reputation and audience size, the series shifted several times, first to the Hammonassett School Arts Barn in Madison, then to Andrews Memorial Hall in Clinton, on to another small meeting hall in Guilford, and finally back to Madison where for 17 years the Chestnut Hill Concerts have made their home in First Congregational Church.


Wiggles, the Last Straw in Nude Clubs on Queens Boulevard
On a milelong stretch of Queens Boulevard in Rego Park and Elmhurst, residents had counted two clubs employing nude female dancers, two X-rated video stores and one so-called love boutique.
But when yet another nude club opened last month on the borough's commercial spine, just south of the Long Island Expressway, residents gathered forces.
Maybe it was the nude club's name -- Wiggles -- or its proximity to a busy subway station in middle-class Rego Park, or maybe the residents were buoyed by last year's closing of Runway 69, a nude club in nearby Forest Hills, after repeated community protests.


World Markets; In Singapore, a Decidedly Malay Accent
IF dullness were a virtue, Singapore's stock market would be beatified, which for a country that saw its economy grow 10.5 percent in the first half of 1994 is, at first glance, pretty odd.
The problem is that very little of what makes Singapore's economy go is actually playable in the market here, and what is really interesting happens to belong to another country, Malaysia.
"Typically in a period of turbulence, people look for safe havens," said Manu Bhaskaran, the research director at Crosby Securities Pte.
Ltd.
"Singapore is seen as a safe haven. It's a bit boring, but people feel safe. The Government manages things quite well. It's perceived as a lower risk place. It's like a flight to quality."


New Jersey Q &amp; A: Dr. Lawrence Feinsod; Seeking Fairness in School Financing
DR.
LAWRENCE FEINSOD, the Superintendent of Schools in Madison and a leading educator in the state, is president of the Garden State Coalition of Schools, which represents more than 100 mostly affluent suburban districts.
The coalition was founded to help such districts maintain their current level of financing in the attempt to devise a new method of distributing state funds to public schools.
The redistribution was ordered in a July 12 ruling by the New Jersey Supreme Court that found the state's 1991 school financing law, the Quality Education Act, unconstitutional.
The court told Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman and the Legislature to fashion a new law by September 1996.


She Wanted to Be Alone, but Not Always
LOVING GARBO The Story of Greta Garbo, Cecil Beaton, and Mercedes de Acosta.
By Hugo Vickers.
Illustrated. 333 pp.
New York: Random House.


Diverse Elements Criticize 'Mainstream' Senate Plan
Business groups and labor unions said today that a bipartisan health care proposal offered on Friday by a group of nearly 20 senators would create perverse, unintended incentives for employers now providing health insurance to drop it.
In addition, the proposal has created an odd alliance between the A.F.L.-C.I.O., a longtime crusader for national health insurance, and Senator Phil Gramm, a conservative Texas Republican to whom such proposals are anathema.
Both detest the bipartisan group's proposal for a new tax on health insurance benefits richer than a standard package to be defined by the Federal Government.
Many unions have given up wages to win such extra coverage.


Inspiration From Sunny Lands for a Good Cold Soup
INEVITABLY, summer demands cold soup.
There are the classics, like gazpacho, vichyssoise and borscht.
Cold cucumber soup is also fairly common.
Recently, the thick Tuscan tomato-and-bread soup, pappa al pomodoro, has become popular.
But there are also more inventive possibilities.
They can be based on vegetable purees, broths with ingredients added or even fruit.
All manner of leftovers can be thinned, smoothed and seasoned to make a good cold soup.


Dispute Snarls the Restoration of Astor Row
Two years ago, city officials and preservationists, including Brooke Astor and then-Mayor David N. Dinkins, announced an ambitious plan to restore more than two dozen landmarked Harlem row houses whose ornately spindled wooden porches served as rare reminders of the neighborhood's rural past.
But a series of delays slowed the project, and now work has all but stopped along Astor Row, on West 130th Street between Fifth Avenue and Malcolm X Boulevard.
The latest in a long string of problems is that much of the wood needed to restore the antique porches has been seized by two of the homeowners involved in the project.


Washington, Native Son, Returning for Hamlet Cup
LATE winter.
Despite rays of sun, the air was bone-numbing cold, with frost covering the ground.
Those were the conditions under which MaliVai (pronounced mah-lah-VEE-yah) Washington, who was born in Glen Cove, played tennis as a 5-year-old on the courts of Swartz Creek, Mich., where his family had moved.


Tracey E. Dominick, Scott L. Gerber
Tracey Elizabeth Dominick, a daughter of Gayer and Patricia C. Dominick of Olympia, Wash., was married yesterday in Telluride, Colo., to Scott Lawrence Gerber, a son of Ellen Peckman of Miami and Jordan Gerber of New York.
Justice Robert Utter of the Washington State Supreme Court in Olympia officiated at the Peaks at Telluride, a hotel.
Mrs.
Gerber, 29, graduated from the University of Washington and was until recently a personal shopper at Barney's in Manhattan.
Her father is a lawyer in Olympia, where her mother is a counselor at Capital High School.
The bride is a granddaughter of Bayard Dominick of New Canaan, Conn., the retired chairman of Dominick &amp; Dominick, a New York securities brokerage.


Mercedes for Cabs but No Fares? A Case of Wheeling and Dealing
The minute the new livery cab business moved into a Zerega Avenue office in June, Dorothy Krynicki knew something was wrong.
The business, called New York 1, employed drivers barely out of their teens, who double-parked on Zerega in Mercedes and BMW's.
What's more, Ms.
Krynicki, who has lived in the quiet neighborhood of Westchester for her entire 42 years, noticed that the cabs didn't pick up fares.


Ms. Ruddick, Mr. Trentmann
Elizabeth Ellen Ruddick, the daughter of William and Sara Ruddick of New York, was married yesterday to Frank Trentmann, a son of Betty Trentmann of Hamburg, Germany.
Justice John J. Roe 3d of Bellport Village officiated at the Bellport Village (L.I.) Court.
The bride, 28, graduated from Harvard University and received a master's degree in social policy and planning from the London School of Economics.
She is to enter the Boston University School of Law in the fall.
Her father is a professor of philosophy and medical ethics at New York University and her mother is a professor of philosophy at the New School for Social Research, both in New York.


If You're Thinking of Living In/Tarrytown; Rich History, Picturesque River Setting
THE cross-country team at Sleepy Hollow High School represents a student body from 14 countries.
It trains on the paths of the Rockefeller family estate and it competes under the banner of the headless horseman, the school mascot.
Welcome to Tarrytown, a village with rich and varied historical and cultural roots and a splendid setting overlooking the three-mile width of the Hudson River.
The Dutch called this point, the river's widest, the Tappan Zee -- Tappan probably for a group of Indians and Zee meaning "sea" in Dutch.
Wealthy industrialists built estates in its hills and its shores have drawn industries that have employed hundreds of newly arrived immigrants.


Kira L. Plagge, Adam C. Messinger
Kira Lynn Plagge, the daughter of Ruth Plagge of Sonoma, Calif., and Michael Plagge of Daly City, Calif., is to be married today to Adam Carl Messinger, a son of Borough President Ruth W. Messinger of Manhattan and Dr.
Eli C. Messinger, also of Manhattan.
Rabbi Ron Herstik is to officiate at the B. R. Cohn Winery in Sonoma.
The bride and the bridegroom, both 25, graduated from Reed College.
She is studying for a master's degree in nursing at San Diego State University.
Her father, who is retired, was a salesman for Julliard-Halpha Wine and Liquor Wholesalers, formerly in San Francisco.
Her mother is the office manager at Systems Programming Ltd., a computer concern in San Francisco.


No Light Is Shed on Mexican Election by Nicaragua's Vote
To the Editor:
Your Aug. 10 news article on pre-election polling in Mexico repeats a common myth about the 1990 Nicaraguan election and polling, and leads us away from the right questions about the Aug. 21 Mexican election.
The myth about Nicaragua is that Violeta Barrios de Chamorro's election victory demonstrated that the great majority of the electorate was thoroughly opposed to the Sandinistas, and that pre-election polls had failed to pick this up because many people were afraid to answer interviewer questions honestly.


Editors' Note
A brief review of "Making It New," by Henry Geldzahler, appears on page 20 of The Times Book Review today.
On Tuesday, after the Book Review had gone to press, Mr.
Geldzahler died.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
ROCK-AND-ROLL  DANCING IN THE STREET  Confessions of a Motown Diva.
By Martha Reeves and Mark Bego.
Hyperion, $22.95.


Fire Destroys Old Union City Monastery


Hong Kong, Step by Step
A 14th-century Chinese pagoda and a study hall built to prepare young men for Chinese imperial examinations are just two of the fascinating old buildings to explore on a new walking tour of Hong Kong.
Recently, preservationists restored nine historic Chinese structures in one of the colony's oldest neighborhoods, Ping Shan, situated in the New Territories.
Experts then mapped out a half-mile walk through the district.
On the Ping Shan trail, visitors pass the nine restored structures in an hour's walk, guided by signs and carved blocks of granite that explain the sights.


In America; Brooklyn's Obsessive Pursuit
Now it's time to investigate the investigators.
On Wednesday a jury in Brooklyn acquitted Eric Jackson of arson and murder in connection with the Waldbaum's supermarket fire that killed six firefighters in 1978.
The forewoman of the jury said the prosecution hadn't even proved that the fire was arson.
There should never have been a trial.
It was held only because unscrupulous law enforcement officials in Brooklyn have insisted on pursuing a long and depraved and deeply sinister effort to nail Mr.
Jackson at virtually any cost.


Maura L. O'Neill, David J. Corkins
Maura Lynn O'Neill, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Robert T. O'Neill of Narragansett, R.I., was married yesterday at the Kingston (R.I.) Congregational Church to David John Corkins, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
James T. Corkins of Williamstown, Mass.
The Rev.
John Vincze, a Congregational minister, performed the ceremony in which the Rev.
David Perry, a Roman Catholic priest, took part.
The couple, both 27, graduated from Dartmouth College.
Mrs.
Corkins is the publicity manager at Sportslink Inc., a marketing company in New York.
Her father is an obstetrician and gynecologist in Wakefield, R.I.
Her mother, Linda O'Neill, is the vice chairwoman of the Narragansett Historic District Commission.


Banks Revise Credit Access For Low-Income Borrowers
LONG ISLAND banks have been developing policies, products and business partnerships intended to increase the accessiblity of credit for low- and moderate-income communities.
But some critics contend that the money is not enough and is not reaching those requesting it.


From Frequent-Flier Miles, Currency for the Earthbound
Call them the Green Stamps of the 1990's.
Frequent-flier miles, created by the airlines 13 years ago to win the loyalty of business passengers, are increasingly being redeemed for things other than free flights.


A Night at the Theater With the Lincolns
HENRY AND CLARA By Thomas Mallon. 358 pp. New York: Ticknor &amp; Fields. $22.95.


Ellen Frey and Frank McCourt
FRANK MC COURT fits right in at the Lion's Head bar in Greenwich Village, a literary hangout where the regulars include an old sea captain who is an expert on "Moby-Dick."
Mr.
McCourt, 63, is the bar's authority on Irish saints as well as its resident raconteur and harmonica player.
He was born in Limerick, Ireland, and his sense of humor, while hilarious, is as graceful and delicate as calligraphy or blown glass.


Porcelain Birds That Seem Alive
THE porcelain birds on display at the New Jersey State Museum vibrate with color and implied movement in a gentle fantasy.
They are sometimes depicted circling in flight or about to dive to capture an unsuspecting insect, and flowers abound.
The fragile medium of porcelain is a perfect match for these delicate subjects.
Textural qualities add realism to the ensembles.
One composition features a pair of mockingbirds amid glowing peach blossoms.
The feathers are delineated in subtle color gradations that range from blue to brown; the edges are white.
The flower petals are so thin and pale that they are almost translucent.


Brazil Is Now Leading Foreign Supplier of Handguns to the U.S.
With taxes and permit requirements hurting sales at home, Brazilian handgun manufacturers are increasing exports, making their country the leading foreign supplier of handguns to the United States.
"The U.S. is now our largest market," said Carlos Alberto Murgel, president of Brazil's largest handgun manufacturer, Forjas Taurus S. A. Taurus now accounts for about 10 percent of all handguns sold in the United States.


Mother Is Slain in Shootout While Being Used as Shield
An 18-year-old woman walked into a sidewalk shootout in Washington Heights yesterday morning and was killed when one of the men involved in the dispute took cover behind her, but her 10-month-old daughter was unharmed, the police said.
The gunfire broke out about 10 A.M. as the woman, Claudia Diaz Ruanova, was walking with her daughter, Lydia, and her husband, Fernando, to buy flowers to sell on street corners on a sunny day, said Police Officer Merri Pearsall, a department spokeswoman.
The shooting occurred near their home at 529 West 158th Street, on a frayed and drug-plagued block of six-story tenements.


Still a Cagean


Keep Health Care Moving
The health care proposal by the "Mainstream Coalition," a bipartisan group of Senate moderates, would leave millions of Americans without insurance.
But it would increase coverage above current rates and reform insurance laws so that ill people could not be discriminated against and workers could carry insurance from job to job.
The plan is too flawed to be inspiring, but a bill based on this proposal is probably the only one the Senate can pass anytime soon.
The choice, then, is between passing something like the mainstream proposal and passing no bill at all.
Because the proposal would do some good and no major harm, it is worth grabbing.
It is a valuable first step in an incremental process of reform, and as such it should not be allowed to slip away.


The Nation; Full of Sound and Fury, Signifying. . .Well, Something
TO Broadway, Washington is a small place, a tryout city where some plays are tested, reworked, and sometimes allowed to die.
But today, the capital is playing out the melodrama of health care, which each side presents as tragedy (if it loses), on several stages at once.
Washington's biggest audience, the voters, is barely engaged.
It worries about health care, all right, but is unimpressed with the Congress and the various plans.
It does not believe this show will last.


An Old Hall Gets New Life
In 1939, Lost Battalion Hall was built at 62d Avenue and Queens Boulevard as a memorial to a 77th Army Division battalion that refused to surrender and lost more than half its 550 members during a World War I battle in the Argonne Forest in France.
In 1962, it became a public recreation center.
Now, more than 30 years later, it's getting its first facelift: a $350,000 renovation, including a new hardwood floor and backboards in the gym.


'We Shall Overcome . . . '
To the Editor:  If John J. O'Connor has a problem with the language of Def Comedy Jam, that's understandable.
As a black man who often attends the live tapings, I will confess to occasional uneasiness with some performers, and I do not watch the show at home in the presence of my children.
But these are issues of morality, not race.
While I am sure that Mr.
O'Connor's concern for the image of my people is well intentioned, we will be all right.
If the Jews have survived Jackie Mason and Myron Cohen, and the Italians have weathered Pat Henry, we shall overcome Def Comedy Jam.
ROBERT FORD Brooklyn


TRANSACTIONS
Football National Football League  ATLANTA FALCONS -- Waived Bob Gagliano, quarterback; Cedric Figaro and Niko Noga, linebackers; Tony Harrison, wide receiver; Lawrence Hatch, safety; Ernie Logan and John Thornton, defensive ends; Scott Tyner, punter; John James, offensive tackle; and Anthony Wallace, running back.


Why Big Guns in War of Ideas Line Up on Right; Spectrum of Debate
To the Editor:
The way that conservative intellectuals have been "more effective in getting their ideas across to the public" is that they have been saying what the commercial and largely conservative media have wanted the public to hear (news article, Aug. 9).
This has created the appearance that serious debate in this country is between liberals and conservatives.


Rascals and Grunts, a Pup and a Match for Dad
The Little Rascals  Many cute unknowns Directed by Penelope Spheeris PG: 72 minutes


Sharon McKinney, Ronald Wenzel Jr.
Sharon Anne McKinney, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Peter T. McKinney of Fair Haven, N.J., was married yesterday to Ronald Louis Wenzel Jr., the son of Margaret Wenzel of Silver Lake, S.I., and the late Mr.
Wenzel.
The Rev.
John W. Patterson officiated at St.
Georges-by-the-River Episcopal Church in Rumson, N.J.
The Rev.
Joseph Mostardi, a Roman Catholic priest, took part in the ceremony.
Mrs.
Wenzel is an administrative assistant at J. J. Kenny Drake in New York, a municipal bond brokerage concern where the bridegroom is a broker.
She graduated from Sweet Briar College and he graduated from St.
John's University.


The Rhubarb Rhubarb
To the Editor:
Charles A. Sullivan (Letters, July 17) questions the seriousness of an Author's Query concerning a history of culinary and horticultural rhubarb.


3 London Museums With New Displays
Three popular museums in London have undergone renovations or opened new galleries in recent months.
At the London Transport Museum, situated in the former Victorian flower market in Covent Garden, visitors can still see historic examples of London's public transport vehicles but there is now more space for exhibits created by the addition of two mezzanine floors.
New techniques have been introduced; for example, simulators allow visitors to find out what it's like to drive a bus or Tube train and actors describe what it was like working on the buses or digging Tube tunnels.
Open daily from 10 A.M. to 6 P.M.
Admission: about $7; concessions and children 5 and over $3.85; Information: (71) 379 6344.


Judge Gives Foreman Green Light for Bout
A judge has given GEORGE FOREMAN approval to fight the World Boxing Association and International Boxing Federation heavyweight champion, MICHAEL MOORER, on Nov. 5 at the MGM Grand Garden in Las Vegas, Nev.
District Judge DONALD MOSLEY found Friday that the W.B.A. acted capriciously in denying an official sanction of the proposed bout.
To fight, Foreman still has to be declared able by physicians for the Nevada State Athletic Commission. (AP)


Bukharan Jews of Queens: A Music Noble and Refined
To the Editor:
I have been a resident of Queens for most of my life, and I agree with the Aug. 7 Soapbox essay about the Bukharan Jews, "Don't Call Us Russians." I resent the malicious typecasting of any group.
And with particular reference to the biases some of my neighbors have toward the Bukharans because of their supposed lack of culture, I suggest they make an effort to learn something about it.


UP AND COMING: Steve Harvey; ABC's New 'Stand-up' Dad
ON OCT. 8, 1985 A YOUNG BLACK man named Steve Harvey, trying his hand at stand-up comedy for the first time, won an amateur-night competition in his hometown, Cleveland, Ohio.
He quit his job selling life insurance and was soon appearing regularly at local comedy clubs for $25 a night.
Within months he was on the road, making the best of things in places like Vermillion, S.D., and Rockingham, N.C.
Facing down drunks and racist hecklers, he impressed audiences with his high-energy, edgy, observational humor.
He joked about his childhood, being a parent, working, current events.
He had one act for white audiences; another, edgier, for black clubs.
Within five or six years Mr.
Harvey was a headliner making $1,000 a week at big-city comedy clubs.
Soon after, he was bringing in $2,500 a week playing resorts and performing regularly on pay-cable stand-up-comedy specials.
In short, his is a classic American success story -- or classic enough, anyway, for the talent-hungry executives who put together ABC's sitcom-heavy lineup.
This fall he will star in "Me and the Boys," a new half-hour family comedy at 8:30 P.M.
Tuesdays, nestled between "Full House" and "Roseanne," two of the network's long-running hits.


Aug. 14-20; No Show


Denise Jefferson, Marc N. Casper
Denise Jefferson, the daughter of Eugene Jefferson of Patchogue, L.I., and Marcia Jefferson of Coram, L.I., was married yesterday to Marc Nolan Casper, a son of Herman Casper of Floral Park, Queens, and the late Betty R. Casper.
Rabbi Allan Press officiated at the Downey House on the campus of Wesleyan University in Middletown, Conn.


San Francisco's Chefs Explore Beyond the Bay
TRAVELERS to San Francisco this summer in search of what is new and hot on the restaurant front may have to cross a bridge or two to find out.
So far this year, a half dozen or more leading chefs have opened second or third restaurants in the surrounding countryside, from Marin, Napa and Sonoma Counties in the north to Palo Alto in the south.
This gastronomic greening trend has several causes.
For one, San Francisco, which is finally emerging from a long recession exacerbated by the 1989 earthquake, is saturated with restaurants.
At the same time, many affluent suburbs suffer from a dearth of fine dining.
Add to this the allure of the tourist-rich wine country, and it's no wonder chefs are expanding out of town.


Montreal
To the Editor: Montreal has long been one of my favorite places to visit, so I was pleased to see "What's Doing in Montreal" by Rochelle Lash (June 19).
It included some of the older major tourist attractions as well as the newer, which is a good way of looking at a city that blends the old and the new so well.
In addition to the places mentioned in the article, first-time visitors might also be interested in the new underground shopping areas downtown.


Zaire Closes Border With Rwanda


Did Greeley Really Say, 'Go West, Young Man'?
In the article about Horace Greeley it is stated that Richard Neale, the Chappaqua Town Historian, has never found direct substantiation of Mr.
Greeley's actually saying, "Go west, young man."
I attended and graduated from Grinnell College, where I and my fellow Grinnellians were taught that Horace Greeley said, "Go west, young man" to Josiah B. Grinnell, who took his advice, went west and founded Grinnell College in 1846 in Grinnell, Iowa.


Sin of Omission?
To the Editor:  In "Blacklist: Memories of a Word That Marks an Era"  [ July 31 ] , victims of the anti-Communist blacklist of the 1940's and 50's discuss their experiences.
The cold-war blacklist was reprehensible and completely at variance with American democratic tradition.


Unpacking Only Once In Provence
THE invention of the suitcase ushered in the dictatorship of the perfect rectangle, and with it, a new form of slavery.
No job can be more difficult or less rewarding than recreating, in foreign parts, the tight-packed perfection that was barely possible at home.
And six hours later, at the next hotel, the fragile edifice is dismantled again.
On our last vacation in France, my wife and I put our feet down.
No more.
We would find a nice spot, drop the bags there, and not budge for a week.
We would rent.


Growing Ripe in Judgment on the Bench
To the Editor:
"From the Bench to White House Counsel" (editorial, Aug. 12), on the appointment of Abner Mikva, Chief Judge of the United States Court of Appeals in Washington, as White House counsel, states that Judge Mikva, "at 68 eligible for retirement, could have accepted a semi-retired status and trailed off into judicial obscurity with a smattering of court opinions from time to time."


The World: Mexican Elections Today; Can the 'Revolution' Continue?
BEFORE the Bolsheviks stormed Moscow or the Fascists Rome, Pancho Villa and Emiliano Zapata had already started shooting to bring down the Government of Mexico.
But unlike the revolutions that followed, the Mexican insurrection that began in 1910 was not hoisted on a radical ideological mast.
The 34-year dictatorship of Porfirio Diaz that triggered the Revolution had already begun modernizing a poor and backward country.
What Villa and Zapata longed for was not an idealistic new society but a return to the certitudes of the agrarian past.
But that doctrineless revolution brought out of its own chaos a system that had more staying power than the more ideological products of Communist and Fascist upheavals.
As millions of Mexicans vote today for a new President and congress, the Institutional Revolutionary Party, the PRI, has demonstrated by its 65 years of uninterrupted rule an ability to outlast, if not outmaneuver and defeat, all challengers.


Deborah J. Hahn, Mark J. Zeren
Deborah Julie Hahn, a daughter of Adele and Joseph Hahn of Woodside, Queens, is to be married today to Mark Jefferson Zeren, a son of Rebecca and Dr.
Richard Zeren of Menlo Park, Calif.
Rabbi Mark R. Newton is to perform the ceremony at the Ridge Hill Reservation in Needham, Mass.


PARIS WHEN IT SIZZLES
August.
The local residents head for the beaches and the hills.
A ghost town.
Hasty retreats from the city's summer heat.


How a King Did and Did Not Seek a Successor
Joseph Papp, founder of the New York Shakespeare Festival, was a controversial figure from the start of his professional life.
Even after his death in 1991, at the age of 70, his shadow loomed large over the Public Theater.
In her biography "Joe Papp: An American Life," to be published Aug. 29 by Little, Brown &amp; Company, Helen Epstein traces the path of the public and private man.
This article, adapted from the book, examines the period leading up to succession at the Public, which ended when JoAnne Akalaitis became the artistic director in July 1991, several months before Papp died.
When Ms.
Akalaitis departed in March 1993, George C. Wolfe took over the top post with the title of producer.


Getting Beyond the Gay Ghetto With Gay Films
BACK IN 1982, 20TH CENtury Fox tested the market for gay-themed movies with "Making Love." It starred Harry Hamlin as a homosexual home-wrecker who inserts himself between the happily married Kate Jackson and Michael Ontkean.
"Making Love" was a critical and commercial flop.
"The picture was ready," Daniel Melnick, the movie's co-producer, says.
"The public wasn't."


F.Y.I.
Name That Uncle
Q.
On the Upper West Side and the Upper East Side, there are two toy stores named Uncle Futz.
Are they connected?
And where does the name come from?


Coyotes Having Come East, What Now?
GERRY J. BRETT, the greens superintendent of the Mill River Country Club in Stratford, is never surprised by the woodchucks, rabbits, squirrels, wild turkeys and other small wildlife on the grounds around the club.
But he admits to having been a little startled this spring when he spotted a couple of coyotes prowling the wilder areas of the course early one morning.
"People get a little nervous," Mr.
Brett said.


Record Briefs
Britten: 'Turn of the Screw'  Soloists; Aldeburgh Festival Ensemble conducted by Steuart Bedford.
Collins Classics 70302; two CD's.


SUNDAY, August 21, 1994; Pas de Douse
Tar beach.
Tube steak.
Stickball.
For urbanites who summer where they winter, the pleasures of the dog days are a triumph of imagination over the gritty, sweating, honking, concrete facts.
It's a feat Risa Jaroslow decided to honor with her own form of dance.
"I'm always impressed by the ability of New Yorkers to transform their environment through sheer willpower," she says.


Viewpoints; Baseball Mediation: Get a Power Hitter
BASEBALL fans sit and ponder.
Will 1994 be the first year since 1904 without a World Series?
The only hope is mediation, and that will be a struggle.
The players and owners are far apart.
They accepted the offer of aid from the Federal Mediation and Conciliation Service with little enthusiasm.
And mediation is "nonbinding." The parties can just walk away.


Whither Now the Willful Weather?
WEATHER has been on everyone's mind this year; there seems to have been such a lot of it.
During the winter, it was snow, piling ever higher as the sand and the salt supplies ran out.
With summer came seemingly endless heat and humidity.
Plants withered, lawns turned brown and people wilted in major ways.
Even the television weather forecasters became bored, forced as they were to predict, day after day, more of the disastrous H's: heat and humidity.


Don't Believe the Cyberhype
This summer, in the shade of an oak tree, near a cabin in the woods, a New York bibliophile consumed nearly a dozen novels -- some enthralling, some snoresome, a few downright annoying.
The most aggravating among them provoked strong language and, occasionally, physical assault, with books hurled against the tree.
Therein lies the 100th reason why expensive, computer-based books will never replace $10 paperbacks, or even $25 hard-covers.
No computer could survive a high-velocity collision with the trunk of a tree.


On Greenpoint's Piers, An Island of Regulars
Posted like silent sentinels all around the town, stand thousands upon thousands of mortal men fixed in ocean reveries.
Herman Melville, "Moby Dick"
ONCE the city's raison d'etre and the inspiration of poetry and song, the waterfront has fallen to the status of civic embarrassment, its jagged edges and fearsome highways acting as if under divine order to keep us from an expansive view or a salty breeze.


Tongs and Gangs: Shifting the Links
For decades, youth gangs served as a sort of warrior class for members of the largest tongs of Chinatown, protecting gambling and prostitution houses, extorting money, kidnapping and seeking revenge.
And the affiliations were tight and clear: the Flying Dragons were linked to the Hip Sing tong; the Ghost Shadows to the On Leong, and the Tong On to the Tong On Association along Fujianese-dominated East Broadway.


Hoods
When millions of people tune in to watch Geraldo Rivera crack open Al Capone's long-lost hidden vault, you know you're on to something.
So it should have come as no surprise that the Fox television network last month telecast a special on which LOYALTY AND BETRAYAL: The Story of the American Mob (Lookout/Collins, paper, $19.95) is based.
Crammed with photographs of some of this country's most notorious gangsters -- including Al Capone, Bugsy Siegel, Dutch Schultz, Lucky Luciano, Meyer Lansky and John Gotti -- the book unfortunately also comes with some banal and overheated prose by Sidney Zion.
Mr.
Zion, the author of "The Autobiography of Roy Cohn" and a columnist at The Daily News, should know better.
And resist the temptation just to flip through "Loyalty and Betrayal," looking only at the pictures -- you would miss the odd, unexplained datum that makes the book fun, like Schultz's final words: "French Canadian bean soup. I want to pay. Let me leave them alone!"  CHARLES SALZBERG


New U.S. Routes For 2 Airlines
Two international airlines have recently established new routes to the United States.
Gulf Air, (800) 553-2824, the national carrier of Abu Dhabi, Bahrain, Oman and Qatar, began service to Kennedy International Airport last month.
Flights on the Airbus A340 aircraft depart New York at 10 P.M. on Sunday and Thursday for Bahrain; Tuesday to Doha; Friday to Muscat via Abu Dhabi; Sunday to Muscat via Bahrain.
Westbound flights depart Bahrain on Tuesday and Friday; Abu Dhabi on Sunday; Doha on Wednesday; Muscat on Thursday and Saturday.


Two Rookie Owners Just Can't Stay Still
Rookie owners, like rookie players, must pay their dues before speaking out.
This is one of the unwritten rules of the major league baseball jungle.
Peter Angelos of the Baltimore Orioles and Jerry McMorris of the Colorado Rockies think they have paid their dues.
One hundred and seventy-three million of them in Angelos's case.
And about $150 million in expansion fees and startup costs in the case of the ownership of the two-year-old Rockies, which McMorris heads up.


Jennifer A. Bitz And Scott A. Gold
Jennifer Anne Bitz, the daughter of Selma and Kenneth Bitz of Wyckoff, N.J., was married last evening to Scott Adam Gold, a son of Shirley and Saul Gold of Merrick, L.I.
Rabbi Noam Marans performed the ceremony at Tamcrest Country Club in Alpine, N.J.
The bride and bridegroom, both 25, graduated from Cornell University.
Mrs.
Gold received a law degree and a master's degree in urban planning, both from New York University.
In the fall she is to become an associate at Brown &amp; Wood, a law firm in New York.


New Cup Boat to Be High-Tech Marvel
A small utility box emits a red laser light across the floor of an 18,000-square-foot room.
It is an eerie sight, like some Star Wars project that was never canceled.
But this is a boat shed, and within the laser's beam stands the upside-down hull of a 75-foot America's Cup yacht.
So far, only wood strips form a shadow of its real shape.
But its builders, who are using the laser as a construction leveler, will add carbon fiber panels to the core.
By December, the hull will be transformed into a sleek racing yacht.
At its bow will be painted a whimsical graphic by the pop artist Roy Lichtenstein.


NEW YORKERS &amp; CO.
Nothing Gets Between Calvin And a Store on Madison Ave.
The designer Calvin Klein is planning to open his first Manhattan store, at 60th Street and Madison Avenue.


SUNDAY, August 21, 1994; Glowing Reports?
The walleye of Burlington, Kan., does its part to prevent atomic meltdown.
If the walleye and other predatory fish that live in the Wolf Creek nuclear power plant's 5,000-acre lake did not eat gizzard shad, the shad would clog the intakes that draw water to cool the reactors.


Halley Harrisburg, Michael Rosenfeld
Halley K. Harrisburg, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert J. Harrisburg of Portland, Me., is to be married today to Michael Rosenfeld, a son of Samuel Rosenfeld of New York and the late June Serper Rosenfeld.
Rabbi Chaim Yaffe is to perform the ceremony at the Nonantum Resort in Kennebunkport, Me.


In the Region/Westchester; 40 Fountains, Gardens and Canals. Needs Work.
TURNING into Untermyer Park off North Broadway, a visitor is struck by the incongruous sight of ornate Greek gardens, canals, marble mosaic reflecting pools and a network of 40 lighted fountains -- all in the midst of the densely populated northwest section of this city.
"From the street, it's all walled off," said Lee J. Ellman, the Yonkers director of planning.
"You would never know anything was there until you get to the garden path leading into the park. It was obviously designed to startle, and it does every time."


Inspiration From Sunny Lands for a Good Cold Soup
INEVITABLY, summer demands cold soup.
There are the classics, like gazpacho, vichyssoise and borscht.
Cold cucumber soup is also fairly common.
Recently, the thick Tuscan tomato-and-bread soup, pappa al pomodoro, has become popular.
But there are also more inventive possibilities.
They can be based on vegetable purees, broths with ingredients added or even fruit.
All manner of leftovers can be thinned, smoothed and seasoned to make a good cold soup.


Joanne Schwartz, Geoffrey Berman
Joanne Karen Schwartz, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Louis W. Schwartz of Jenkintown, Pa., was married last evening to Geoffrey Steven Berman, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Ronald Berman of Princeton, N.J.
Rabbi Harold Weintraub performed the ceremony at the Four Seasons Hotel in Philadelphia.
Mrs.
Berman, 27, is an associate in New York at Arnold &amp; Porter, the Washington law firm.
She graduated from Cornell University, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa, and received a law degree from New York University.
Her father, an ophthalmologist, is also an associate professor of ophthalmology at Jefferson Medical College in Philadelphia.


Bonnie M. Baker and Brian D. Butler
Bonnie Melissa Baker, the daughter of Howard and Carol Baker of Commack, L.I., is to be married today to Brian David Butler, the son of Marlene and Dr.
Marc Butler of Melville, L.I.
Rabbi Neil Kurshan is to perform the ceremony at the Woodbury (L.I.) Country Club.
The bride, 24, is a law student at Yale University.
She was elected to Phi Beta Kappa at the University of Pennsylvania, from which she graduated summa cum laude and from which the bridegroom graduated cum laude.
Her father is a senior vice president of the American Stock Exchange in New York.
Her mother is an author and a playwright.


INSIDE
New Shift by North Korea
North Korea has thrown cold water on a new pact with the United States by announcing that it will reject American demands for inspections of two critical nuclear sites.
Page 25.
Unintended Consequences?
Business groups and unions complained that a bipartisan health care proposal would unintentionally encourage companies to stop insuring their workers.
Page 30.
The New World of Nursing
Rapid changes in health care have shaken the nursing profession.
Hospitals are trimming staffs, but the fraction of nurses with advanced training are in intense demand.
Page 45.
Holy Bull Wins the Travers
Holy Bull outran Tabasco Cat and everyone else to win the 125th Travers, taking his longest strides toward becoming the 3-year-old division's champion.
SportsSunday, Section 8.


A Delicatessen Plus In Bridgehampton
SCHMOOZIE'S looks and smells like a Jewish delicatessen.
The required corned beef, pastrami, brisket and blintzes are on the menu, but so too are grilled vegetables, pastas, healthy pita-pocket sandwiches, shrimp salad, bacon, Virginia ham and Greek salad.
Recently the special of the day, listed just above the revered whitefish salad, was, of all things, barbecue pork loin.
This is a place where Snapple and Dr.
Brown's sodas coexist.
Schmoozie's, the new 110-seat restaurant at 2045 Montauk Highway in Bridgehampton (537-0909), where HSF had been, calls itself an old New York-style restaurant.
Actually it is a department store of Jewish delicatessens.
Whatever anyone wants, it has.
Its overlong 250-item menu lists peanut-butter-and-jelly sandwiches, Nicoise salad and a veggie heaven sandwich.
A light line of fat-reduced dishes containing no butter or cream is being added to traditional favorites like stuffed derma, chopped chicken liver, matzoh ball soup and smoked fish.


Corrections
An article last week about plans for service improvements in the Division of Motor Vehicles misstated the surname of the division's director.
He is Richard Kamin, not Heyman.


Learning To Live It Up At Last
WHEN I was very young, I traveled with my parents to assorted destinations of their choice.
Their choices were usually long weekends in the "country" -- places like the Delaware Water Gap -- a few hours by car from our apartment in Manhattan: my stepfather was an Ob-Gyn and always on call.
Occasionally Mother and I went somewhere on our own; my first plane trip, in 1948, back when flying was still a real adventure, was to Corning, N.Y., for a cousin's christening.
In my late teens, I traveled alone to places of my choice, going ever farther as jet planes replaced props.
After I became a journalist, I traveled with the song to faraway places with strange-sounding names, once to get married (in Jakarta), occasionally just to admire a cathedral or a mosque, but increasingly to write an article about a person who lived at destination X or an event that had occurred at destination Y. For many years my husband, Neil, and I lacked the money and leisure to travel for pleasure, and no matter: I had more adventures away from home when I was working than when I was sightseeing.
At 15, I had flown to Switzerland to take funiculars up the Alps.
At 50, I went to Cully, a small town on Lake Geneva, to write about a woman who had had her daughter stolen from her at birth by trickery and found her child alive and beautiful some 47 years later.
Researching this fairy tale was more captivating than the scenery.


Graham, The No. 2, Goes Out Hobbling
It was hits like these that quarterback Kent Graham didn't think he would have to endure as the backup to Dave Brown.
But as Graham lay on the turf tonight after a devastating hit by Jets linebacker Marvin Jones, the Giants got a taste of what it means to have two good quarterbacks.
And Graham got a taste of what he called "a cheap shot" by Jones.
"Right now I want to say it was a cheap shot," Graham said while standing on crutches in the bowels of Giants Stadium after the Jets' 13-10 preseason victory.
"I need to look at the film to be sure, but I know he was definitely trying to hurt me. The play was long dead and he didn't let up. That's not how you do things."


Amy S. Jordan, Robert S. Webb
Amy Stanton Jordan, a daughter of Dr.
Elizabeth T. Jordan of San Diego and Dr.
James C. Jordan of La Jolla, Calif., was married yesterday to Robert Stabler Webb, a son of Lucinda Royse Webb of New York and the late Robert Miller Webb.
The Rev.
Madeline Marini, a minister of the Church of Gospel Ministry, performed the nondenominational ceremony at the Stephen Birch Aquarium in La Jolla.
Mrs.
Webb, 33, is a program associate with the National Trust for Historic Preservation in Denver.
She graduated from Wellesley College and received a master's degree in architectural history and historic preservation from the University of Virginia.
Her father is a retired cardiologist.
Her mother is a professor of humanities at the University of California at San Diego.


Julie Edwards, Stefano Quadrio Curzio
Julie Karin Edwards, the daughter of Roger and Alberta Edwards of Gillette, N.J., was married yesterday to Stefano Quadrio Curzio, the son of Alberto and Marisa Quadrio Curzio of Milan, Italy.
The Rev.
Matthew Mees officiated at the First Congregational Church in Chatham, Mass.
The Rev.
James Nunes, a Roman Catholic priest, took part in the ceremony.


N.A.A.C.P. Board Dismisses Group's Executive Director
The board of the N.A.A.C.P. tonight dismissed the organization's executive director, Benjamin F. Chavis Jr., for actions "inimical" to the best interests of the civil rights organization, its chairman, William Gibson, said.
After meeting for more than eight hours, the 57 members of the 64-member board who attended the emergency session voted to oust Mr.
Chavis, ending his stormy 18 months as the head of the nation's oldest and largest civil rights organization.


'Sayonara' the Musical In Revival in Elmsford
IN the evolution of a musical, things are meant to change for the better.
Consider among the theater's vagaries how a show can devolve into a shadow of once promised substance.
In its 1987 world premiere at the Paper Mill Playhouse in Millburn, N.J., "Sayonara" (from the Michener novel) blossomed; ravishingly so, given a production of visual wonder.
Yet, the score (by George Fischoff) and the book (by William Luce) existed almost in separation -- an odd thing for an incurably romantic tale about lives intertwined, those of an ace flier -- they call him Ace -- who falls in love with Hana-ogi, the star of Japan's leading musical theater troupe, and a private (Joe Kelly) who marries a Japanese girl (Katsumi).


Other Cap Money
To the Sports Editor:
According to The Times, baseball players earn about $60 million a year in licensing fees.
That licensing income -- which comes from fans' purchases of clothing, baseball cards and other merchandise -- is supporting the current strike.
Every time you buy a Ken Griffey Jr. poster or a T-shirt with Frank Thomas's picture on it, you're contributing to the players' strike fund and you're funding the current strike and helping to make future strikes possible.


Conversations: Burns W. Roper; Private Opinions on Public Opinion: Question Is, What Is the Question?
BEFORE people could instantly register their views by hand-held computers and by calls to "800" and "900" telephone numbers, before street-corner interviews were elevated into "mall intercepts," before Harris and even (if barely) before Gallup, Elmo Burns Roper Jr. pioneered a profession of pulse-takers to whose insistent surveys on products, politics, personalities and popular culture four in 10 adult Americans have responded -- that is, if one recent Roper poll is accurate.
What hath Roper wrought?


Michael Kochel, 78, Ex-Fordham Player
Michael J. Kochel, a guard on Fordham University's famous football teams of the 1930's who later became an Air Force colonel, died Thursday at his home in Bellevue, Neb.
He was 78.
The cause apparently was a heart attack, said his son, Michael P. Kochel.


Mary Ellen Bertrand, J. J. Pilkington Jr.
Mary Ellen Bertrand, a stockbroker at Kidder, Peabody &amp; Company in Greenwich, Conn., was married on Friday to John Joseph Pilkington Jr., a partner in Pilkington &amp; Leggett, a White Plains law firm.
The Rev.
Gene O'Brien performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at the Church of the Resurrection in Rye, N.Y.
Mrs.
Pilkington, 39, graduated from Mount Vernon College.
She is the daughter of Mrs.
John M. Perez of Norwalk, Conn., and Dr.
Charles A. Bertrand of Harrison, N.Y.
Her father is a cardiologist in White Plains and Bronxville, N.Y.
Her mother, Mary Perez, is a retired registered nurse.
The bride is the stepdaughter of Dr.
Maria E. Bertrand.


Fumes Injure Eight In Home Depot Fire


Nordstrom Gala to Benefit Two Groups
A NEW department store may appear as a temptation to some and a boost to others, but when a giant like Nordstrom comes to town, alert nonprofit groups see a bonanza.
Such was the case when Nordstrom, the Seattle-based fashion specialty chain with 76 stores in 14 states, announced that it would take up residency in the Westchester, a new mall here.
The wooing began about a year ago, and now Nordstrom, which last year had sales of $3.6 billion, has announced partnerships with two local institutions.
Both the Caramoor Center for Music and the Arts in Katonah and the Westchester branch of St.
Vincent's Hospital in Harrison will be the beneficiaries of the store's opening gala on March 15.


Entrepreneur's Account of Gold Mining Role
To the Editor:
Despite the effort in two recent articles in The New York Times ("Questions of Conflict Sting Mutual Funds," Aug. 7, and "The Road to Summitville, a Gold Mining Debacle," Aug. 14) to portray me as responsible for environmental problems at the Summitville mine in Colorado, I never had day-to-day mine management or operational responsibility for the site.


The Executive Computer; Using Software Metering to Save Money and Stay Legal
IT'S a software meter, and the sales pitch is simple but compelling: Your company is probably buying far more software than it needs, and this product will show you why.
Software meters -- producers include On Technology, Express Systems, Symantec, Lotus and Novell -- are programs that monitor the use of applications like spreadsheets, word processors or data bases.


Rascals and Grunts, a Pup and a Match for Dad
In the Army Now  Pauly Shore Directed by Daniel Petrie Jr. PG: 91 minutes


With Baseball Closed, Expect to See Sanders In an N.F.L. Uniform
The Deion Sanders road show is taking on the same trappings as the Reggie White Magical Mystery Tour during the free agency signing period in 1993.
With the baseball strike stretching into its second week, Sanders, who plays for the Cincinnati Reds, has turned his attention to finding an employer in his second sport.
Contractually, the cornerback cannot play football until the baseball season ends in October or is terminated by the strike.


India's Forests Are Besieged, but Are Growing Nevertheless
In the Himalayan foothills, where forests of pine, silver oak and deodar have flourished for centuries, unarmed forest guards are battling development and timber gangs.
Sometimes, nature seems to work against the guards.
A huge fire of unknown origin in May engulfed thousands of acres of trees, farms and fruit orchards near here.


A Chance for Transit Chief To Get More Psychic Salary
To the Editor:
Alan F. Kiepper, president of the Transit Authority, says in your Aug. 14 article, "Nudging the System: How to Move a Bus One Block," that he was pleased to bypass the bureaucracy and move a bus terminus in Red Hook one block so residents could wait inside a bus in bad weather.
Mr.
Kiepper says it gave him "what I call psychic salary."


Whither Now the Willful Weather?
WEATHER has been on everyone's mind this year; there seems to have been such a lot of it.
During the winter, it was snow, piling ever higher as the sand and the salt supplies ran out.
With summer came seemingly endless heat and humidity.
Plants withered, lawns turned brown and people wilted in major ways.
Even the television weather forecasters became bored, forced as they were to predict, day after day, more of the disastrous H's: heat and humidity.


In a Colombian Port City, the Only Hope Lies in Leaving
Guillermo B., a tall, thin man in his mid-20's, has tried to leave this poverty-ridden port city five times.
With little schooling and a disabled mother to support, his ambition is to go to the United States, find work and return with a fortune.
His first attempt to leave came last year.
One night, he bribed a port guard with a counterfeit $100 bill and hid himself in a container that was to go on a cargo ship bound for Florida.
As the vessel crossed the Panama Canal, two sailors discovered him and alerted immigration officials in Miami.
A month later, the ship returned Guillermo, who asked that his full name not be used, to this Pacific port 200 miles southwest of Bogota.


Streetscapes/The Brearley School; Confounding the Tradition, and Still Reaching Up
THE typical New York private school building seems to cross town house with private club -- neo-Georgian, genteel and, particularly, only four or five stories high.
For over a century the Brearley School, now at 83d Street and the East River, has followed a different course, building an unusual series of three high-rise buildings in 1890, 1912 and, in 1930, its present 10-story-high factory-style structure.
Now even that has proved too small and this summer the 110-year-old girls' school is adding two floors.


Wall Street; A Judicial Aftershock for a Quake-Damaged Insurer
IT'S been a tough year for 20th Century Industries, a California-based insurance company once known for financial soundness based on careful underwriting practices combined with low overhead costs.
Last week 20th Century was the loser in the California Supreme Court, which ruled 7-0 that a state constitutional amendment, known as Proposition 103, was legal.
The decision will force 20th Century to refund more than $100 million to customers.


THE PRESIDENT'S PAST
In his lengthy hit piece on President Clinton, Kelly covers the minutiae of a few Arkansas political deals, while implying that it is somehow possible for an individual to climb to the pinnacle of American politics without making pe- riodic compromises with sleazy business people.
Where was Kelly in the 1980's?
Does he recall "ketchup as a vegetable," the "heroics" of Oliver North?
What about George Bush's endless stream of platitudes while the economy ran afoul?


Swimmers Compete Around Manhattan Island


Backgrounding A Waterfront Park
To the Editor:
I read with great interest the article headed "The Hudson Waterfront: What's Next?" on June 26, especially the part about the proposed expansion of Thomas F. Smith Park at 22d Street.
It is not much of a park today and the proposed improvements are exciting and long overdue.
Given the sudden attention this beleaguered park is finally getting, it seemed appropriate to offer some background on the park's namesake.


Debate Over Pay for Ballot Initiatives
Voters in this state have long used the citizen-initiative as a big populist stick, rolling back pay increases for politicians, raising the minimum wage for workers and removing the sales tax from food, among the many laws made by direct democracy.
This year, as usual, the petition drives were plentiful.
But of the 33 initiatives that were circulated in Washington State, only one received enough signatures to make the fall ballot: a measure that would allow denture makers to sell false teeth without going through dentists.


Tabasco Cat's Big Feet Didn't Handle Surface
This time, it was Tabasco Cat's people who were searching for the excuses.
When the Cat ran sixth in the Kentucky Derby, most people cared more about why Holy Bull, the 2-to-1 favorite, finished 12th.


The Chosen One
AUDREY HEPBURN A Biography.
By Warren G. Harris.
Illustrated. 318 pp.
New York: Simon &amp; Schuster.


Manager's Profile
Earl McEvoy Fund: Vanguard High-Yield Corporate Portfolio, $2.2 billion in assets.
Manager since 1984 inception. (Sponsor: The Vanguard Group, Valley Forge, Pa.)


Aug. 14-20: Bleak Education Report; Decades After Sputnik Science Education Still Lags
If the graphs the Department of Education submitted last week with its latest report card on student achievement levels were EKG results, they would describe a patient who was dead.
There was some sign of life in math and science.
But reading and writing showed barely a ripple of improvement over 20 years.
Back in 1957, when Sputnik was launched, the fervor for meeting the Soviet challenge generated an explosion of science training and research.
But a decade after the 1983 report "A Nation at Risk" alerted America to broad failures in education, the news is not much better.


PHOTOGRAPHER'S JOURNAL


Confusion Over an Insurance Product
To the Editor:
The headline "Credit Insurance: Overpriced and Oversold" (Viewpoints, July 3) caught my attention, having been involved in the credit insurance industry for seven years and accepting that it is one of the most misunderstood insurance policies available.
Unfortunately, the headline contained a misnomer that tainted the reputation of another insurance product.
The "credit insurance" Mike Hudson critiques is more commonly referred to as "credit life insurance." This is a policy sold to consumers to pay off their outstanding loan obligations if a debtor dies or becomes disabled; credit insurance, on the other hand, insures a company's accounts receivable from losses generated by corporate insolvency.


Spy Agency's Move Signals Obsolescence
To the Editor:
The furor over expensive new headquarters for the National Reconnaissance Office, the supersecret spy satellite agency, recalls C. Northcote Parkinson's wise counsel.


SUNDAY, August 21, 1994; Missing Million
Every event in a baby boomer's life, from Woodstock to parenthood to getting dressed in the morning, comes with its vast parade of commemorations, advice books, television series, movies and navel-regarding musings -- all implying that no one ever went to a concert, or had a child, or looked for shoes until about 1965.
For history's neglected kids, it can be downright annoying.
So when Susan Mitchell, editor of a newsletter called The Boomer Report, noticed recently that the Census Bureau had abruptly lowered its projections of the population, for the rest of this decade, of people born between July 1, 1946, and July 1, 1947 -- from 3.8 million to 2.8 million -- she wondered: Was the agency onto stirrings of revolt?


New &amp; Noteworthy Paperbacks
SMILLA'S SENSE OF SNOW By Peter Hoeg.
Translated by Tiina Nunnally.
Dell, $6.50.
The narrator, a cynical and sardonic woman, investigates the death of her 6-year-old neighbor, a neglected child to whom she felt inexplicably drawn.
Last year our reviewer, Robert Nathan, called this Danish novel "not only a splendid entertainment but also an odd and seductive meditation on the human condition."  THE BEST INTENTIONS By Ingmar Bergman.
Translated by Joan Tate.
Arcade, $11.95.
This novel-cum-autobiography explores the marriage of the author's parents, a poor, straitlaced preacher and the overindulged daughter of a wealthy family.
The book, which follows the outlines of Mr.
Bergman's film of the same title, treats the couple's early years together, showing how love and resentment commingled.
By examining their personalities in fiction, their son also finds clues to his own character.
Last year our reviewer, Caryn James, said, "A kinetic mix of screenplay, novel and memoir, 'The Best Intentions' is the closest thing imaginable to a Bergman film without pictures or sound."


Four Beacons Along the Hudson
AS a longtime lighthouse buff, I have stood upon the rocky ledges below the Pemaquid Point lighthouse in Maine and descended stairs to Point Reyes light in California, surrounded by cliffs and low lying fog.
I have climbed Split Rock light in Minnesota, perched above the sheer cliffs of Lake Superior, and enjoyed a panorama of San Diego harbor from the grounds of the Old Point Loma Lighthouse.
I was therefore somewhat skeptical about the lure of the Hudson's lights.
They aren't as tall as most nor as famous.
They aren't on puzzles or postage stamps or even in most travel books.
But after recently visiting the four lighthouses open to the public, I was amply rewarded by stunning views of the river, the Palisades and the Catskills; one of the lighthouses, in Saugerties, even accommodates overnight guests.
Jeffrey's Hook
Known to millions as the "Little Red Lighthouse" because it is the subject of the children's classic "The Little Red Lighthouse and the Great Gray Bridge," Jeffrey's Hook is the only lighthouse on Manhattan.
Even so, many New Yorkers are surprised to discover it exists.
The red cast-iron structure, on a spit of land jutting into the Hudson in Fort Washington Park, is dwarfed by the adjacent George Washington Bridge, about 15 times Little Red's height.


The World; Aid Agencies Hope to Enlist Military Allies In the Future
TO those who were old hands at dealing with human disasters, the rapid descent of a million Rwandan refugees onto this God-forsaken stretch of land had a depressingly familiar initial result: Many died before relief arrived.
But disease and death, for all their seeming relentlessness, were finally slowed in large part by the same sorts of military skills that distinguished the allied victory in the Persian Gulf war: the ability of military personnel to organize the supply of water, shelter, sanitation, medicine and food for vast numbers of people over great distances under challenging conditions.


This Road Show Has Minor Origins
It is another humid, sticky Southern night along another one of those suddenly popular minor league baseball trails, and the Buck, Stick and Billy Traveling Show is about to commence.
There are enough empty seats at spiffy Knights Castle for the three men to actually be three hundred men, and they settle in the fifth row behind the plate to be within sight of the radar gun.
Buck, Stick and Billy sound like the latest and greatest country and western threesome to invade Nashville, but they are not entertainers and they would rather not be noticed.
They work for the Yankees; they are instrumental in making the decisions that have molded the team with the best record in the American League, and they are scrambling to stay busy and stay sane during the player strike.


Mormon Ranks Grow One by One by One
ROSA JONES still remembers what brought her to the Mormon Church four years ago.
A single woman with no children to visit her, she was sitting alone in the tenement apartment in southern Yonkers where she had lived since she moved there as a 20-year-old nurse's aide in 1960.
It was a hot Sunday summer morning, and she was watching television.
"Do you know where you were before you came into this world?" asked a voice on an advertisement from the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, commonly known as the Mormons.
Ms.
Jones wrote down the 800 number printed on the screen and called it.
To the operator who answered, she replied, "I want to know where I came from."


Of Gushes, Bacchanalias And Model Obsessions
UPTOWN -- "You have to gush when appropriate," Paul Rudnick, the acerbic writer of plays and screenplays, was saying on Aug. 13 at Gilda, a restaurant on East 49th Street, where a wrap party for the movie "Jeffrey" was being held.
And gush he did, over every aspect of turning his hit Off Broadway comedy about love and sex in the age of AIDS into a movie.
"I loved shooting in Central Park," said Mr.
Rudnick, whose credits include the Broadway play "I Hate Hamlet" and the movie "Addams Family Values." "It was so well maintained, and Strawberry Fields was so beautiful that it made me feel all warm and runny towards Yoko."


Mr. Monroe's Neighborhood
THE LAST YEARS OF THE MONROE DOCTRINE, 1945-1993 By Gaddis Smith. 280 pp.
New York: Hill &amp; Wang. $25.
THE Monroe Doctrine, first proclaimed by President James Monroe in a message to Congress in December 1823, is perhaps the most revered pronouncement of American foreign policy.
Originally a statement that the United States opposed the establishment of monarchical governments and new colonial regimes in the Western Hemisphere by European nations, the doctrine went largely unnoticed at first by the European powers.
Yet as American strength grew over the years, so did foreign respect for Monroe's warning, and by the beginning of the 20th century it had assumed a mythical place in the national consciousness.


Dr. Sanford J. Perlis; Psychiatrist, 68
Dr.
Sanford J. Perlis, a psychiatrist in Westport, Conn., died on Wednesday at Yale-New Haven Hospital.
He was 68.
The cause was cancer, said his son Michael S. Perlis.


Aug. 14-20: Look Who's Talking Too; Call Us! Scream at Us! Boost Our Ratings!
NEVER before, it seems, have so many Americans been so eager to hear themselves talk.
Or so willing to listen to others and call it entertainment.
During the 1992 Presidential campaign, much was made of the impact of talk radio, which drew its strength from the anomie of the electorate.
Now talk radio has a new competitor: talk TV.


Merely Verbal Punctuation
To the Editor:  John J. O'Connor's slam of the cursing used by today's young black comics  [ "The Curse of Incessant Cursing," July 31 ]  missed completely the reason it is detrimental to society.
It's not the words in themselves, which are no more than exclamation points; it's that there are so few ideas beneath the curses.
Young people today often don't have the words to express their feelings.
They speak in oaths because they live in them.
Curses get reactions.
They have come to represent "adult" behavior in our convoluted culture.
If these young people had a proper grounding in the English language, they would have available to them several precise terms to express anger, hatred and even love in terms decipherable to their audiences.


The Odd Pull Of 'Jeopardy' On 62 Flutes
WE ARE IN A HUGE, MILDEWED AUDITOrium with a decrepit ceiling missing several panels.
The hard wooden seats are filled except for the dozens of broken ones; thousands of proud parents and friends chatter in two dozen languages.
The tune "Long, Long Ago" emanates from the front, behind a stained green curtain.
Though it sounds for all the world like some gigantic exotic instrument or the auditory equivalent of root canal, it is something more: it is the sound of the future.
Two hundred tiny fiddlers are getting ready for the first half of the Elementary Music Festival at Lincoln High School Auditorium, a concert featuring the finest beginning musicians of the San Francisco Unified School District.
The disrepair in the hall is symbolic: the school district has fallen on hard times, as California continues to reel under inexorable recession.
Many schools are in trouble.
There is little money for new technology, special subjects or new staff.
Some schools don't even have basketball rims (although in fairness, the absence of rims may have more to do with discouraging gang activity in certain areas after school).
There are 10,350 students taking music lessons in the district and only 13 music teachers.
Each is responsible for five or more schools, and they ride the circuit like judges of yore.
Simple arithmetic says that each teacher sees about 800 students per week.


New Mexico
To the Editor: Judith Anderson's article ("Leaving Their Mark in New Mexico," June 5) on Acoma and El Morro was wonderful.
It is a trip my husband and I took in a recreational van three years ago.
The camp ground at El Morro is beautiful, quiet and almost empty.


A Slaying Chills Young Japanese in New York
His American dreams were at once modest and just beyond reach, centered on racing cars, boxing and the possibility of a green card.
Before he was shot to death in a robbery attempt in Queens earlier this month, it seemed like Kei Sunada was inching toward a few of them.
Like many young Japanese who find their way to New York, but unlike most other immigrants his age, Mr.
Sunada was lured not by money -- he had plenty of that back home -- but by the chance to pursue an offbeat career.


Pristine Priest Lake
FROM the glow of the campfire's embers, I could see a light rain chipping away at the lake's surface.
Lightning forks prowled between the silhouetted ridges of the craggy Selkirk Mountains looming ominously above the water.
Now I understood why the local residents called this place "God's country." Perched high in the northern Idaho panhandle, Priest Lake offers an intriguing combination of pristine scenery, pioneer history and rare wildlife, including some of the last grizzly bear and caribou in the continental United States.
The lake, 30 miles south of the Canadian border and two hours northeast of Spokane, Wash., owes its name to Father Pierre Jean de Smet, the first of many Jesuit missionaries who set up base camps here in the 1840's.
Originally called Kaniksu, the Indian word for "black robe," it was renamed in the early 1900's.
Loggers, silver miners and homesteaders gradually followed early in the 20th century, building small camps beside coves and white sand beaches.


New to the 'New' Bronx: New Cars
"Everyone said we were crazy, that it would never last," says Barry Milea, the 42-year-old president of Milea Truck Sales Corporation.
That was 13 years ago, when Mr.
Milea and his cousins, Robert Milea and Albert Sanfilippo, opened their truck dealership in the South Bronx.
But after years of working "around the clock," Barry Milea says, and setting up his living quarters above the dealership office, the partners proved the skeptics wrong.
Milea Truck Sales, which is at 885 East 149th Street at the corner of Bruckner Boulevard, has sales of $40 million a year and 150 employees.


Fresh Air And Camera Help Focus On a Career
As the screen fades to black, the voice of the director, Neccasia Zabriskie, intones, "Zoom out, camera one. Make it a full-body shot on Gamaine." Fade in on a young girl wondering aloud whether she should take the purse she has just found, when the action freezes and a second girl, the voice of conscience, reminds her of the consequences.
Is this the filming of the latest anti-theft public service announcement?
Not yet.
But if some of the seven girls who put together the film "Choices, Decisions, Consequences" should decide on a career in television, this project could mark the beginning.


Get Real, Kids
Those who oppose Disney's plan to build an American history theme park in Virginia argue that children should learn from the real history here, not jazzy simulations.
The televised Congressional Whitewater hearings offered a rare window on real history.
So this would seem the perfect time to review the morality lessons for youngsters emerging from that Federal seminar on ethics.


Damned if You Do
To the Editor:  Judging by Rodney H. Clurman's angry response to the outing of his cousin the composer Aaron Copland  [ Letters, July 31 ] , it's no wonder Copland never discussed his homosexuality with him.


The Man Who Loved Shakespeare
JOE PAPP An American Life.
By Helen Epstein.
Illustrated. 554 pp.
Boston: Little, Brown &amp; Company. $24.95.


Hotel's Fate Poses a Preservation Test
FOR those approaching Cape May by sea, the Christian Admiral Hotel vies with the Cape May Lighthouse as the first sighting of land in the state's southernmost coastal city.
As might be expected in this Victorian city with its national historic landmark status, when the lighthouse needed restoration, Cape May rallied in 1990 to refurbish the 165-foot brick structure, built in 1859.
The work was completed in 1994 to the satisfaction of all concerned.
But the eight-story brick Beaux-Arts Christian Admiral Hotel, built in 1908, may not have as happy an ending.


Sherrie Pietranico and Brian Cole
Dr.
Sherrie Lynn Pietranico, a senior chemist at Hoffman La Roche, the pharmaceuticals company in Nutley, N.J., was married yesterday to Dr.
Brian Anthony Cole, a spinal surgery fellow at Temple University Hospital and Shriners Hospital for Crippled Children in Philadelphia.
The Rev.
Donald Kavanaugh performed the Roman Catholic ceremony in St.
Paul's Chapel at Columbia University in New York.
The bride, 29, graduated from Rutgers University and received a Ph.D. in chemistry from the University of Pennsylvania.
She is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Anthony P. Pietranico of West Milford, N.J.
Her father is a retired New York City corrections officer.


Holy Bull Leaves Cat in His Dust and Wins Travers
The Bull outran the Cat and the rabbit and everybody else today when he won the 125th Travers Stakes by a neck over Concern and took his longest strides on the road to the championship of racing's 3-year-old division.
It was a smashing performance by Holy Bull, who withstood a furious closing rush by Concern, the winner of the Arkansas Derby, and won for the 11th time in 13 starts.
And then it was 17 lengths of daylight back to Tabasco Cat, the winner of the Preakness and Belmont and the archrival to Holy Bull for the season's honors.


Ideas &amp; Trends; Europe, Too, Contracts a Bad Case of Inflationphobia
THE dilemma is a familiar one.
Higher interest rates mean less growth, but also less chance that the inflation monster will escape from the box.
Will another turn of the screw keep the economy in trim or choke off recovery?
Like their American counterparts, Europe's government bankers are groping with the same imponderables that affect everyone with a stake in the ongoing miracle of postwar Western affluence.
And like the governors of the Federal Reserve, the gnomes of Zurich and other European capitals are inclined these days to err on the side of fiscal and monetary prudence.


Rascals and Grunts, a Pup and a Match for Dad
Corrina, Corrina  Whoopi Goldberg, Ray Liotta, Tina Majorino Directed by Jessie Nelson PG: 114 minutes


Southwest Brooklyn Presses Its Economic Case
There are no greengrocers, no pharmacies, no bakeries in Red Hook.
Gowanus has no health services -- the nearest public clinic is about two miles away, in Fort Greene, and hard to reach because of a lack of public transportation.
Local officials have begun looking to new state and Federal programs to boost the economy in southwest Brookyn.
Last month, the area that encompasses Red Hook, Gowanus and Sunset Park was chosen by the state as one of 21 new enterprise zones.


Reducing Stress In a Sale
BUYING or selling a home has always rated high on almost everyone's scale of stressful life events.
So spare some extra pity for the buyers in this summer's marketplace.
Many are facing the dual stress and uncertainty of the move-up buyer -- those who want or need a larger home and must cope with the vagaries of selling one home while buying the next.
Adding to those anxieties may be the idea of taking on even more debt.


Country Graybeards Get the Boot
GEORGE JONES MAY BE THE greatest country singer of his time but he has a small problem these days.
Like Waylon Jennings, Willie Nelson, Merle Haggard, Tammy Wynette, Loretta Lynn and virtually every star from the pre-Garth Brooks, pre-video, pre-country-hunk era, he can't get on the radio anymore.
"Nowadays, if you're not 23 years old and got a cute butt in blue jeans and a black hat on or something, you don't have a prayer," said Mr.
Jones, the acknowledged master of the country ballad.
"It's awful all of a sudden to be shut out, when a lot of us are the ones who paved the road for the younger generation."


Germans Meet Russians on Nuclear Seizures
Senior German experts presented evidence to Russian officials here today to support their contention that weapons-grade nuclear materials seized in Germany were produced in the former Soviet Union.
In Bonn, the German Finance Minister, Theo Waigel, told a German newspaper that future financial aid to Russia would be linked to cooperation in stopping nuclear smuggling.
"I expect other nations to take the same stand," Mr.
Waigel was quoted as saying by Bild am Sonntag.


Brighton Journal; A Girl Is Dead. A Town Asks Why.
Until today, Brighton was the kind of town where murder happened only on television and Lary Lane Morgan, a former resident, was the kind of neighbor townspeople might go out with for a few beers.
But all that changed with the discovery of the body of 9-year-old Anna Marie Emry of Grinnell and the arrest of Mr.
Morgan after the authorities said he had helped them find the body.


Jane Van Gelder, Harry Steinberger
Jane Ellen Van Gelder, a vice president and an account supervisor at Bates Manhattan Advertising in New York, is to be married today to Harry Steinberger, the executive vice president and managing director of Yorx Electronics in West Orange, N.J.
Rabbi Jeffrey Segelman is to officiate at Tappan Hill in Tarrytown, N.Y.


Profile; The Tech Exec Who Also Brings Home the Bacon
THANKS to the Whirlpool Corporation's transformation from a major North American appliance company into the industry's worldwide leader, David Whitwam, the chairman and chief executive, has been enjoying praise and recognition lately, including being the focus of an article in the Harvard Business Review, "The Right Way to Go Global."
But back in the middle of 1990, three years after Mr.
Whitwam committed Whirlpool to the expansion now winning accolades, his strategy was in trouble.
Operating profits were falling and Whirlpool's stock was trading even lower than the bottom it hit following the 1987 crash.
The company was in danger of planting the flag all over the map without really profiting from it.
Whirlpool, Mr.
Whitwam concluded, needed an outsider to harness the strengths of its growing ranks of partners, subsidiaries and suppliers.


Commercial Property/Lease Buyouts; As the Market Firms, Tenants Can Get Off the Hook
UNTIL recently, a tenant that wanted to buy its way out of a lease was pretty much out of luck.
With prime real estate going begging throughout the recession-ravaged city -- and with financially troubled tenants demonstrating a tendency to default on their rents -- few landlords would let reliable bill-payers out of their lease obligations.
The few that did asked such high prepayment penalties that tenants went scurrying after sublessees anyway.
Times are changing.
As the real estate market continues to firm up, more and more landlords are letting tenants out of leases, for as little as half their remaining obligation.


. . . While Plant Pilferers Taketh Away
A small stretch of the Upper West Side would like to add a category to their index of problems, which already include everything from aggressive panhandlers to car thieves and drug dealers.
The addition: green thieves.
John Olund, a tenor who lives at 319 West 106th Street, said his building had been hit four times in the last month.
First, somebody made off with two two-foot-high potted plants from the locked vestibule.
Then, a planter wired to the fence disappeared.
After that, a honeysuckle bush in a very heavy metal container vanished.
Last week, somebody pulled a window box full of impatiens, begonias, salvia and geraniums through a window grill.


Schools Replenishing Their Staffs
SCHOOL districts across the state have been hiring teachers this summer to fill scores of openings due to retirements and a growing elementary school population.
Superintendents, principals and directors of personnel said they have been plowing through stacks of applications and conducting rounds of interviews in a search for the most talented people from pools of candidates numbering as many as several hundred.
Many new teachers will start out at entry-level salaries, administrators said, which means some relief for local school budgets.
Schools in the state began replenishing their teaching staffs three or four years ago, and the trend is expected to continue, as those hired in the late 1960's and early 1970's start leaving their jobs, the director of personnel for the Danbury schools, John J. Eriquez, said.
"It's a good time for school districts, because a lot of highly paid staff is retiring," he said.
"If there is less money spent on staff, maybe it can be spent on things like supplies and equipment, where needs have been set aside in recent years."


A Delicate Balance
SANDRA CHOW squinted in fierce concentration as she pedaled a creaky bicycle down the Central Park Mall.
Picking up speed, she lifted an arm and grasped frantically at the air.
"Whoa, this isn't right!" she hollered, leaping off the bike and watching meekly as it slammed into a bench.


Jennifer Wiener, Jeffrey Rosenthal
Jennifer Laura Wiener, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Howard Wiener of East Brunswick, N.J., is to be married today to Jeffrey Andrew Rosenthal, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Harold L. Rosenthal of Dix Hills, L.I.
Rabbi Michael Paley is to officiate at Tappan Hill in Tarrytown, N.Y.
The bride, 23, graduated magna cum laude from Barnard College.
She received a master's degree in English literature from Columbia University where she is a candidate for a Ph.D. in that subject.
Her father is a pediatrician in North Brunswick, N.J.


Temple of Art Or Bordello?
To the Editor:  As Phil Patton points out in "The Pixels and Perils of Getting Art On Line"  [ Aug. 7 ] , there is wide disagreement in the art world as to whether it is a good idea or a frightening one for museums to court new visitors by digitizing their art collections.
Personally, I fear that the trend of looking at art masterpieces on computer screens poses an additional threat to the ancient and noble tradition of art connoisseurship, which is already under serious assault by PC-obsessed yahoos on college campuses.


If You Squint, This Is Not a Faulty Tower
ANDY WARHOL ONCE SAID THAT the reason he started wearing gray wigs when he was still in his 30's is that if he made himself look old, people would be taken aback by his youthful vigor.
"When I do something with a normal amount of energy," Warhol explained, "it seems young."
Robert A. M. Stern designs buildings with gray wigs: contemporary projects that are sophisticated pastiches.
And the impression of age is sometimes so convincing that we find ourselves startled into feelings of relief and even immense gratitude whenever the buildings show signs of life.


Siberia: 5 Million Miles of Frozen Dreams
They shot it out at noon, not long after a hard summer rain had turned the city roads to mud.
By the time the turf battle for one of Siberia's wildest outposts had ended, two gang leaders lay dead, six others were on their way to the hospital, and this untamed city -- filled with enough strivers, gamblers, con men and thieves to make Dodge City seem like Larchmont -- had taken one step closer to anarchy.
"This has always been a crazy place but it sure is getting wilder," said Rima Yakovleva, a 28-year-old fur trader whose friend was killed in the shootout this month.
"When people say freedom is dangerous in Russia I think I know what they mean. Because no place is freer or more dangerous than Siberia."


Ellen Taschioglou, Scott Mangiafico
Ellen Cooper Taschioglou, the daughter of Rhoda and Kemon Taschioglou of Lincoln, Mass., was married there yesterday to D. Scott Mangiafico, the son of Jeanne and Joseph Mangiafico of York, Me.
The Rev.
Iain Maclean performed the Congregational ceremony at the First Parish.


Lumet Directs 'Blue Light'
IT would be consoling to regard a play about mind control, fact alteration and strategic seduction -- all brought on by a mysterious stranger -- as an exercise in science fiction or far-fetched psychodrama.
But "Blue Light," a world premiere engagement at the Bay Street Theater Festival in Sag Harbor, offers no such consolation.
In her first work for the stage, Cynthia Ozick has written a scary, completely provocative play.
Some will be stimulated by her pure audacity; others will simply be provoked, perhaps defensively incensed.


U.S. Packs Up to Move Radio Free Europe and Radio Liberty
Radio Free Europe and Radio Liberty, the United States Government-financed stations that broadcast to Eastern Europe and the Soviet Union for most of the cold war, are reeling from what has happened to them in the last two years.
First, the Clinton Administration sprang the news that it would eliminate the stations' $211 million budget altogether in 1995.


Inspiration From Sunny Lands for a Good Cold Soup
INEVITABLY, summer demands cold soup.
There are the classics, like gazpacho, vichyssoise and borscht.
Cold cucumber soup is also fairly common.
Recently, the thick Tuscan tomato-and-bread soup, pappa al pomodoro, has become popular.
But there are also more inventive possibilities.
They can be based on vegetable purees, broths with ingredients added or even fruit.
All manner of leftovers can be thinned, smoothed and seasoned to make a good cold soup.


Nicole Chapin, Patrick T. Duke
Nicole Taylor Chapin, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles M. Chapin 3d of Oldwick, N.J., was married yesterday to Patrick Thomas Duke, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
J.
Thomas Duke of Potomac, Md.
The Rev.
Alfred M. Niese, an Episcopal priest, officiated at the Church of St.
John on the Mountain in Bernardsville, N.J.
The Rev.
Martin Field, a Roman Catholic priest, took part in the ceremony.
The bride graduated from Yale University and received a law degree from Georgetown University.
Next month she is to become a clerk for Judge Harold H. Greene of the Federal District Court for the District of Columbia.


Ariel Menninger, Joseph McInerney
Dr.
Ariel Cathlyn Menninger, a daughter of Dr.
Roy W. Menninger of Topeka, Kan., and Catherine Menninger of Franconia, N.H., was married yesterday to Joseph McInerney, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Robert McInerney of Pittsfield, Mass.
The Rev.
Andrew Scobie performed the ceremony on Cannon Mountain in Franconia Notch, N.H.
The bride, 38, is a veterinarian in Placerville, Calif.
She graduated from Hampshire College and received her veterinary degree from the University of California at Davis.
Her father is the chairman of the Menninger Clinic, the psychiatric institution in Topeka, of which the bride's grandfather the late Dr.
William C. Menninger was a founder.


It's Older Than You Thought
To the Editor:
"For Professional Photographers, a Digital-Age Debate" (Technology, July 24) said that stock photo agencies have been around since the mid-1970's when the Image Bank began selling photographs.
The stock photography business started long before 1970.
The H. Armstrong Roberts agency started in 1920, and others came soon after -- like Ewing Galloway and Shostal Associates.
Shostal (now Superstock) started in 1940, four years after Kodachrome was introduced.
All of these agencies were and still are selling to worldwide markets and were doing so long before the stock agencies mentioned in the article.
DAVID J. FORBERT  North White Plains, N.Y., July 25  The writer, a photographer, once owned a photograph agency.


Postponed Cruise
To the Editor: Last fall, my husband and I booked Regency cruises and a land stay in Istanbul under the title Mediterranean and Black Sea, through our travel agent.
A deposit of $600 for a trip on the Regent Jewel was made on Nov. 21, 1993, for a trip leaving May 11, 1994.
The trip was postponed to May 25 and then again to July 6.
At great inconvenience we changed many plans to meet the first two changes of date.
After a total payment of $5,284 on May 12, I was notified by my travel agent at the beginning of June that the Regent Jewel was not ready and our trip was again being delayed.
We could no longer change our plans.


Eileen Minnefor, William Dixon
Eileen A. Minnefor, the daughter of Margaret and Dr.
Anthony Minnefor of Morris Plains, N.J., is to be married today to William Stowe Dixon, the son of David and Kathleen Dixon of Somerset, N.J.
The Rev.
John Palatsis is to perform the ceremony at Our Lady of Sorrows Roman Catholic Church in South Orange, N.J.
The bride, 31, is keeping her name.
She graduated from Middlebury College and received a law degree from Harvard University.
Until recently, she was an associate at Patterson, Belknap, Webb &amp; Tyler, a New York law firm.
Her father is the chairman of the pediatrics department at St.
Barnabas Hospital in Livingston, N.J.


Rwandan Refugees Are Stranded at Border
When Zairian troops closed the border with southwestern Rwanda today, 12-year-old Bertin Tatuimana found himself lost astride two worlds, stranded on a creaky bridge over which perhaps 400,000 of his fellow Rwandans have fled in the last few days.
Hours before, while thousands were still crossing the bridge in both directions, Bertin had gone back into Rwanda to play with a friend whose family had yet to make the trek across the frontier.


Aug. 14-20; A Holocaust Memorial for New York
Washington has the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum.
Los Angeles has the Simon Wiesenthal Center's Museum of Tolerance.
Jerusalem has Yad Vashem.
But New York, where the greatest number of Holocaust survivors are said to live, has nothing yet like these.


THE PRESIDENT'S PAST
The gist of Kelly's article is that Clinton's nickname, Slick Willie, is justified: he takes strong positions and then changes them, says one thing and does another, etc.


A Change in Mexico?
As Mexican voters prepare to cast ballots today, many express both frustration with the ruling party and a reluctance to face change.
Will their anger cancel out their reticence?
Article, page 16.


Carol D. Ehler, Charles F. Wiecha
Carol Dorothy Ehler, the deputy chief development officer at the Metropolitan Museum of Art in New York, was married yesterday to Charles Francis Wiecha, a manager in the research division at I.B.M. in Yorktown Heights, N.Y.
The Rev.
Lisa Ward, a Unitarian Universalist minister, officiated at the Marquand Chapel of the Yale University Divinity School in New Haven.
The bride, 37, graduated from William Smith College and received a master's degree in arts administration from New York University.
She is a daughter of Helen C. Ferguson of Wallingford, Conn., and the late Allyn F. Ehler, and is a stepdaughter of David S. Ferguson.


Ike and Monty
To the Editor:
According to Chris Patsilelis's review (In Short, July 17), "Ike &amp; Monty: Generals at War," by Norman Gelb, "sharply" contrasts Dwight D. Eisenhower, the Supreme Allied Commander during World War II, and Bernard Law Montgomery, the British commander of the Allied land forces.


Senior Center's Long Search For a New Home
For two decades, the Elmhurst-Jackson Heights Senior Center has been a second home to hundreds of elderly men and women who gather there daily.
But the center's lease expires at year's end, and efforts by city and center officials to find a new site have become, well, very complicated.
The center occupies the basement and first floor of 87-11 Whitney Avenue, a two-story, red-brick building in Elmhurst.
Since the Christian Testimony Church bought the site three years ago, the church has used the top floor, and church officials have pressed for the use of the other floors for its congregation.


BENITO MUSSOLINI
The Mussolini lyric from "You're the Top," cited in John Lukacs's article "Benito Mussolini, Back From the Dead" (July 24), was written by P. G. Wodehouse for the 1935 London production of "Anything Goes." In the original 1934 New York production, the Porter refrain was:
You're the nimble tread of the feet of Fred Astaire
You're an O'Neill drama
You're Whistler's mama
You're Camembert.
The fact that the Mussolini line does not appear in Robert Kimball's "Complete Lyrics of Cole Porter" or "The Unpublished Cole Porter" is not due to any desire to censor Porter's works; it is simply because he did not write that version.
There have been numerous parodies of Porter's lyric scheme for "You're the Top," including a fine ribald version written by Irving Berlin.
ROBERT H. MONTGOMERY JR.
Trustee, Cole Porter Musical and Literary Property Trusts New York, N.Y.


Sound Bytes; Three Careers and Counting
CALL Prof.
John J. Donovan the Johnny Carson of the training circuit.
The ebullient Mr.
Donovan doesn't so much teach his seminars as "host" them, entertaining his audience of often skeptical corporate executives while he extols the virtues of replacing aging mainframe computers with technology based on powerful personal computer technology.
Professor Donovan is president and chief executive of the Cambridge Technology Group, a three-year-old information systems training company in Cambridge, Mass., with about 50 employees, and is a management professor at M.I.T.
With an armful of degrees, including a Ph.D. that covers medicine, engineering and philosophy, he has been an electrical engineer, an engineering professor and a clinical pediatrician at Tufts Medical School.
Today, Professor Donovan is revving up for career No. 4.


Friends in Need
To the Editor: Last September we were to attend a wedding in Naples.
Approximately 90 minutes out of Rome, our car broke down, fortunately close to a rest area.
There we met two delivery men on their way back from Rome to Pomigliano D'Arco after delivering fresh pasta.
They pushed our car into the rest area.
Then they called the rental company several times.
The truck arrived three and a half hours later and the operators advised us that all they could do was tow the car to a nearby town.
Since we needed to be in Naples by 6 P.M. the two delivery men (who had insisted on staying with us) offered to drive us to a Caserta on the outskirts.
They took our luggage, lifted one of us into the passenger seat of their truck, while the other and the assistant rode in the rear cab.
They offered us half of their lunch.


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
The Party Pace
"IT'S the Hampton's social triathlon," Judy Licht said.
"We've been in training all summer for this." In less than two hours Ms.
Licht, a television reporter, and her husband, Jerry Della Femina, advertising executive and owner of much of East Hampton's business district, made it to three star-studded parties.
The key was in knowing where to park, how much to eat and whom to greet.
"You can't break pace," Ms.
Licht said.
In eating, greeting or parking.
The Della Feminas left their car in friends' driveways and behind one of their restaurants.
As for dining three times, "You eat only finger food," Ms.
Licht said.
"Picking up a plate would slow you down."


Becker, Taking His Time, Defeats an Irritated Stich
Out they came, with hackles raised, the Volvo International's high-profile semifinalists, Boris Becker and Michael Stich, two Germans who share a common homeland and an uncommon alienation from each other.
Somehow they manage to convey a mutual respect and disdain simultaneously.
Somehow they manage to convey that their every match is a grudge match in which Becker would like to revive the bombastics that made him a Wimbledon legend at 17, and Stich would like to remind his predecessor that his own 1991 Wimbledon crown came at the legend's expense.


2 Groups Plan 19-State Fight On Smoking
The American Medical Association and a major health foundation have announced that they will begin a $10 million anti-smoking campaign in 19 states.
The plans of the A.M.A. and the co-sponsor, the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation, make the 19 selected states targets in a new effort to spread California's successful program of using tobacco taxes to support anti-tobacco education.


T. Charles Lee; Church Organist, 79
T.
Charles Lee, the retired organist and choirmaster of the Brick Presbyterian Church in Manhattan, died on Wednesday at the Palm Beach Hospice Center, Palm Beach, Fla.
He was 79.
The cause was cancer, said his wife, Shpresa Lee.


CURRENCY
Last
Prior
Year
Week
Week
Ago
Japanese Yen
98.68
100.13
104.30
per Dollar
German Mark
1.5397
1.5510
1.6745
per Dollar
Canadian Dollar
1.3758
1.3813
1.3178
per U.S. Dollar
British Pound
1.5480
1.5474
1.5149
U.S. Dollar per British Pound
Gold$382.00
$376.70
$373.50
Republic National Bank
Currency: Friday NY Close


Fantastic Literature
To the Editor:
Shame on Tom De Haven.
He thoughtfully and glowingly reviews Jonathan Carroll's novel "From the Teeth of Angels" (July 24), then in the middle of it all takes a vicious swipe at the whole field of fantastic literature.


Track and Field: A Sport With Everything but an Audience in the U.S.
For longtime track fans, last weekend's United States-Pan Africa meet in Durham, N.C., was both a rare opportunity to see a world-class event on American soil and a melancholy reminder of how exciting track and field once was in this country.
The first United States-Africa meet in Durham, in 1971, drew a two-day crowd of more than 54,000 spectators.
It was party time.
Fans were thrilled by the performances of Steve Prefontaine and Frank Shorter, Kip Keino and Miruts Yifter and clapped rhythmically during the distance races like they do at the big European meets in Oslo and Stockholm.


Corrections
A map on page 3 of the Travel section today with a Correspondent's Report about the new Kansai International Airport in Japan locates it incorrectly.
It is on a man-made island in Osaka Bay, not on the Pacific coast. (The airport is scheduled to open Sept. 4.)


Politics and Aid Could Shift In '90 Census Readjustment
A recent Federal court ruling that may force readjustments to the census count in favor of New York City could have the opposite effect on state governments in the metropolitan region, officials say.
In the ruling, issued Aug. 8, the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit told a lower-court judge to reconsider his dismissal of a suit by New York City and other municipalities, which had argued that the 1990 Census undercounted minority groups and urban residents in general.


Squadrons of the Anonymous
MAGDALENA ABAKANOWICZ By Barbara Rose.
Illustrated. 224 pp.
New York: Harry N. Abrams. $49.50.


The Case of the Murdered Candidate
IN THE VIDEOTAPES OF LUIS DONALDO COLOSIO'S last campaign speech, the working-class neighborhood spreading before him in Tijuana looks like any other colonia of half-paved streets and yards fenced in by bedsprings.
Women in nylon dresses press against a line of men guarding the candidate's path.
College students hold up a banner proclaiming "Enough!" of the 65-year rule of Colosio's Institutional Revolutionary Party, the PRI.
But on the plywood shacks and cinder-block cubes that fill the steep canyon called Lomas Taurinas, there are many more banners: "Colosio," they read, "Colosio, We're Going for More" and "Colosio, I Love You."
As cameras follow him out of a brown Chevrolet Suburban just before 4:30 P.M. on March 23, Colosio radiates a confidence that had been missing from his campaign.
The seemingly calm, upbeat country that President Carlos Salinas de Gortari had bequeathed to him with the governing-party nomination in November had disappeared with the New Year.
The peasant rebellion that erupted in the southern state of Chiapas took the Government by surprise.
Bombings in Mexico City, the kidnappings of two powerful businessmen, new pressure for political change and an angry backlash from hard-liners within his party -- all of that had battered a candidate who stood for the status quo.


SUNDAY, August 21, 1994; Dullest of Champions?
Since the World Cup ended with a relentlessly uneventful match between Italy and Brazil, soccer fans have been lamenting a widespread American reaction to their favorite sport: glazed eyes.
Surely, though, there are other games that, big though they be, are even more tedious to watch?
Which is the most stultifying sport of all?
To find out, another completely unscientific poll was conducted, by dialing at random in the 212 area code.


In Canada, Patients Do Choose Their Doctors
To the Editor:
It is an oft-heard but mistaken notion that single-payer medical coverage means patients cannot choose their doctors.
On the contrary: In Canada's system, patients have absolute freedom to choose their doctors, based on normal distribution patterns.
Compare that to your average health maintenance organization.


PLAYING IN THE NEIGHBORHOOD
MIDTOWN  Enough 'Star Trek' Lore To Please Almost Anyone
It's the five-year mission that never ends.


Vexed by Vending-Machine Technology
To the Editor:
While vending machine electronics has progressed ("Vending-Machine Technology Pushes Electronic Frontier," Technology, July 17), the ergonomics are certainly backwards.
Most modern machines, like phones, calculators and A.T.M.'s have numeric buttons ranging from "0" to "9," but the vending machine you had pictured and the machines at my office have nonstandard numeric buttons ranging from "1" to "10." How many times have I desired the Reese's Peanut Butter Cups at location "D10" only to get a granola bar because I pressed "D," then pressed "1" and then finally tried to press a nonexistent "0" button.
Doohh!
DAN DeBRITO  Corvallis, Ore., July 25


Aug. 14-20: Merger Mania; Two More Drug Companies Decide to Join Forces
In an unexpected side effect of the national health care debate, formerly high-flying drug companies have turned parsimonious.
Trying to keep profits growing when they can no longer raise prices at will, the companies have cut back, at least temporarily, on lavish spending for armies of sales people, glistening laboratories and campus-like headquarters in exurban New Jersey.
And they are merging.
Last week, American Home Products Corporation, the world's 12th-largest drug maker, persuaded executives of the American Cyanamid Company, No. 31 in sales, to hand over the keys for $101 a share, or $9.7 billion.
If Federal antitrust regulators approve the deal, as expected, American Home Products will become the fourth-largest drug maker.


Russia: The Land Of Opportunity
To the Editor:
In "Do Business in Russia? For Now, No" (Viewpoints, Aug. 7) Marshall I. Goldman came to the wrong conclusion.
With its paucity of facts and regurgitation of well-known obstacles, the article seemed designed to promote Professor Goldman's new book rather than inform or to shed new light on events in Russia.
It is too bad that he did not speak with a more sophisticated consultant than his friend who pockets $10,000 to tell people not to invest in Russia.


To Change or Not to Change? Mexicans Are Voting Today
How much change do Mexicans want?
The question has echoed throughout the presidency of Carlos Salinas de Gortari, asked again and again as he dismantled a protectionist, state-run economy, toppled idols of the 1910 Revolution, and moved under rising pressure to cede some of his party's authoritarian control of the political system.


Offering Youths Role Models and Hope
IN an effort to direct young black and Hispanic men away from the dangers of the streets, a new program from the Peekskill Area Health Center is marshaling community resources to offer positive alternatives.
"Minority males are at risk disproportionately for a whole gamut of health problems like heart disease, H.I.V. infection, diabetes and substance abuse," said Roberta Marcus-Leiner, associate vice president of community initiatives for the center.
"We're looking to help the community use its own strengths to redraft that imbalance."


The X-Men Vanquish America
IN THE BEGINNING, THERE WERE FIVE TROUBLED teen-agers -- Cyclops, Angel, Beast, Iceman and Marvel Girl -- all normal until they turned 13.
Suddenly they could do superhuman things -- fly, shoot energy from their eyes and much, much more.
Called the X-Men, "the strangest superheroes of all," they promptly went to war against Magneto, the master of magnetism and a real bad guy.
It was a rebellious style, only slightly masked by the jackets and ties the X-Men then wore.
An early issue has Iceman, whose frigid rays cool any situation, exclaiming: "Here's a quick-freezing icy sweatshirt for you, Stretch! This'll cramp your style real good!"


Finally, a Solution
To the Sports Editor:
Here's idea No. 1,999,999 for solving the baseball strike:
First, you must realize this is not an ordinary strike that might be solved by arbitration.
Samuel Gompers, for example, would not even begin to recognize it as such.
There are no workers complaining about the usual causes -- low pay, long hours, bad working conditions, etc.
No employees are engaged in a sit-in, nor are there any picket lines to keep people out of the workplace.


Julia B. Cohen, Troy W. Norris
Julia Beth Cohen, a daughter of Arnold and Rona Cohen of Phoenixville, Pa., was married yesterday to Troy William Norris, a son of Thomas and Beverly Norris of White Stone, Va.
Rabbi Henry Cohen officiated at the Radnor Valley Country Club in Villanova, Pa.
Mrs.
Norris, 27, and her husband, 28, graduated from Harvard University, she magna cum laude, he cum laude.
They received M.B.A.'s from Harvard, from which she also received a law degree.
The bride is to become an associate next month in the Boston office of McKinsey &amp; Company, the New York management consulting company.
Her father is a professor of law at Villanova University in Villanova.
Her mother is a director of business development for Day &amp; Zimmermann Information Solutions, computer consultants in Radnor, Pa.


How the Bronx Acquired That Mysterious Article
To the Editor:
With reference to the July 31 F.Y.I. column's explanation that the "the" in the name of the Bronx came about because it was named after the Bronx River: It is true that Jonas Bronck was an early settler and the owner of a rather large farm in the southern portion of what was then an unnamed borough.
But the "the" came about as follows: When friends living in New York (Manhattan) went north to visit Jonas and family, they said, "We're going to see the Broncks." The river that ran through Jonas's land came to be known, naturally enough, as the Broncks's river.
Then came the borough we know as the Bronx.
DAVID M. ROSNER  Manhattan


Votes in Congress
Tally Last Week in Connecticut, New Jersey and New York  Senate
1.
Health Care: Vote on an amendment to a major health care reform bill that would require private health insurance plans to offer coverage of care for infants, children and pregnant women by July 1, 1995.
Approved 55 to 42, Aug. 16.
2.
Health Care: Vote on an amendment to a major health care reform bill that would provide more assistance for rural health care.
Approved 94 to 4, Aug. 18.
1
2
Connecticut
Dodd (D)
Yea
Lieberman (D)
New Jersey
Bradley (D)
Lautenberg (D)
New York
D'Amato (R)
Nay
Moynihan (D)
KEY: (A) Absent or did not vote; (P) Present.


Compost Man, the General (and Army) Of Greening Campaign, Giveth . . .
Stuart Sabowitz, a 43-year-old computer instructor, is the guerrilla volunteer of the Upper West Side.
Last year he finished a solo, seven-year project: turning the lot behind his apartment at 293 Riverside Drive, near 101st Street, into a two-level, 2,300-square-foot garden with brick paths and bushes and trees.
For two years, he has been a one-man raking machine, collecting oak, maple and gingko leaves in Riverside Park for composting.
Recently, he placed planters along his block and filled them with myrtle, violets, morning glories and impatiens.


Ms. Elfin, Mr. Leidenheimer
Dana Alison Elfin, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Mel Elfin of Washington, is to be married today to Robert E. Leidenheimer Jr., the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Leidenheimer of Falls Church, Va.
Cantor David Shneyer is to officiate at the Pooks Hill Marriott in Bethesda, Md.
The bride and the bridegroom are associates in the Washington law firm of Howrey &amp; Simon.
She graduated from Brown University and received her law degree from the University of Texas at Austin.
He graduated from James Madison University and received his law degree from the University of Virginia.


Tax-Exempt Bonds Issued for Renovation at Kennedy
Continuing New York City's efforts to help renovate aging terminals at Kennedy International Airport, the administration of Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani has issued $83 million in tax-exempt bonds to help American Airlines pay for the renovation and expansion of its passenger terminal.
The financing agreement, with the city's Industrial Development Agency, will enable the airline to complete a multimillion-dollar project it began in 1989 to rebuild its terminal and one next to it.


Whither Now the Willful Weather?
WEATHER has been on everyone's mind this year; there seems to have been such a lot of it.
During the winter, it was snow, piling ever higher as the sand and the salt supplies ran out.
With summer came seemingly endless heat and humidity.
Plants withered, lawns turned brown and people wilted in major ways.
Even the television weather forecasters became bored, forced as they were to predict, day after day, more of the disastrous H's: heat and humidity.


Elizabeth Roberts, Douglas Lewtan
Elizabeth Dawn Roberts, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
I.
Lloyd Roberts of Muttontown, L.I., was married last evening to Douglas Henry Lewtan, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Marvin Lewtan of West Hartford, Conn.
Rabbi Joseph Potasnik officiated at Temple Emanuel in Kings Point, L.I.
Mrs.
Lewtan, 25, graduated from Wellesley College and received an M.B.A. from Boston University.
Mr.
Lewtan, 30, graduated from the University of Vermont.


A Sedentary Consideration
To the Editor:  Phil Patton neglects to mention an important benefit of on-line art at museums: the visitor gets to sit down.
After an hour or two on your feet, intensely viewing the original art on the walls, one is happy to fool around with a computer, resting mind and body before going back to the real thing.
ANN KERR Trenton


The Executive Life; Valley's New Staple Is Coffee, Not Chips
THE daily grind at more Silicon Valley companies is getting much easier to take, thanks to the increasingly refined coffee-drinking habits of their executives.
The mundane morning coffee is being upgraded to a fancy roast or exotic blend, and ordinary drip machines are being displaced by espresso and cappuccino makers.
Some companies are even competing for employees and building morale using the seductive effects of good aromatic coffee.


Rascals and Grunts, a Pup and a Match for Dad
Andre  Tina Majorino, Keith Carradine, Chelsea Field, Tory the Sea Lion Directed by George Miller PG: 94 minutes


PLAYING IN THE NEIGHBORHOOD: FLUSHING MEADOWS At the U. S. Open, Fun for Early Birds
YOU'RE sitting courtside at the U. S. Open.
Your seat is close enough to the action to hear every grunt, every angry challenge to an iffy line call.
And best of all, it's free.
How, you ask, do you get such great seats? Get there before the Open starts.


Making Nuclear Arms Is Easier Than It Looks, New Study Says
Building a nuclear bomb takes so much less plutonium or uranium than generally believed that new safeguards must be adopted as part of a global tightening of defenses against the criminal diversion of atomic materials, private experts argue in a new proposal.
For plutonium, the experts say the official threshold of danger should be lowered from 8 kilograms to 1 kilogram, or from 17.6 pounds to 2.2 pounds.
They also propose eightfold reductions for uranium, the other main fuel of atomic bombs.


THE PRESIDENT'S PAST
Kelly concludes that the Clinton Presidency lacks a center because the President himself lacks one.
However, the body of evidence Kelly himself has assembled indicates that Clinton does have a center -- the preservation of his electoral viability.
The fact that he can be all things to all people, that he can passionately argue both sides of an issue, indeed derives from that center, for to take a stand would inevitably alienate some segment of voters.
And alienation is the nemesis of electability.
N.
KASNETT Brooklyn


Elizabeth Economy and David Wah
Elizabeth Charissa Economy, an associate fellow at the Council on Foreign Relations, was married yesterday to David Michael Wah, a vice president in the investment banking division of CS First Boston.
Both work in New York.
The Rev.
Demetri Kantzavelos performed the ceremony at the Annunciation Greek Orthodox Cathedral in Chicago.
Ms.
Economy, a daughter of Prof. and Mrs.
James Economy of Urbana, Ill., is keeping her name.
She graduated from Swarthmore College and received a master's degree in political science from Stanford University and a Ph.D. in that subject from the University of Michigan.
Her father is a professor and the head of materials science and engineering at the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign.


Family Cruise Line Ceases Operation
Citing a lack of enough consistent business, American Family Cruises said it was ceasing operation after its Sept. 3 cruise from Miami to the Caribbean returned on Sept. 10.
The company, a joint venture of Bruce Nierenberg, who was a founder of Premier Cruise Line in 1983, and Costa Cruises, had a life of less than a year.
It began sailing Dec. 18, 1993, with the American Adventure, a 1,500-passenger ship, which was advertised as the first cruise ship just for families with children.
The announcement of termination of service said that passengers had seemed satisfied.
Ticket holders for cruises after the final date can call their travel agents or the line, (305) 377-4130, about full refunds or alternatives.


Anita C. Powers, Gregory Golinski
Anita Catherine Powers, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
William T. Powers Jr. of Croton-on-Hudson, N.Y., was married there yesterday to Gregory William Golinski, the son of Gerald J. Golinski of Buffalo and Eileen C. Golinski of Hampton, N.H.
The Rev.
Gennaro Gentile performed the ceremony at Holy Name of Mary Roman Catholic Church.
Mrs.
Golinski, 25, is a senior underwriter at the Reliance National Insurance Company in New York.
She graduated cum laude from the Catholic University of America.
Her father is the president of the Rockefeller Trust Company, a private New York corporation providing trust services to Rockefeller family members.


The Nation: Growing Old, Politically; It's the Voters Who Seem to Get Cranky
LESS than three years after spurning a chance at Presidential immortality, Mario M. Cuomo, the man so often cast as New York's Hamlet on the Hudson, now risks the humiliation and abandonment of Lear.
In neighboring New Jersey, meanwhile, the state's freshman Governor, Christine Todd Whitman, once scorned as a lightweight candidate, suddenly finds herself mentioned as a possible 1996 Vice Presidential hopeful after pushing a groundbreaking income tax cut through a sympathetic Legislature.


For This Fire, a Castle Is Fuel
IT WAS WELL PAST MIDNIGHT on a recent brisk summer evening, and this normally sleepy Welsh town near Cardiff was wide awake.
It is not every day, after all, that the local 13th-century castle -- Britain's second largest, after Windsor Castle -- is set alight.
"It's quite terrifying," said the location manager, Sue Quinn, "setting a Welsh historic monument on fire." Or even seeming to, since this is in fact for a film.
But for "Restoration," Michael Hoffman's film version of the acclaimed historical novel by Rose Tremain, Caerphilly Castle and its adjacent lakes were proving an apt stand-in for Cheapside, near the river Thames, the primary marketplace of medieval London.


Freezers Reigned in Cold War East Bloc
To the Editor:
Your Aug. 12 Business Day article on privatization in the former East Germany says that "under Communism, Foron made the only refrigerators and freezers in Eastern Europe, employing 5,500 people to build 800,000 units a year."


Survey Shows Support For Keeping a Statue
The front-page piece with picture about the Horace Greeley statue in Chappaqua  [ "Greeley Statue Has People Heading in All Directions," June 5 ]  told much about the current controversy with the New York State Department of Transportation.
Two new pieces of evidence came in after the article's publication, and we want to make your readers aware of them.


Eating in Maine
To the Editor: Your article,"Going Way Beyond Lobster in Six Maine Resaurants, (June 12) does not include an outstanding restaurant in the Camden area.


Miss Lewis, Mr. Westerberg
Carolyn Suzanne Lewis, an international equity saleswoman at Paribas Capital Markets in New York, was married yesterday to Stephen Hunter Westerberg, an advertising manager at Bride's and Your New Home Magazine in New York.
The Very Rev.
Robert V. Wilshire performed the ceremony at St.
John's of Lattingtown Episcopal Church in Locust Valley, L.I.
The bride graduated from St.
Lawrence University.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas A. Lewis Jr. of Locust Valley.
Her father, a former governor of the New York Stock Exchange, is a senior vice president at Kidder, Peabody &amp; Company in New York.


Linus C. Pauling Dies at 93; Chemist and Voice for Peace
Linus C. Pauling, a brilliant chemist and an untiring political activist who received one Nobel Prize for chemistry and another for peace, died on Friday at his ranch in the Big Sur area of Northern California.
He was 93.
The cause was cancer, said Steve Lawson, chief executive officer of the Linus Pauling Institute of Science and Medicine in Palo Alto, Calif.


A Hotel's Many Lives
THE Christian Admiral Hotel has had a checkered past.
Its glory days began in 1908, when it opened as the Hotel Cape May Hotel, and steamships sailed into Cape May Harbor, bringing the gentry from Washington and Philadelphia.
With the introduction of the automobile, Atlantic City was on the upswing.
The Depression turned Cape May into a sleepy little town.


Less Than Their Share?
THE DIFFERENCE Growing Up Female in America.
By Judy Mann. 317 pp.
New York: Warner Books. $22.95.


Can New Britain Keep The Red Sox Loyalty?
THOUGH they have enjoyed winning seasons only three times in 12 years since moving from Bristol in 1983, the New Britain Red Sox are regarded by many of the city's residents as a prize possession.
But, in large part because of its overall bad record, the team has not drawn particularly well in a city that has been struggling to get back on its feet during most of the time the Red Sox have been playing at Beehive Stadium.


Polishing Image, Tongs Mend Fences With Old Foes
One recent afternoon at the Chinatown Health Clinic, the friendly smiles of Sandra K. Lee, its chairwoman, and the staff were laced with nervousness as they greeted the equally tense members of the Chinese Consolidated Benevolent Association, the umbrella group of nearly 70 family, district and business associations, also known as tongs.
"We appreciate your taking your busy time to visit our new location," Ms.
Lee, a fourth-generation Chinese, said in lilting Cantonese.


Laura Postiglione, Joseph LaNasa 3d
Laura Ann Postiglione, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Frank Postiglione of Dix Hills, L.I., is to be married today to Joseph A. LaNasa 3d, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
LaNasa Jr. of New Orleans.
Msgr.
Thomas J. Hartman is to perform the ceremony at St.
Patrick's Church in Huntington, L.I.
The bride, 22, graduated from Boston College.
Her father is a stockbroker at the American Stock Exchange in New York.


Russian, Latvian and All-American
OF the two group shows in Kent that are under review, the smaller, at Bachelier-Cardonsky, features two painters from Russia and a maker of collages and assemblages who was born in Latvia.
The other, an all-American production at Monique Knowlton, features three sculptors, a painter and an artist whose images, drawn in steel rods, do double duty as furniture.
Ingrid Freidenbergs, a veteran of numerous group shows in Manhattan, opens the proceedings at Bachelier with 18 small compositions inspired by "The Scarlet Letter."


A Writer Under the Influence of 'Bad News'
"THIS word privacy, I want to unpack it," says the writer.
"You can get privacy through substance abuse. You have something that is shameful, you have to keep it a secret. In the process of doing that, of protecting something from other people, you learn to hide parts of yourself, parts that are no longer up for everyone to evaluate. I got access to parts of myself I couldn't get to otherwise, and it helped my writing enormously."
"With all respect," I say carefully, because I like the writer, "that sounds like so much junkie rationalization. What have you got from heroin?"


A Critic's Creed: Plug Yourself And Your Fellow Americans
IMAGINE THIS SCENARIO: THE chief music critic of a major New York daily newspaper is a working composer.
The critic's compositions are performed by leading orchestras, chamber musicians and singers around the country, sometimes with the composer conducting.
When a new composition by this critic is presented in New York, another music critic from the paper reviews it, almost always favorably.
After six years on the job, the critic wins a Pulitzer Prize, not for criticism but for composition.
And far from being embarrassed, the editors of the paper boast in print of the critic's accomplishment.
Though unthinkable today, this was the situation of Virgil Thomson during his 14 years at The New York Herald Tribune.
When he left the paper 40 years ago this fall, his career as composer and performer foundered for a time, and music criticism lost one of its perkiest, most provocative voices.
Even those who devalue Thomson as a composer concede that he may have been the most brilliant music critic the United States has produced.
Yet his appointment arose out of a singular set of circumstances that could not be duplicated today.


On Sunday; Benny Ong: A Farewell To All That
BENNY Ong, Uncle Seven, International Adviser for Life of the Hip Sing Tong, the Godfather of Chinatown, lay in state at the Wah Wing Sang Funeral Home the other day, surrounded by enough flowers to cover much of lower Manhattan.
Floral wreaths from businessmen, families and the myriad associations of Chinatown's social network -- family organizations like the important Lee family, the Engs, associations from villages and regions in Canton province, home of the original settlers -- lined the walls and were stacked up on the floor.
Funeral banners hung in long narrow strips, proclaiming Mr.
Ong's many qualities, notably from officials of the Nationalist government in Taiwan.


I Traded In My Grungy Flannel For the FX Channel
'MR.
KARLEN!
WHAT happened to your hair?" demanded the horrified producer's assistant from the Fox network. Clipboard in hand, she had perkily bounced into the holding pen in the midtown Manhattan sound studio to tell me I was on deck for my first television-news audition ever. "You don't look anything like your tape!
You had on torn blue jeans and tennis shoes and that grungy Brooklyn Dodgers T-shirt . . . and you had that hair!"
It was late last winter, and I was about to try out for an on-camera spot on the Fox network's soon-to-be cable channel, FX, a name derived from Fox itself.
Rupert Murdoch had just committed $100 million to FX.


Sisterhood Is Flavorful
We were coming from different places and ultimately headed in different directions, but for reasons that defy logic, our paths crossed in Tuscany, and so we met there last summer for a long weekend, seven women who cook and write about it for a living.
With one exception, it was easier to converge in these far-flung hills than at home in New York City.
The exception drove from Florence with her husband, stopping along the way at a fabled butcher to buy a gigantic slab of beef, which made her even more exceptional.


Nicole M. Perkins, Timothy Kilcullen
Nicole M. Perkins, a daughter of Gail and Henry Perkins of Yonkers, is to be married today to Timothy J. Kilcullen, a son of Jeanne and Robert Kilcullen of Scranton, Pa.
The Rev.
Eugene Callender, a Presbyterian minister, is to perform the nondenominational ceremony at the Four Seasons Hotel in Philadelphia.


Idyll Dances, Jacob's Pillow
THE FIRST AUDIENCES AT JACOB'S PILLOW WERE LADIES FROM the area who came to take tea with the modern-dance pioneer Ted Shawn and watch his handsome Men Dancers company in summer lecture-demonstrations.
Six decades later, the Jacob's Pillow Dance Festival has broadened to include performances, workshops and training in just about every dance form, attended by dance aficionados and vacationers.
Everywhere there are dancers, young and old, novices and stars, in studios and on stages that sprout up among the trees and flowers of the onetime farm in Becket, in western Massachusetts.
Experimentalist and mainstream companies share classes and watch one another's rehearsals, along with eager students.


As Prelude to Terrorism Case, Prosecution and Defense Team Wrangle
With one month to go before the scheduled start of the trial of the Egyptian cleric Omar Abdel Rahman and 13 other defendants, the pretrial maneuverings have been dominated not by usual questions like the admissibility of evidence, but by a bitter conflict between the prosecution and one team of defense lawyers, the firm of William M. Kunstler and Ronald L. Kuby.
The prosecution team, which is headed by Assistant United States Attorney Andrew C. McCarthy, has been waging an aggressive campaign to have the firm of Kunstler &amp; Kuby disqualified from representing any of the defendants in the case.


Note to Readers
The Op-Ed page welcomes unsolicited manuscripts.
Because of the volume of submissions, however, we regret that we cannot acknowledge an article or return it unless it is accompanied by a self-addressed, stamped envelope.
If manuscripts are accepted for publication, authors will be notified within two weeks.


Wave Theory
Long ago, when the Dodgers played at Ebbets Field and the Giants at the Polo Grounds, I was edging into adolescence studying articles in women's magazines that instructed readers how to select a hair style.
These essays were accompanied by schematic drawings to demonstrate ways hair could be styled to minimize a square jaw, a low brow or any structural defect.
In those days a hairdo wasn't supposed to be a statement.
It was merely expected to help a woman look pretty.
There's been a change.
Nowadays, while a woman's hair may flatter her features, it also tells us who she thinks she is, depending on which of two schools of hairdressing she chooses -- celebrity or society.
Celebrity hair is fancy.
Society hair -- the demure coiffures worn by women who patronize benefits -- is plain.
You can also call society hair serious hair: it ranges from the severity of Justice Ginsburg's to the Queen's decorous waves.
It's a no-look look, concealing the costly labor that creates the appearance of simplicity.


Cubans, Stay Home, Many Floridians Say
For Al and Gladys Ros, President Clinton is making the right move in trying to limit a new exodus of refugees from Cuba.
Mr. and Mrs.
Ros, who fled Cuba in 1961, two years after Fidel Castro came to power, question the motives of those who are taking to boats now.
"We left because of ideals," said Mrs.
Ros, 67, of Plantation Key.
"We didn't want to live in a Communist country. But now they are leaving because they are hungry. If Fidel gives them food, they would stay."


Mimi Burkhardt and David S. Sevin
Elizabeth Amy Burkhardt, a daughter of Andrew B. Burkhardt Jr. of Cranston, R.I., and Lynn L. Burkhardt of Barrington, R.I., is to be married today to David Scott Sevin, a son of Richard M. Sevin of Rye, N.Y., and the late Elizabeth G. Sevin.
The Rev.
Judith A. Davis, an Episcopal minister, is to perform the ceremony at the Eisenhower House at Fort Adams State Park in Newport, R.I.
The bride, 25, is known as Mimi.
She was until recently a research coordinator at the Psychiatric Institute of Washington.
She graduated from William Smith College.
Her father is the city editor of The Providence (R.I.) Journal.
Her mother is a librarian at the Barrington Public Library.


THE PRESIDENT'S PAST
It is naive to believe that politicians, and most particularly Presidents, get elected by telling voters the truth, with a capital T. Jimmy Carter said that he would never lie to us, and we all know what happened to him.
PAUL E. GILLEO Indiana, Pa.


Vote Could Upend Legislature
Besides electing a new President, Mexicans will vote on Sunday to fill nearly 600 seats in the national legislature, casting ballots that could shift the balance of power.
The number of members in the upper house will double from two senators to four for each of the 31 states and the Federal District of Mexico City.
Because one seat in each state will be reserved for a member of a minority party, the opposition will have a much stronger voice in the new Senate.
In the current Senate, only 3 of 64 members belong to the minority.


For Nurses, New Uncertainties; Managed Care Means Specialized Needs and Less Hiring
Only a few years ago, when Ina Cowan left her job as a Wall Street headhunter to pursue a second career as a nurse, New York hospitals were hiring new recruits as fast as they could sign them up because of a severe nursing shortage.
But when Ms.
Cowan, the valedictorian of her class at Phillips-Beth Israel School of Nursing, graduated in June with a 4.0 average, she was shocked to find that hospital openings for entry-level nurses had suddenly become scarce.
She started interviewing in March and found a job only two weeks ago, after an exhaustive six-month search.


A Sad Tale Of Penalties For Failure
THEIR names are John and Roger, and they have a lot in common.
Both spent their entire professional lives at one employer, and both rose to the top early enough to have a long tenure that shaped the character and the prospects of their companies.
Both men were unquestionably dedicated to their jobs, and both made serious mistakes that severely damaged the firms they loved and led.


Whither Now the Willful Weather?
WEATHER has been on everyone's mind this year; there seems to have been such a lot of it.
During the winter, it was snow, piling ever higher as the sand and the salt supplies ran out.
With summer came seemingly endless heat and humidity.
Plants withered, lawns turned brown and people wilted in major ways.
Even the television weather forecasters became bored, forced as they were to predict, day after day, more of the disastrous H's: heat and humidity.


Robert Walton, 67, Computer Specialist
Robert E. Walton, a retired deputy director of the Office of Information Technology at the Justice Department, died on Tuesday at the Potomac Valley Nursing Center in Rockville, Md.
He was 67 and lived in Bethesda, Md.
The cause was cancer, his family said.


Questions In Lineup For Owners
When baseball club owners join the strike-bound labor negotiations this week, they will sit at the table saddled with greater divisions than they would like the players or anyone else to think.
Despite management's constant claim of unity and solidarity, the division became noticeable in the last few days as a result of the Federal mediators' success in inducing the owners to allow five members of their group to attend bargaining sessions.


Sixteen Seconds Left: Final Cheer Goes to Jets
Fickle fans booed and cheered -- or was it cheered and booed? -- the Jets and Giants tonight.
It was a game worthy of their rivalry, and especially coming on the silver anniversary of the teams' first meeting.
But it was the Jets, who again almost wasted that powerful offense, who provided the fitting dramatic final-minutes moments.


Long Island Q&amp;A: James B. Rather; Heartache and Insights of Living With Lou Gehrig's Disease
FOUR years ago James B. Rather, a former Federal prosecutor, noticed that he was having trouble running.
Mr.
Rather, of Port Washington, was given a diagnosis of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, a muscular dystrophy more well known as Lou Gehrig's Disease.
Even after the diagnosis, Mr.
Rather, who in the early 80's worked under United States Attorney Rudolph Giuliani, continued working at his law firm in Melville, carrying a full court schedule.


Ms. Crawford, Mr. Van Duyne
Elizabeth Robb Crawford, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
James L. Crawford of New Vernon, N.J., was married yesterday to Peter Gardner Van Duyne, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Gardner Van Duyne of Mantoloking, N.J.
The Rev.
Richard DenUyl Jr. performed the ceremony at the United Congregational Church in Little Compton, R.I.
Mrs.
Van Duyne, 30, graduated from Hamilton College and received a master's degree in education from Columbia University.
She teaches the third grade at St.
David's School in New York.
Her father is a managing director of J. &amp; W. Seligman &amp; Company, investment managers and advisers, and is the manager of the Tri-Continental Corporation, a closed-end investment company, both in New York.


Cynthia Sims, Raymond Koloski
Cynthia Lynn Sims, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Frank P. Sims of Mount Vernon, Ohio, was married yesterday to Raymond S. Koloski, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Raymond Koloski of Poughkeepsie, N.Y.
The Rev.
Robert Wright officiated at the Gay Street United Methodist Church in Mount Vernon.


Moving to Head of the Class in Montauk
MONTAUK is it this summer.
The midseason opening of the Harvest on Fort Pond confirms what East End food lovers have known since Memorial Day.
Exciting new restaurants have turned this family oriented community, much loved by campers and fishermen, into the place to be.
The Harvest is an airy open beauty with serene views of Fort Pond's reed-dotted shoreline, docks and boats.
Inside, the shining wide-planked wood floors, creamy walls, white woodwork, earth-tone accents and walls of windows are in the understated Tuscan tradition.


A Shower Floods a Co-op Unit
Q In November 1989 I purchased a two-bedroom, one-and-a-half-bath coop for $125,000.
The most important feature was the one and a half baths.
The main bathroom next to the smaller bedroom has a shower and a bath.
The master-bedroom bathroom has only a shower.


BEST SELLERS: August 21, 1994
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
4
THE GIFT, by Danielle Steel. (Delacorte, $15.) A woman's casual visit to a small town changes the lives of many of its inhabitants, as well as her own.
2
3
25
THE CELESTINE PROPHECY, by James Redfield. (Warner, $17.95.) An ancient manuscript, found in Peru, provides insights into achieving a fulfilling life.
3
2
11
THE CHAMBER, by John Grisham. (Doubleday, $24.95.) A lawyer represents a racist who is on death row for his part in a 1967 bombing in Mississippi.
4
5
9
POLITICALLY CORRECT BEDTIME STORIES, by James Finn Garner. (Macmillan, $8.95.) Classic tales respun to avoid offending current sensibilities.
5
4
106
THE BRIDGES OF MADISON COUNTY, by Robert James Waller. (Warner, $16.95.) A photographer and a farmer's lonely wife in Iowa.
6
7
19
THE ALIENIST, by Caleb Carr. (Random House, $22.) A journalist and a psychologist track down a murderer in turn-of-the-century Manhattan.
7*
6
5
EVERYTHING TO GAIN, by Barbara Taylor Bradford. (HarperCollins, $24.) A woman tries to cope after an act of violence destroys her perfect family life.
8
9
3
DISNEY'S THE LION KING, adapted by Don Ferguson. (Mouse Works, $6.98.) The coming of age of animal royalty, told in words and pictures.
9
10
4
UNDUE INFLUENCE, by Steve Martini. (Putnam, $22.95.) A defense attorney finds himself caught in a web of murder and deceit within his own family.
10
8
9
THE CROSSING, by Cormac McCarthy. (Knopf, $23.) A young American comes of age traveling with a she-wolf into Mexico's mythic sierra.
11
1
DIXIE CITY JAM, by James Lee Burke. (Hyperion, $22.95.) The search for a sunken Nazi submarine stirs up trouble for a New Orleans detective.
12
1
UNTIL YOU, by Judith McNaught. (Pocket, $22.) An American woman's role as a chaperone in Georgian England brings her a surprising romance.
13
1
STORMING HEAVEN, by Dale Brown. (Putnam, $22.95.) A band of terrorists besieges America by dropping bombs on critical sites.
14
12
4
PLAYING FOR THE ASHES, by Elizabeth George. (Bantam, $21.95.) A case involving arson, infidelity, cricket and murder in the English countryside.
15
15
8
THE WATERWORKS, by E.L.
Doctorow. (Random House, $23.) Life in the New York City of 1871 as witnessed by a jaded newspaperman.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Nonfiction
1
1
67
EMBRACED BY THE LIGHT, by Betty J. Eadie with Curtis Taylor. (Gold Leaf Press, $16.95.) A woman's near-death experience.
2
2
9
THE AGENDA, by Bob Woodward. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $24.) The inner workings of the White House during the first year of the Clinton Administration.
3
4
24
MIDNIGHT IN THE GARDEN OF GOOD AND EVIL, by John Berendt. (Random House, $23.) The mysterious death of a young man in Savannah, Ga.
4
3
35
THE BOOK OF VIRTUES, by William J. Bennett. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $27.50.) Moral stories adapted from the Greeks, the Bible, folklore and elsewhere.
5
6
4
MOTHERLESS DAUGHTERS, by Hope Edelman. (Addison-Wesley, $23.) The experiences of women after the deaths of their mothers.
6
5
6
MOON SHOT, by Alan Shepard and Deke Slayton with Jay Barbree and Howard Benedict. (Turner, $21.95.) How Americans reached the moon in July 1969.
7
13
2
THE CATCHER WAS A SPY, by Nicholas Dawidoff. (Pantheon, $24.) The life of Moe Berg, big-league catcher, O.S.S. agent, lady's man and freeloader.
8
9
10
LIFE OF THE PARTY, by Christopher Ogden. (Little, Brown, $24.95.) A biography of Pamela Harriman, the United States Ambassador to France.
9
1
FEAR OF FIFTY, by Erica Jong. (HarperCollins, $24.) A "midlife memoir" by the novelist, poet, essayist and feminist.
10
1
OCTOBER 1964, by David Halberstam. (Villard, $24.) The season in which the Cardinals beat the Yankees, reflecting great changes in baseball and society.
11*
7
18
SAVED BY THE LIGHT, by Dannion Brinkley with Paul Perry. (Villard, $16.) An account of two near-death experiences by a South Carolina businessman.
12
14
2
THE TRIBE OF TIGER, by Elizabeth Marshall Thomas. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $20.) The nature and culture of cats.
13
8
32
SOUL MATES, by Thomas Moore. (HarperCollins, $25.) A psychotherapist discusses love and relationships.
14
15
3
GAL: A True Life, by Ruthie Bolton. (Harcourt Brace, $19.95.) A black woman recalls her troubled childhood in Charleston, S.C.
15
1
THE KENNEDY WOMEN, by Laurence Leamer. (Villard, $27.50.) Five generations of an American family.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous
1
1
17
IN THE KITCHEN WITH ROSIE, by Rosie Daley. (Knopf, $14.95.) Recipes by Oprah Winfrey's cook.
2
2
65
MEN ARE FROM MARS, WOMEN ARE FROM VENUS, by John Gray. (HarperCollins, $23.) Ways to improve communication and relationships between the sexes.
3
3
17
MAGIC EYE II, by N.E.
Thing Enterprises. (Andrews &amp; McMeel, $12.95.) A second collection of designs.
4
4
31
MAGIC EYE, by N.E.
Thing Enterprises. (Andrews &amp; McMeel, $12.95.) Designs in color that take on new qualities when scrutinized at length.
Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending Aug. 6, at 3,050 bookstores plus wholesalers serving 28,000 other retailers (gift shops, department stores, newsstands, supermarkets), statistically weighted to represent sales in all such outlets nationwide.
An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
And Bear in Mind (Editor's Choices of other recent books of particular interest) THE BIRD ARTIST, by Howard Norman. (Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, $20.) An adulterous affair and a murder propel this tragic novel of a hamlet in Newfoundland, where everybody knows everybody and the weather is unspeakable.
CAPONE: The Man and the Era, by Laurence Bergreen. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $30.) A massive, thoroughly researched examination of the most celebrated mobster of the Prohibition era, who attained dominance in his field at the age of 28.
DAISY BATES IN THE DESERT, by Julia Blackburn. (Pantheon, $22.) A bold biography whose author risks identifying with the consciousness of her subject, an adventurer, a self-taught anthropologist who studied the Australian aborigines, and a liar who invented her past anew at every turning of her life.
THE EVOLUTION OF RACISM: Human Differences and the Use and Abuse of Science, by Pat Shipman. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $23.) A thoughtful study of evolution's employment to abet or oppose racism; not all the bad guys meant ill, and the good guys sometimes fought dirty.
LOUISIANA POWER &amp; LIGHT, by John Dufresne. (Norton, $22.) Mr.
Dufresne's first novel, replete with funny lines and plot twists that always lead somewhere, concerns an orphan's efforts to escape a family curse.
Lots of luck, orphan!
A PASSAGE TO EGYPT: The Life of Lucie Duff Gordon, by Katherine Frank. (Houghton Mifflin, $27.50.) An engaging life of a clever valetudinarian from Britain's upper crust, whose letters from Egypt in 1865 were instrumental in the creation of Britain's interest in that country.
THE RAPE OF EUROPA: The Fate of Europe's Treasures in the Third Reich and the Second World War, by Lynn H. Nicholas. (Knopf, $27.50.) A hair-raising account of the Nazis' megalomaniac looting of Europe's artistic treasures, the perils undergone by the artworks themselves, and the Allies' strivings to find the stuff, save it and bring it back.
RARE &amp; ENDANGERED SPECIES: A Novella &amp; Stories, by Richard Bausch. (Seymour Lawrence/Houghton Mifflin, $22.95.) Mr.
Bausch's third fiction collection faithfully explores the territory he knows best: long marriages, old grudges, unforgotten injuries.
ROOMMATES: My Grandfather's Story, by Max Apple. (Warner, $19.95.) An enthralling novelistic memoir of the infinitely durable Herman (Rocky) Goodstein, who at 93 accompanied Mr.
Apple to college.
SHEAR, by Tim Parks. (Grove, $21.) An eerie, engrossing suspense novel about responsibility; its hero, a smug geological consultant, tragically complicates his life through sexual adventure.
THESE SAME LONG BONES, by Gwendolyn M. Parker. (Houghton Mifflin, $21.95.) With an unusual combination of lush metaphor and narrative restraint, this first novel spins a tale of race and power as a black businessman struggles to transcend his daughter's death.


Hotels See Benefits From Repeal of Tax
THE hated hotel tax is almost history.
The Sept. 1 repeal of the 5 percent surcharge on New York State hotel rooms is making Westchester hotel people very happy.
"All of us in the industry are delighted," said Marcia Dmochowski, speaking about members of the Westchester County Hotel Association.
"The repeal of the tax will make Westchester much more affordable for meeting planners."


Corrections
A picture of a tennis player on page 14 of the Long Island Weekly today was printed in error.
It shows Jimmy Connors, not MaliVai Washington, a competitor in the Waldbaum's Hamlet Cup tennis tournament in Commack, L.I., who is the subject of the adjacent article.


Anderson Effusive Despite Strike
Not even a strike can get Sparky Anderson down.
He is irrepressible even in these bleak times.
The man who has anointed Hall of Famers before they have played their first major league game saw some baseball games last week, on different levels, and he came away with his superlatives flying.


In Praise of Strike
To the Sports Editor:
Contrary to the opinions of letter writers last week (Mailbox, Aug. 14) bewailing the baseball strike, I applaud it.
I've been a Tiger rooter since 1934, and the strike proves to me that some professional athletes recognize that they have an obligation and responsibility to those who come after them, as well as those who earlier risked (and in some cases, sacrificed) their careers to obtain freedom from bondage.


2,926 Miles In 517 Hours Wins Race
Istvan Sipos of Szeged, Hungary, fantasized about running to infinity.
Nothing but the endless road, the rhythm of his stride, and the quest.
It would be the ultimate run.
An impossible dream, he thought.
But Sipos actually experienced eternity during the MoonBat TransAmerica Footrace.
Yesterday, he finished first at the Columbus Circle entrance to Central Park, 64 days and 2,926 miles after he began.
Sipos's 517-hour, 43-minute odyssey took him through 14 states, several stomach aches, two falls and a minor foot strain.
He survived, he said, because of his spiritual faith and because, midway through the race, he came close to eternity.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-25  NUCLEAR SAFEGUARDS URGED  A report by nuclear experts says that building a bomb requires less nuclear material than previously believed and urges more stringent measures for protection.  1  COMPLEX ISSUES IN SIBERIA  Siberia has always been the Russian frontier, but with the combination of democracy, poverty, a reactionary tradition and resources, it reflects issues of the emerging Russia.  1


'A Rage to Punish'
To the Editor:
In his review of Lois G. Forer's book "A Rage to Punish" (July 17), Yale Kamisar minimizes the consequences of the mandatory minimum sentences dictated by the Federal sentencing guidelines.
He suggests that mandatory minimums can easily be avoided by prosecutors in return for a defendant's substantial tattling on other defendants and that if they care to do so, prosecutors can simply dismiss cases to avoid the impact of the guidelines.


CHRONICLE
ROGER CLINTON'S new gig as husband and father isn't keeping him away from his music.
President Clinton's brother has recorded a song for his friend BILL TILLMAN , who is putting together an album due out by early December, The Dallas Morning News reported.
The album will also feature work by members of Steely Dan.


Where the Sounds of Spanish Grate
On the edge of the Everglades, where new housing tracts thin out into palmetto scrubland and a marshy saw-grass horizon, two cultural forces gathered today at a corner highway truck stop called Dade Corners.
On one side were a few hundred Cuban-Americans waiting in the summer heat under a threatening sky to board shuttle buses for a one-mile trip to the Krome Detention Center, where family members or old friends who had just crossed the Florida Straits in boats were being held by immigration authorities.


Shell Game at Dept. of Aging Hurts the Elderly
To the Editor:
Not only do Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani's appointees in the New York City Department for the Aging have little or no experience with the elderly, but the Mayor has also increased the number of executives paid more than $70,000 a year.


When Ratings Peaked
CNN's ratings generally soar when big news is breaking, and that is especially true when the channel provides live coverage that no other network can match, as in the early days of the 1991 Persian Gulf war.
Following are the events that brought CNN its highest ratings.
In contrast, the channel's average rating for a 24-hour period so far this year is 0.6, or about 378,000 households. (One cable rating point is currently equivalent to 630,000 households; in past years the figure was slightly less.)


No Field of Dreams at Baseball Assembly Plant; Lawful Salary Cap
To the Editor:
Re "The Selfish Sultans of Swat" (editorial, Aug. 14): By definition, a wage scale caps salaries and bars employees from negotiating their individual wages as "free agents." Salary caps and wage scales are indeed the essence of the collectivized wage bargain that the labor laws have both authorized and encouraged for unionized employees since the 1930's.


Suburban Office Space
Helped by an improving economy, the commercial real estate market in New York City's suburbs has begun to emerge from its recession, real estate brokers say.
Asking rents for office space have bottomed out and vacancy rates have started to fall.
With rising prices in Manhattan, companies could once again begin looking to the suburbs for office space, but the tightening of markets in New Jersey and on Long Island means most growth in those areas should continue to come from the expansion of local businesses.
Westchester is still very attractive to large companies because there are more large blocks of space available.
The Equitable Life Assurance Society and MasterCard are two companies looking for space in the county.


Edginess on Capitol Hill
Rarely has the House of Representatives been more ready for a recess.
Capitol Hill has become an edgy, unhappy place in recent weeks, and the reasons run deeper than the grueling fight over the crime bill, the long delay of the August break or the immensity of the health care challenge.
Many lawmakers say it has simply become one of the most partisan sessions they can remember.
Yes, there are moments of bipartisan cooperation, like the hunt of the "mainstream coalition" for a health care compromise in the Senate, or the moderate Republicans' efforts in the House on the deal for a crime bill.


Now Boarding, on Courts 1 Through 52, 3-on-3 Hoops
On Friday, the Grand Central area was typically congested, with thousands of feet pounding the sidewalks and just as many trucks, cars and cabs clogging the streets.
By Saturday, the traffic slowed to a dribble -- myriad dribbles.


The Talk of Hollywood; Big Budget, Big Stars and Now a Big Mess
Within the movie industry, "Crisis in the Hot Zone" was viewed as one of the most formidable films of 1995.
Starring Robert Redford and Jodie Foster, directed by Ridley Scott ("Alien," "Thelma and Louise") and produced by 20th Century Fox, the real-life medical thriller seemed to have all the elements of a highly successful drama.


RESULTS PLUS
GOLF Lowery Wins With a Big Comeback  Steve Lowery used two dramatic eagles on the back nine to vault into a tie and then beat Rick Fehr in a playoff to win the International in Castle Rock, Colo.
Lowery prevailed on the first playoff hole when Fehr drove into a pond on the right side of the fairway.
Lowery made a routine par on the hole to earn the $252,000 top prize and his first victory in seven seasons on the PGA Tour.
Lowery, as many as 10 points off the pace after two bogeys in his first five holes, eagled both of the par-5's on the back nine -- worth 5 points apiece under the scoring system used in this tournament. (AP)


Equity Issues This Week
The following equity and convertible debt offerings are expected this week:
CSI Computer Specialists Inc., Rockville, Md., an initial public offering of 1.1 million units (each representing two shares and two class A warrants).
Stratton Oakmont Inc.


The Talent Was There But Plot Was Missing
One of the first things that struck Ray Sherman when he looked at the Jets' roster before he took the job as offensive coordinator was the amount of talent the offense had at the skilled positions.
But he was puzzled by the same thing that baffled every Jets fan.


Warning to Castro
With no letup in the flood of refugees from Cuba, the Clinton Administration angrily accused the Castro Government of orchestrating the exodus and warned that further steps, including a blockade, would be considered unless meaningful steps were taken toward democracy.
Article, page A10.


Helmet And Rollins Bare Roots
An audience member at a concert in the 1960's by the free jazz saxophonist Albert Ayler described the music as a loud, powerful sound that "didn't let up . . . It was like a giant tidal wave of frightening music." The audience member went on to depict the music using terms that are nowadays applied to heavy metal.
On Saturday night at Roseland, two heavy-metal bands, Helmet and the Rollins Band, acknowledged their kinship with and debts to jazz, in much the same way that rappers have been self-consciously integrating their own jazz roots into their music.
Helmet opened its set with an agitated version of "Beautiful Love," a Victor Young melody that has become a jazz standard, and ended its show by playing recordings of Thelonious Monk.
In between, the Manhattan-based quartet added more subtle jazz influences to its precise heavy-metal grind.
Page Hamilton, who studied jazz guitar at the Manhattan School of Music, played clearly mapped modal solos that approached the energy and strength of John Coltrane, an influence Mr.
Hamilton often cites.
John Stanier, the drummer, drove the music forward like a benevolent coachman, pounding out rhythms that were more expressive than propulsive.


Some Shifting In Delegation Advances Bill
Some House members switched their votes because they got what they wanted; others switched because they overcame their qualms.
Among New York City's delegation, there was consensus that the House should vote on the bill, but there was not unanimity on its merits.
Susan Molinari, a Staten Island Republican, had joined in blocking the bill that emerged from conference earlier this month but voted for the measure last night, declaring, "We sent the bill back and fixed it." In particular, her concerns about stronger provisions to deal with sex crimes were addressed, she said.


A Celebration of Pride on Wheels


A Mayor's Fund Raising Draws Fire
After several successes in recent investigations of prominent elected officials in northern New Jersey -- long fertile ground for political corruption -- prosecutors are said to be training their sights on the fund-raising practices of Mayor Sharpe James of Newark.
Mr.
James, who was elected to a third term as head of the state's largest city in May, has repeatedly denied the accusations of wrongdoing, which stem in part from the relationship between an organization called the Friends of Sharpe James and a now-failed savings and loan association in Bergen County.


METRO DIGEST
AFTER THE PEACE: D'AMATO VS. CUOMO
After years of enjoying a seeming non-aggression pact with Mario M. Cuomo, Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato has helped George E. Pataki become a competitive challenger to New York's third-term Democratic Governor.
Mr.
D'Amato, who had little to do with the 1986 or 1990 gubernatorial campaigns, said in an interview last week that his active participation in this year's race was motivated purely by a desire to improve state government.


Accounts
*
Italian Trade Commission, New York, to McCaffery &amp; Ratner, New York, as the first agency to handle advertising and promotions for the combined Italian foods and wines account.
McCaffery previously handled the wine account's 1992-93 program.
Though billings were not disclosed, the 1992-93 wine billings were more than $7 million. *
Mann Packing Co., Salinas, Calif., to Goldberg Moser O'Neill, San Francisco, as the first agency to handle consumer advertising for the company's produce products.
Billings were estimated at $2 million to $3 million.


Thompson Chosen By La Quinta Inns
La Quinta Inns Inc. in San Antonio has named J. Walter Thompson Chicago to handle its general advertising and direct marketing account, which had been at GSD&amp; M in Austin, Tex., for the last two years.
Billings were estimated at $5 million to $6 million.
David Dayton, La Quinta's director of advertising, said on Friday that Thompson Chicago was awarded the account after a six-week review that was narrowed to two other finalists: Sosa, Bromley, Aguilar &amp; Associates in San Antonio and Tucker Wayne/ Luckie &amp; Company in Atlanta.
Campaigns are expected to begin in late January or early February.


Irvin Horowitz, 69; Editor at The Times Taught Journalism
Irvin M. Horowitz, an editor at The New York Times for more than 30 years, died on Saturday in Cape Cod Hospital in Hyannis, Mass.
He was 69 years old and lived in Montclair, N.J.
The cause of death was a stroke, said his wife, Marjorie Horowitz.


Time for Mr. Balaguer to Let Go
The United States faces a difficult choice in its relations with the Dominican Republic: accept the results of a questionable election, or refuse to recognize 87-year-old Joaquin Balaguer as legitimate President.
Mr.
Balaguer has had his day, and the U.S. should not help him hold on to power.
Mr.
Balaguer's opponent, Jose Francisco Pena Gomez, claims that 200,000 people, mostly his own supporters, were illegally deprived of their votes in the elections last spring.
International observers found these claims credible.
Still, the country's election commission certified Mr.
Balaguer's victory, with a margin of 22,000-odd votes.


Tapping Their Way to a World Record


No Field of Dreams at Baseball Assembly Plant; Service at the Stadium
To the Editor:
On Thursday, Aug. 11, the day before the baseball strike deadline, two friends of mine attended a New York Yankee game at the stadium to enjoy an afternoon of baseball.
They went with two other men from their office as their guests.


Paris Journal; In Hooking Carlos, France Opens a Can of Worms
Having long cultivated the myth of his own invincibility, the legendary terrorist known as Carlos at least had the satisfaction of knowing that his name was once again in the headlines last week after he was arrested in the Sudan and extradited to France.
But in France he was promptly upstaged by his own lawyer, Jacques Verges, who spent the week answering reports based on East German intelligence archives that he had been an "operational member" of Carlos's group and had even carried out terrorist actions in France.


Turnout Is High in Mexican Presidential Election


In Rwanda, United Nations Should Forgo War Crimes Tribunal; Late on Relief
To the Editor:
I write to clarify United Nations procedures for providing humanitarian aid that may have been misinterpreted.
In Rwanda, as elsewhere, purchasing procedures don't slow the response; it is the need to beg.
United Nations relief operations are financed by voluntary contributions.
Donors decide how much to give, when and on what terms.


Rapists and Condoms; Is Use a Cavalier Act or a Way to Avoid Disease and Arrest?
The three men made no effort to disguise their faces, showed little concern that the woman's cries for help might be heard by passers-by, and raped her only 200 yards from a police station, near Prospect Park in Brooklyn last May.
But the rapists' nerve had limits.
One by one, the victim told police, each man paused, reached into a pocket, tore open a small plastic wrapper and put on a condom.
Even at their most brazen, investigators said, the attackers could not shed the fear of contracting AIDS.
In what might be an unforeseen consequence of sex education, rapists are increasingly wearing condoms.
Five years ago investigators would have been surprised by a victim's statement that her assailant used a condom.
Today detectives, prosecutors and counselors say that it is no longer unusual.


New Calendar Brings New Fiscal Accountability to Nassau Politics
Nassau County voters will have a stronger say in how much they are taxed and how their tax dollars are spent as the result of a little-noticed change in the county's fiscal calendar.
Under the old calendar, in which the fiscal year ran from January through December, lawmakers were able to propose and adopt new budgets, and raise taxes, well after Election Day.


Correction
Charts on Aug. 8 with the continuation of a front-page article about problems in the mutual fund industry understated by a factor of 10 the average daily trading volume for three stocks.
For MTC Electronic Technologies, the average for the period shown in the chart was 377,866 shares, not 37,787; for Rare Earth Resources, it was 12,994 shares, not 1,299, and for Work Recovery Inc., it was 221,733 shares, not 22,173.


Acting and Interacting In 'The Mobius Strip'
The program presented on Saturday afternoon by Mobius, a Boston-based performance-art group, was pretty tame fare by New York standards and at times was portentous.
Part of a Lincoln Center Out of Doors salute to Boston, the suite of excerpts and one full dance did not stand up well to individual scrutiny.
But the event, called "The Mobius Strip," did create a kind of endless loop of charming interactions among the performers and the audience members who wandered about after them.
"The Mobius Strip" opened with Nancy Adams's "Orange You Glad," in which three women in orange plastic skirts and crowns walked about the South Plaza handing out fruit and business cards and repeating a "knock, knock" joke without a punch line and a man with a shopping cart ran into people.
In "American Dreamscape," Joseph Wilson spilled coins onto the ground, leaving them to be collected by eager children.
Taylor McLean methodically assembled and performed on a long steel pipe in an excerpt from "The Pornography of Time."


As Autumn Nears, Publishers Brace for a Glut of Big-Name Titles
August is a slow and languorous month for publishing.
Employees go on vacation, new books are released in a trickle and most companies in New York close at lunchtime every Friday so the editors can head for the Hamptons.
But this is the calm before the storm, because publishers are actually resting up for the big fall season.
Autumn for publishing is like summer is for Hollywood: it is the time when many of the year's splashiest titles are released, bookstores are full of customers and everyone in the industry hopes to find a hit that will carry through until Christmas.


Graham Speaks Out About a 'Cheap Shot'
Giants quarterback Kent Graham and Jets linebacker Marvin Jones won't be having dinner together anytime soon.
Graham called the hit by Jones that may have put Graham out of action for at least a week a cheap shot.
And Giants Coach Dan Reeves thought Jones "should have pulled up" after Graham threw the pass.
It was a questionable play, one that Reeves said could have "very easily" been called a penalty.
Reeves's comments were tempered compared with those of Graham, who was highly upset about the hit.


N.B.A. Players: A Mission to South Africa
Denver Nuggets center DIKEMBE MUTOMBO believes sports can promote fellowship among South Africa's tribes and ethnic groups.
This week, he and the Knicks' PATRICK EWING will be in the post-apartheid nation to conduct basketball clinics in Johannesburg and Cape Town.
Also on hand will be ALONZO MOURNING of Charlotte, JOHN CROTTY of Utah, Atlanta Coach LENNY WILKENS and the former Washington coach, WES UNSELD.


Not Three, Not Two, but One Lion King
It was as if the Detroit Lions had three teams in one last season.
Over in that corner were Rodney Peete's Lions.
Over here were Erik Kramer's Lions.
Over there were Andre Ware's Lions.
Three quarterbacks. Three teams.


Mostly Mozart Exits in a Mostly Graceful Manner
Gerard Schwarz brought the 28th Mostly Mozart season to a close on Saturday evening at Avery Fisher Hall with a program that began with a modest gesture, ended with a grand one and offered a few moments of vocal fireworks in between.
The grand gesture was the Beethoven Ninth Symphony, surely the most sweeping work an orchestra specializing in Classical and early Romantic repertory is likely to get its hands on.
Between the mysterious rumblings of the opening and the ecstatic final pages, Beethoven touches on the full range of expressivity available to him, from pessimism to utopian hopefulness, from a kind of coarse, bombastic physicality to the most sublime spiritual subtleties.
In a great or even good performance, it seems to have a world within it.


Coliseum Site Deserves A World-Class Facility
To the Editor:
Discussions of the future of the New York Coliseum site at Columbus Circle have ignored the central question: What should the city try to accomplish at this magnificent location, and how?
What can New York do today at Columbus Circle, with its excellent transportation access, unparalleled view of Central Park and proximity to Lincoln Center, that will make sense 10 years from now?


N.A.A.C.P. LEADER, OUSTED BY BOARD, HINTS HE WILL SUE
As the N.A.A.C.P. sought to put its financial and administrative house in order after the abrupt dismissal on Saturday night of its executive director, the Rev.
Benjamin F. Chavis Jr., the ousted leader today called his dismissal a "crucifixion" and hinted he might sue the civil rights organization.
Appearing at a Baltimore church today with Louis Farrakhan, the minister of the National of Islam, and several other leaders of militant black groups, Mr.
Chavis sounded alternately conciliatory and angry over the decision of the board to end his contract after a stormy 16-month tenure.
Using religious metaphors, Mr.
Chavis suggested that he intends to remain active in the civil rights struggle.


Communities' Input Sought On Housing for Mentally Ill
Responding to mounting protests by neighborhood groups in New York City over the placement of social-service programs, the New York State Office of Mental Health has decided to allow greater community say in the development of large residences for the mentally ill.
The new policy requires for the first time that city and state lawmakers be notified within five days when a nonprofit agency signs a contract for a site in their districts, and requires a 75-day period for public comment.
State officials and representatives from the nonprofit agency must also attend any public meetings to discuss a project, and the Office of Mental Health must explain why it chose to accept or reject the site.


Bridge
It will be recalled that Mark Twain cabled The Associated Press from Europe to say that a report of his death was an exaggeration.
Similarly exaggerated are reports that bridge is dying.
On the contrary, most duplicate games in the New York area report increased attendances, often more than 20 percent, in the last three years.
Bridge classes are overflowing, and some are forced to turn away prospective students.
There is also a small injection of experts from abroad, mainly Europe.
Their bidding methods, like some wine, tend not to travel well, but they have well-developed skill in card play.
The diagramed deal, for example, was played in a Swiss Team event at the Spring Nationals in Cincinnati in March.
North and South were Andrew Baranov of Washington and Vladimir Fleyshgakker of Manhattan.
They struggled up to four spades, a contract in which there were three top losers and problems in both red suits.


Haiti Rulers Hold Relief Fuel, Endangering Lives
The mothers and fathers of half-starved children stand over their beds in the tuberculosis ward at Grace Children's Hospital and mumble prayers for mercy, miracles and diesel fuel.
The patients are kept alive by medicine that must be chilled in refrigerators, which are powered mostly by generators in a country where electrical power winks in and out like fireflies.
Now the level of care at this charity hospital, like much of the medical care and feeding of Haiti's poor, is being threatened by the Government's refusal to release fuel donated by the United States and other nations hoping to insure that relief efforts continue.


Man Is Slain at a Party in a Church Basement
One man was killed and another seriously wounded early yesterday morning during a large party in the basement of a Roman Catholic church on the West Side of Manhattan, the police said.
The police have tentatively identified the dead man as Alberto Aldos, 27.
He was shot in the chest during festivities in the auditorium of St.
Paul the Apostle Church at Ninth Avenue and 60th Street, possibly in a dispute that broke out over a disk jockey contest, said Detective Mary Ann Mullin, a police department spokeswoman.
He died later at St.
Luke's-Roosevelt Hospital Center.


A Guitar Legend Records on a Legendary Recording Device


Putting Umbrellas to Work in Sunny Weather


End of Russia's Economic Slide Brings Eerie Calm
A year ago, President Boris N. Yeltsin announced that he was preparing a "September barrage" against his sworn opposition in the Russian congress.
By October, the metaphor had turned real, with tanks shelling the Parliament building.
This August, there is an eerie stability.
Monthly inflation is down to 6 percent compared with 26 percent a year ago.
Salaries are worth more with the ruble stronger, and consumer spending is up.
There is consensus on economic policy under Prime Minister Viktor S. Chernomyrdin, who has adopted the tight-money policies he criticized in January.
Mr.
Yeltsin appears more energetic, the new Parliament is behaving itself and a divided opposition is apparently looking more toward 1996 elections than to counterrevolution in the streets.


In Rwanda, United Nations Should Forgo War Crimes Tribunal; Burundi Came First
To the Editor:
Rwandan politics cannot be understood without reference to Burundi, especially now.
The Oct. 22, 1993, coup in Burundi, started by elements of the Tutsi-dominated military, and its aftermath were probably the main causes of the actions of the hard-line Hutus in Rwanda.
After the coup, probably 100,000 to 200,000 people were killed in Burundi, mostly Hutus.


No Field of Dreams at Baseball Assembly Plant; Hooray for the Strike!
To the Editor:
I never thought that I'd be saying this, but: Hooray for the baseball strike!


Too Much Yang, Not Enough Yin
The Chinese philosophical tradition of Taoism is founded on the idea of balance -- in nature and in human relations.
Its two core principles are yang and yin, symbolizing the dualities of light and dark, sky and earth, male and female.
Taoist texts teach that both nature and society seek balance, and that interfering with this natural arrangement can bring unhappy consequences.
Chinese society is rediscovering this today.
As The Times's Philip Shenon reported last week, the balance between male and female has been skewed.
Under Government pressure to limit families to one child each, driven by tradition that favors boys, helped by ultrasound and readily available abortions, Chinese families have been messing with Mother Nature in an effort to make sure their one child is a boy.
The result: a stark shortage of women of marriageable age, and a lot of lonely young men.


Communing With Nature on an Airport Runway in Brooklyn
When plans were made to take Asia Mason and Paul Linen and Clarence Leggett and their friends camping, the intention was to go to some relatively uncompromised place where they would be quite apart from city claustrophobia.
The children lived in Manhattan or the Bronx.
They rarely got away.
They yearned for sun-glittered wilderness.
They went to Brooklyn.


Euro RSCG Gets A Microsoft Account
The Microsoft Corporation has selected Euro RSCG in London to handle its account in Britain, which had been at the London office of Ogilvy &amp; Mather Worldwide until that agency was awarded the worldwide I.B.M. account in May.
Billings were estimated at $12 million.


Economic Calendar
Listed below are the scheduled release dates for major economic indicators this week.
Monday  None  Tuesday  None  Wednesday  Durable-Goods Orders . . .
July  Thursday  Weekly Jobless Claims  Friday  G.D.P. . . .
Revised 2d Qtr.


Tower Air Picks Krimstein/Clapps
Tower Air has named Krimstein/ Clapps in New York to handle its account, which had been at Biederman, Kelly &amp; Shaffer in New York for the last decade.
Billings were estimated at $2 million.


In Little Places, Democracy's Big Test
Just after the sun rose today behind the pyramids here, Juan Beltran and Hector Munoz Villal appeared out of the mist carrying a sturdy wooden table covered with an embroidered cloth.
The table would form the heart of polling place No.  4115, District 21, State of Mexico, for the most important elections in modern Mexican history.
"Everything is ready but we'll wait for the party representatives to come before we put out anything else," said Mr.
Beltran, a 27-year-old peasant farmer who seemed a bit bewildered to have been selected president of the polling place.
"It's important to do that."


Yet Another in a Series of Crucial Weeks for Health Care
This is another crucial week for national health insurance legislation, not the first, and unless matters completely collapse, not the last.
At first it may not seem that way.
The House will continue waiting -- for the Senate and for the Congressional Budget Office.
And the Senate will even put aside its dilatory debate on health insurance to take up the crime bill after today's vote to pass it in the House.


N.A.A.C.P. Will Remain Strong, Supporters Say
In spite of the controversy that the Rev.
Benjamin F. Chavis Jr. brought to the N.A.A.C.P. in the last few months, African-Americans around the country said the organization would continue its role as the pre-eminent voice of the civil rights movement.
"I think it's been a setback," said Hugh P. Price, president of the National Urban League, "but it's an 85-year-old organization with extraordinary resiliency."


As Ratings Languish, CNN Faces Identity Crisis
CNN, the cable channel that altered the nature of television news, is finding it tough to compete by the very rules it helped establish.
So successful has the Cable News Network been in changing the television news culture that the broadcast networks, which used to hold back footage of international events for their own evening newscasts, now offer these images to their affiliates throughout the day.
Rival cable channels, trying to emulate CNN's accomplishments, now offer round-the-clock coverage of local news, entertainment news and courtroom news.


Girl, 9, Is Shot In Car During Road Dispute
Nine years old, she was sitting snugly in the back seat of her uncle's car Saturday night, going to the airport to get her grandfather, when a bullet fired by a hostile motorist pierced the car door and penetrated her lower left abdomen.
The girl, identified by her family as Lillibeth Cruz, of Brooklyn, was in stable condition yesterday at Mary Immaculate Hospital in Queens.
Perhaps because the steel of the car door blunted the impact, the bullet did no major damage and she is expected to make a full recovery.


Baseball's Bottom Line -- A special report.; Colleagues or Competitors? 28 Owners in the Spotlight
The following article is based on reporting by Richard Sandomir, Barry Meier and Matthew Purdy and was written by Mr.
Purdy with Mr.
Sandomir.
The Yankees' $40 million-a-year cable television contract -- the biggest in baseball and the envy of other club owners -- is the financial equivalent of a changeup pitch.
When it was signed in 1988, it looked like a potential bonanza to other owners who were due to share in the contract.
Until it faded away.


Albert Blaustein, Who Drafted Nations' Constitutions, Dies at 72
Albert P. Blaustein, a law professor who dedicated nearly three decades of his life to drafting constitutions for nations in transition, died yesterday at Duke University Hospital in Durham, N.C., after suffering a heart attack.
He was 72.
A fervent believer that a constitution could help a nation define its legal, political and moral identity, Mr.
Blaustein wrote the constitutions now in use in Liberia and Fiji, contributed large parts of the constitutions of Zimbabwe, Bangladesh and Peru, and had a hand in the drafting of about 40 others, including those of Nicaragua, Romania and post-Soviet Russia.


Used American Jeans Power A Thriving Industry Abroad
When the giant flea market outside the Rose Bowl opens at dawn, bargain hunters from Thailand and Japan are the first on the field.
Pockets bulging with wads of $100 bills and carting big empty suitcases strapped to luggage dollies, they load up on American artifacts like weathered leather jackets and rock-and-roll memorabilia.
But the real quarry is used jeans -- especially Levis -- which can fetch as much as several thousand dollars back home.


In Rwanda, United Nations Should Forgo War Crimes Tribunal
To the Editor:
The United Nations must stop stoking the fires of hatred in Rwanda by thinking about setting up an international tribunal to try Hutus who committed genocide in Rwanda.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Television; As ad spending by movie studios grows, NBC is cashing in with its Thursday night showcase.
MORE than a decade ago, NBC officially, if somewhat self-servingly, declared Thursday night "the best night of television on television."
For that network, Thursday has unquestionably been the richest night.
In a lucky coincidence for NBC, about the same time it started building Thursday into a powerhouse program night, first with "Hill Street Blues," then with "Cheers," "The Cosby Show," "L.A. Law" and last year with "Seinfeld," some advertisers designated Thursday their favorite night to throw around money.


No Field of Dreams at Baseball Assembly Plant
To the Editor:
The strike by major league baseball players on so-stated "philosophic" grounds, to protect the interests of future colleagues, exemplifies the enormous disparity in compensation for services and freedom of action in today's world.
While a Bobby Bonilla makes $10,000 for every at bat, the women who assemble the baseballs he either hits or misses earn about two cents per ball.


Hit-Run Crash Kills Officer
An off-duty New York City police officer was killed early yesterday when he was struck by a speeding hit-and-run driver while checking his disabled motorcycle on a roadside in Queens, the police said.
Another off-duty police officer who had stopped to help him was slightly injured when his car was also struck.


Treasury Plans to Auction Bills and Notes This Week
The Treasury's schedule of financing this week is confined to bills and notes beginning with today's regular weekly auction of new three- and six-month issues.
Tomorrow, the Treasury will sell $11 billion of new two-year notes, and on Wednesday $17.25 billion of new five-year notes will be sold.


Big Play by a Keen-Sighted Lineman
The Colts got to watch the Colts, and it was all because of a Steeler.
Pittsburgh defensive end RAY SEALS begged and borrowed 34 tickets from his teammates last week so a midget league team from his hometown of Syracuse could watch the exhibition game Saturday night between the Indianapolis Colts and the Steelers in Pittsburgh.


The Chancellor's Response
How much more should New York City's school system be decentralized?
Schools Chancellor Ramon Cortines now weighs in with a balanced approach.
He would gradually give local school districts more administrative responsibilities, but he would keep some functions under central control to maximize efficiency and accountability.
The decentralization issue, batted about for 25 years, was stirred up recently by Edward Costikyan, an adviser to Mayor Rudolph Giuliani.
He suggested that the central Board of Education be dismantled and replaced by five borough boards.
He also recommended a commissioner of education who would be appointed by the mayor.


Verdict on a Counsel: Conservative but Not Rigid
For the past dozen years, Kenneth W. Starr has traveled in the midst of a conservative movement that has helped reshape constitutional law.
Like his peers, he tends to read the Constitution in a restricted, rather than expansive, spirit, demanding what he calls "self-restraint."
He finds in the Constitution no right to an abortion, little support for affirmative action and fewer protections for minorities, poor people and criminal defendants than his liberal or moderate colleagues.


Tokyo Stocks Fall
Stocks were lower here today.
At the close of trading, the Nikkei index of 225 issues was down 118.12 points, or 0.58 percent, at 20,394.58.
On Friday, the Nikkei dropped 350.07 points.


Texas Challenger Uses Thick Skin and a Smile
George W. Bush did not like it when Ann W. Richards joked to the nation six years ago that his father was "born with a silver foot in his mouth." And he certainly did not like it when Ms.
Richards, on the campaign trail the other evening, described him as "some jerk" who was running against her for governor.
But don't look for the 48-year-old Mr.
Bush, the Republican nominee, to respond in kind to the tart-tongued Ms.
Richards.
As he travels around the state, Mr.
Bush freely concedes that the incumbent Governor is "an interesting, entertaining person," if, well, a tad abrasive sometimes.


Mexicans Cast Votes in Large Numbers
Carrying their hopes for the country's future to thousands of rickety plastic booths set up in schoolrooms and town plazas, Mexicans voted today in elections that could either set them firmly on a more democratic course or imperil the already frayed order of their society.
From early, unofficial returns, Ernesto Zedillo Ponce de Leon, the candidate of the governing Institutional Revolutionary Party, known as the PRI, appeared to have a sizeable lead over the two other main candidates in the race, Diego Fernandez de Cevallos of the conservative National Action Party and Cuauhtemoc Cardenas of the leftist Democratic Revolutionary Party.


A History of Bayreuth And of the Egos Behind It
Bayreuth  A History of the Wagner Festival  By Frederic Spotts  Illustrated. 334 pages.
Yale University Press. $35.
"You seem to sit with the dead in the gloom of a tomb," was Mark Twain's reaction.
But Bruckner, Grieg, Tchaikovsky, Saint-Saens and Liszt all made pilgrimages.
European royalty paid homage.
Artists gave up large fees; conductors worked without being identified, all in service to an extraordinary, megalomaniacal enterprise: an opera house designed and built by Richard Wagner specifically for performances of his epic work, "The Ring of the Nibelung."


Hill, Holliday Drop Starter Account
Hill, Holliday, Connors, Cosmopulos in Boston has resigned the account of the Starter Corporation after only two months because of what the agency described as irreconcilable differences.
Billings were estimated at $7 million.
"We couldn't agree on anything," Steve Friedman, executive vice president and managing director at Hill, Holliday, said on Friday.
"We knew right from the beginning it was a bad marriage, and before we had children we decided to end it."


The Current Is Against This U.S. Team
Until the 1970's, American swimmers ruled the waves, usually winning most of the gold medals in the Olympics.
Even in recent years, they have won more than most nations -- 11 of the 31 gold medals in the 1992 Olympics in Barcelona, 13 of 32 in the 1991 world championships in Perth.
But the rest of the world is closing in.
In the world championships two weeks from now in Rome, no other country may win more medals than the United States, but many will chip away.
There should be good shares for Russian men and for Chinese and German women.
There should be medals for Hungary, Australia, Finland, New Zealand, Canada, Britain, Spain and Italy.


Is That Deion Sanders Poking Around Giants?
Prime Time in New York?
It may seem farfetched that the free agent cornerback Deion (Prime Time) Sanders would become a member of the Giants and their thin secondary.
But Sanders would apparently like the Giants to think long and hard about that prospect.
Sanders has told some National Football League players and team officials that he would like to at least talk with the Giants about joining the team.


Fund Set Up To Help City With Projects
In an unusual effort to enlist big business in the economic development of New York City, a prominent group of executives is trying to raise $100 million in private funds to invest in such diverse projects as a new Central Park restaurant, expansion of the Jacob K. Javits Convention Center and keeping the Yankees in the Bronx.
The New York City Partnership, whose members include the top executives of more than 150 of the city's largest companies, said those companies and many wealthy individuals would be asked to donate $1 million each to the fund, which would be operated with no intent to turn a profit.


Becker Serves Up A Strong Open Case
Boris Becker, historically a great intimidator by name alone, served notice this afternoon that he has put the Boom Boom back into his game as well by thumping Switzerland's Marc Rosset, 6-3, 7-5, in the sun-washed finale of the Volvo International.
Becker, who appears to have reversed the two-year tour through tennis limbo that took him out of the top 10 after nearly a decade's stay, marauded his way through the Volvo's draw without dropping a set and improved his ranking to No. 7 in the world.


Raising Artistic Sights of Riders in Nether and Upper Regions
At the 116th Street subway station, near Columbia University, riders have a choice.
They can plop down on the standard-issue seats, or they can sit in "Railrider's Throne," a steel artwork designed by Michelle Greene, and wait for the train in regal post-modern splendor.
Arts for Transit, a program of the Metropolitan Transportation Authority, placed "Railrider's Throne" in the station three years ago.
Like the revolving cube in Astor Place, the heroically proportioned chair, which incorporates the station's diamond tile motifs, has won a following.
Riders approach, circle and appraise it.
Some sit.
Others watch.
The thing is popular.


Owners At Table, Manners Uncertain
When Federal mediators succeeded last week in setting the stage for resumption of talks in the baseball strike, with owners at the bargaining table, one baseball person remarked that there might be light at the end of the tunnel.
The tunnel, though, may be miles longer than he thinks.
The return to the bargaining table for the first time since the first day of the strike, Aug. 12, could lead to positive developments, but neither side is predicting that, and at least one owner yesterday foresaw the potential for relations to deteriorate from their already low level.


Patents A Belgian Company Develops a Test to Detect the Presence of a New a New Strain of the AIDS Virus
IN July, the French and United States Governments reached a truce in a decadelong tussle over dividing royalties on patents for the blood test that detects infection with the AIDS virus.
The test is crucial for screening the blood supply as well as identifying those infected with H.I.V., the virus that causes AIDS.
Until very recently, scientists thought that tests based on those pioneering patents, which cover the two strains of the virus known as H.I.V.-1 and H.I.V.-2, could reliably identify the presence of the virus in all cases.
Evidence is mounting, however, that a new type of the virus is so different from the first two strains that it can elude current modes of detection.


Golf Course Turns Into a Turf War at Liberty State Park
Liberty State Park attracts tens of thousands of visitors a year, but it remains a raw gem on the New Jersey waterfront, unfinished and tarnished by a long and crippling crossfire about whether an 18-hole golf course should be included in its final design.
Although the park is 18 years old now, only 158 of its 578 acres of land, in sight of the Statue of Liberty, are open to the public.
Another 579 acres in the park are wetlands and tidal marshes.


CHRONICLE
With less than two weeks to go before Nebraska's first execution in 35 years, MIKE FARRELL , the actor, joined death-penalty foes on Saturday in a march from the University of Nebraska to the State Capitol.
"The tide of human history is toward growth," Mr.
Farrell, the former co-star of the television series "M*A*S*H," told more than 200 people, The Associated Press reported.
"The answer to people in need is not more violence. You are the vanguard of history."


President Considers a Cuban Blockade
As the flood of refugees out of Cuba continued unabated, the Clinton Administration warned President Fidel Castro today that the Administration would consider further steps, including a blockade of the island, if he did not take meaningful steps toward democracy.
Angrily accusing Mr.
Castro of orchestrating the exodus, the White House chief of staff, Leon E. Panetta, said on the ABC News program "This Week," "We want to see Castro move toward a democratic government, and that clearly is not happening. As a consequence, we're putting pressures on the Castro Government."


Zaire Reopens One Crossing From Rwanda
Zaire reopened one of its two border crossings to southwest Rwanda today after a daylong standoff between thousands of desperate Rwandans and Zairian soldiers that started within a half-hour of the departure of the last French troops.
The refugees were twice driven back after they threatened to surge over the narrow bridge that had been the pathway to asylum for thousands before it was closed on Saturday.


Bacon Hunt Yields Tidbits From Texas
There has been much criticism that the crime bill was larded with "pork." But for days, the only pork that critics could identify was a $10 million criminal justice center at the alma mater of Representative Jack Brooks in Beaumont, Tex.
Then, at 2 A.M. Sunday, a previously undetected piece slid out of the 1,100-page bill.


Radio Marti Pleads With Cubans to Stay Home
Radio Marti, the United States Government's $14 million-a-year direct link to the Cuban people, broadcast a plea over and over again today asking listeners not to try to flee their island by sea.
At 3 P.M., the station broadcast a 10-minute news segment that began with a 2-minute excerpt of President Clinton's most recent speech detailing his Administration's policy changes toward Cuban refugees.
The President's words, which were heard in English, were simultaneously translated by an interpreter into Madrid-accented Spanish.


South Asian Gay and Lesbian Group Marches for India


Germany Upholds Tax on Fast-Food Containers
In a potentially significant blow to the fast-food industry, a German court has given cities and towns the right to impose taxes on disposable containers including cans, paper plates and plastic cups and silverware.
The Federal Administrative Court, which is based here, upheld an ordinance in the western town of Kassel that requires snack bars and fast-food restaurants to pay a tax equivalent to 30 cents for each paper plate they use, 25 cents for each can or nonreturnable bottle, and 6 cents for each plastic spoon, fork or knife.


The U.S. and Cuba: A Tense History
1952: Former President Fulgencio Batista seizes control and establishes dictatorship.  1959: The Batista regime collapses as Fidel Castro's forces occupy Havanna.


For Travel Agents, a Tough Life
Bobbie Sylvester had been a home economics teacher in Salt Lake City until she decided to become a travel agent 20 years ago.
"My best day as a home economics teacher wasn't as good as my worst day as a travel agent," she used to boast.
But now, with people and businesses pinching their travel pennies and with a big decline in the percentage of agency revenue from airline commissions -- the agents' traditional bread and butter -- hundreds, perhaps thousands, of the nation's 32,500 travel agencies are struggling to survive.


BUSINESS DIGEST
International
As another generation of teen-agers the world over embraces American culture, secondhand jeans have become status symbols.
A cottage industry, a thriving underground economy, has sprouted west of the Mississippi to buy, wash and repair used Levis for resale in countries from Finland to Australia.  [ Page A1. ]


Mighty Ducks Set Meeting With Kariya
The Anaheim Mighty Ducks today will take another stab at signing the National Hockey League's No. 1 prospect, PAUL KARIYA, the top United States college player last season.
"We are interested in sitting down and talking to him," said the Ducks' general manager, JACK FERREIRA, who will meet with Kariya and his agent in Vancouver.


D'Amato's Push for Pataki Ends a Long Cuomo Truce
J.
Morton Davis, a wealthy investment banker, had put both his money and his mouth firmly behind Richard M. Rosenbaum's gubernatorial campaign until his phone rang a few weeks ago.
It was Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato, calling to plead for George E. Pataki, the Republican candidate he has led -- sometimes literally by the hand -- through the 1994 campaign.
A few days later, Mr.
Davis, who had already contributed $6,000 to Mr.
Rosenbaum, sent Mr.
Pataki a check for $25,000.


People
*
Russ Slaughter was named executive vice president and creative director at Tinsley Advertising, Miami, assuming responsibilities held by the late Peter Barnes.
Mr.
Slaughter was previously a vice president and creative director at D'Arcy Masius Benton &amp; Bowles, Chicago. *
Ken Mandelbaum, chief executive at Mandelbaum Mooney Ashley, San Francisco, was named to the additional position of creative director, succeeding Cathi Mooney, who will focus on her duties as art director.
As part of a revamping of the creative department, Tom Rosenfield and Rob Schwartz were named to the new positions of vice presidents and associate creative directors.
They were previously vice presidents of creative at Team One Advertising, El Segundo, Calif.


Scientist Studying Diseases Is Infected by Deadly Virus
A scientist studying tropical diseases at the Yale University School of Medicine felt last week as if he had come down with malaria again.
But a Yale doctor quickly focused on a different cause of the man's fever: because of an accident in his laboratory in downtown New Haven nearly two weeks before, he had become only the third person known to be infected with a new, deadly virus from Brazil.
Yale doctors and state and Federal health officials gave this account today -- at a hastily called news conference -- not to warn the public, but to try to reassure it.


Essay; Clinton's Veto Power
Like George Bush's fateful "read my lips" promising no new taxes, Bill Clinton's memorable gesture of taking his pen out of his pocket and waving it before the Congress -- threatening to veto health legislation that fell short of his goals -- must have seemed like a great idea at the time.
Abandonment of the tax pledge led television news editors and political spotmakers to replay the Bush clip time and again, driving home the point of his terminal fuzziness.


The Nuclear Black Market
Recent reports that German police have intercepted small amounts of nuclear material on Europe's black market are a chilling reminder that the end of the cold war brings no guarantee of nuclear safety.
Indeed, the disintegration of the former Soviet Union with its huge stockpiles of weapons and nuclear materials may actually make the world more dangerous than it was when such materials were under police-state control.
Surely there is no more urgent task before the world's governments than eradicating this embryonic trade.
Yet Russia resists, and the Clinton Administration has been slow to press the issue.


Last Stronghold of Muslim Rebel Is Taken by the Bosnian Army
The mostly Muslim Bosnian Army today overran the last stronghold of a rebel Muslim force in northwestern Bosnia.
Contingents of the army's Fifth Corps were ferreting out the last pockets of rebel resistance in the town of Velika Kladusa this afternoon, said Maj.
Dacre Holloway, a spokesman for the United Nations military force here.


No Headline
"Since I have been able to reason, I have never seen a clean election. Now they say this one will be clean. But even the dogs have 'Zedillo' written all over them. They don't let the other parties compete. Is that democracy?" -- RUBEN HERRERA, a retired factory worker.  [ A6:5. ]


Dell to Offer New Pentium Computer Line
The Dell Computer Corporation, pushing to become a leading supplier of computers using the Intel Pentium microprocessor, today will introduce a new line of Pentium computers intended for business use.
Called the Optiplex X590, they are equipped with the Intel Corporation's high-performance Pentium processor, which runs at 90 megahertz.
The starting price is $2,749 for a computer with a 210-megabyte hard drive, slightly under the $3,000 level that many makers are trying to break to increase sales of Pentium-based computers for offices.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-7  RUSSIAN STABILITY GROWS
With inflation down and political opponents focusing on elections, Russia is settling into a period of stability, though the country has been in turmoil for so long that the calm makes Russians deeply apprehensive.
A1


HOUSE APPROVES CRIME BILL AFTER DAYS OF BARGAINING, GIVING VICTORY TO CLINTON
With the vital support of Republicans, House Democrats today achieved what they could not do on their own, passing a $30.2 billion anti-crime package and sending it to the Senate.
The vote gave President Clinton the most tortuous legislative victory of his Administration.
The vote on final passage of the bill was 235 to 195, with 46 Republicans joining 188 Democrats and 1 independent to vote "yes." Still, 64 Democrats voted against their party, and 131 Republicans voted "no."


Ottawa Journal; The Clock Turns Back To Lincoln Vs. Douglas
A cannon thundered in this prairie town today, as it did 136 years ago, signaling the start of the campaign debate between Stephen A. Douglas and Abraham Lincoln that riveted the nation.
But today the debaters are impostors.
A portly "hometown boy," a high school teacher, steps into the role of Senator Douglas, while an Alabama actor, a former maintenance supervisor at a bank, wraps himself in Lincoln mythology to play the tall challenger for Douglas's Senate seat.


Nancy Lancaster, 96, a Leader In Interior and Garden Design
Nancy Lancaster, an American-born socialite who had been an international influence on interior and garden design since the 1920's, died on Friday at her home near Little Haseley, Oxfordshire, England.
She was 96.
She died in her sleep after a brief illness, said her daughter-in-law, Lady Anne Tree.


New Tax Hits Stocks In Israel
The Israeli stock market plummeted nearly 10 percent today, as jittery investors were given the first chance to react to a Government decision last week to impose a capital gains tax on stock profits.
The benchmark Mishtanim index fell 18.22 points, or 9.93 percent, to 165.18, and analysts expect further declines Monday morning.


CHRONICLE
ALAN ZWEIBEL and Gilda Radner met in 1975 when they were both starting out on "Saturday Night Live," he as a writer, she as a comedian.
They became fast friends through their five years on the show, through their single days and marriages, through separations and illness, until Ms.
Radner died of ovarian cancer in 1989.
Mr.
Zweibel, who created Roseanne Roseannadanna and other comic characters for Ms.
Radner, needed a way to come to terms with losing his friend, he said the other day, so he began writing re-creations of their conversations, some hilarious and some heartbreaking, over the years.
The dialogues became a book, "Bunny Bunny," subtitled "Gilda Radner: A Sort of Love Story." It will be published Sept. 7 by Villard Books.


Market Place; Will Rising Prices of Cars Imperil Detroit's Recovery?
The Chrysler Corporation recently rolled out a new compact sedan, the Cirrus, aimed at value-conscious import buyers.
Chrysler promises that the car will offer plenty for the money, which means it better offer an awful lot: The base price is an eye-popping $17,970.
Perhaps the most astonishing thing about the price is that it makes the Cirrus one of the cheapest competitors in its segment, which includes the Honda Accord and Nissan Altima.


No Field of Dreams at Baseball Assembly Plant; Lawful Salary Cap
To the Editor:
Re "The Selfish Sultans of Swat" (editorial, Aug. 14): By definition, a wage scale caps salaries and bars employees from negotiating their individual wages as "free agents." Salary caps and wage scales are indeed the essence of the collectivized wage bargain that the labor laws have both authorized and encouraged for unionized employees since the 1930's.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Being sensitive, specific and concrete wins Direct Resources business -- and accolades -- abroad.
IT is difficult enough to create advertising in English to persuade Americans to buy products.
How, then, do agency executives create advertising in a language they don't speak to run in a country not their own?
Andrew Cohen, president at Direct Resources, a New York agency that specializes in direct marketing for advertisers like Time-Life Books and Waterhouse Securities, has learned some intriguing answers to that question.
He was hired in May to produce a campaign in Dutch for OHRA, one of the largest insurance companies in the Netherlands.
The television commercials that Direct Resources created are scheduled to begin running this week.


Dreamy Tunes Wafting From a Romantic Haze
When Lush released its first recordings in 1989, it stood out for its sound alone: two airy women's voices in harmony and a shimmering mist of guitars above a pushy rhythm section.
It was labeled "dream-pop" and enjoyed an early-1990's vogue in England before its trendiness wore thin.
Five years later, the sound is familiar; groups like the Cranberries have cleared it up and made hits.
But at Manhattan Center on Thursday night, Lush had budged only slightly.
Songs from Lush's new album, "Split" (4 A.D./Reprise), floated and kicked, with the voices of Miki Berenyi and Emma Anderson still blurred by guitar overtones.
Yet the new tunes were slightly more down-to-earth than early songs like "De-Luxe" and "Sweetness and Light." Lush has moved pop elements -- guitar hooks, vocal melodies, lyrics about love and longing -- a little closer to the foreground, and it has brought more variety to its recent songs.
"Hypocrite" and "Blackout" verged on punk-rock; "Light From a Distant Star," with recorded tinkling bells, was a folky elegy.
Atmosphere is still Lush's vocation, but the band is making sure there are tunes in the haze.


HORSE RACING: Sports of The Times; And Even if Nominated, the Bull Will Not Run
ON the morning after Tabasco Cat lost the Travers Stakes to Holy Bull, the gray ghost of horse racing, Wayne Lukas stood outside Barn 83 at Saratoga Race Course and considered the next question: So, now who is the leading candidate for 3-year-old champion and Horse of the Year?
"To compare it to a Presidential election," he said, "Holy Bull won all the early primaries, but there's still an important election. There are still some big states out there that haven't reported."


World Economies


Krone Wins A Big One At Saratoga
Julie Krone won her first Grade One stakes since she was severely injured one year ago.
She rode Link River to victory in the John A. Morris Handicap today by nearly three lengths over the favorite, You'd Be Surprised.
Link River, a 4-year-old daughter of Gone West, withstood a major rush by the favorite in the homestretch, and they both finished far in front of another top filly, Dispute.
And another star of the past, November Snow, who won the Alabama Stakes here two years ago, ran seventh and last.


INSIDE
New Threat to Haiti's Poor
Haitian officials are holding up fuel supplies that had been donated to agencies providing health services to Haiti's poorest residents.
Page A3.
A Bush Battles in Texas
George W. Bush, the Republican candidate for governor of Texas, says his opponent, Ann W. Richards, can be beaten with kindness.
Page A8.
Private Aid to New York
A group of executives is trying to raise $100 million to help New York City, including projects like keeping the Yankees in the Bronx.
Page B1.
A2 Arts


Anderson May Prove The End for Jet Woes
In the impersonal, computer-driven world of pro football, the Stevie Andersons abound: No Division I credentials, no success as a draft pick, enough talent to compete but not crack a roster.
That's why there are practice squads filled with first-year players who show something -- but not enough.
But Anderson, the formerly anonymous practice-squadder, produced 5 catches for 117 yards, including one of those pretty-as-a-picture touchdown receptions in the final quarter against the Giants Saturday night.
Loping in full stride, the 6-foot-5-inch receiver extended his long arms and magnetically caressed Jack Trudeau's bomb that had traveled 45 yards.
Anderson scampered another 35 with the ball for an 80-yard scoring strike.


Dividend Meetings


FLIGHT FROM CUBA: The Policy; Cuba Strategy: Reactive or Planned?
The way Administration officials tell it, their new policy toward Cuba has two straightforward goals: stopping the flood of refugees and pressuring Fidel Castro to take meaningful steps toward democracy and a free market.
With Cuba's economy in a shambles and with Mr.
Castro facing the most dissent in years, it is an opportune time to get Mr.
Castro to bend to outside pressures, Administration officials say.


Green's Farm: Corn, Tomatoes, but No Rhubarb
He's an outdoors sort of fellow, a big ruddy-faced man who has been deriving his deepest psychic pleasures from open fields and deep woods all his life.
So it was hardly surprising that when he found himself without a dugout step to stand on, Dallas Green did what he always does when baseball lets him down.
He returned to the 60-acre farm in Chester County he and his wife, Sylvia, have called home since 1980.
The house is an eclectic affair that dates from 1737, 1767 and 1969, depending on the room.
But even the 1969 den added by a previous owner has antique touches, like the ceiling beams taken from a barn built of logs floated down the Susquehanna River more than a century ago.


Medisave Appeals to Low-Income Employees; Keep the Bill Simple
To the Editor:
It appears that all the 1,300-page to 1,410-page political health care reform bills designed to protect special interest groups ranging from the insurance industry to the American Trial Lawyers Association are now before Congress.


Fix-It Service Remodels Radio Shack
William Lieber thought he had reached a consumer electronics dead end.
After his Sony Worldband ICF-2001 shortwave radio stopped working -- after the warranty expired, of course -- Mr.
Lieber bounced from the manufacturer to a series of small independent repair shops trying to find someone to fix it.


A Taste of Drug Reality, In Quick MTV Bites
It's a brisk trip along drug alley tonight, courtesy of MTV.
But don't let the auspices put you off.
The tone of "Straight Dope" is far more cautionary than celebratory; the hits on the hard stuff are tougher than the cracks about crackdowns.
Kurt Loder, the mile-a-minute narrator, offers mini-histories of marijuana, LSD, heroin and crack cocaine; the editing is as jumpy as ever, with some psychedelic coloring, and some of the quick-fix celebrity comments (Jerry Garcia, Queen Latifah, David Byrne) make network news sound bites seem like feasts.
But there is coherence amid the commotion, and when the program settles down for longer interviews with users, sellers and a Drug Enforcement Administration agent, pertinent points are made.


Medisave Appeals to Low-Income Employees
To the Editor:
"Don't Be Seduced by Medisave" (editorial, Aug. 16), on the plan that would allow people to purchase health insurance policies with high deductibles and invest the savings in tax-free accounts, is based on standard arguments from Dr.
Paul Ellwood of the Jackson Hole Group of health care executives and analysts, and John Burry Jr. of Blue Cross-Blue Shield of Ohio.


Group Technologies Corp.(GRTK,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Oklahoma Gas &amp; Electric Co.  (OGE,N) reports earnings for 12mo to July 31


Giants Receiver Sure Packs A Wallop
It was not the kind of hit a wide receiver usually makes, but Thomas Lewis did.
As David Meggett streaked up the sideline Saturday during a game against the Jets, linebacker Marvin Jones followed him.
Lewis cut Jones off and threw his body at the linebacker.
It looked as if Lewis was shot out of a cannon.
Jones ended up somewhere along the Giants' bench.
After the block, Lewis stood over Jones as Giants players patted him on the back.
It's the type of play that captured the attention of everyone on the team.
It's the kind of toughness that Lewis showed at Indiana.
It's the kind of toughness the Giants expected of their No. 1 draft pick.
And it's the kind of toughness that will probably make him a very good receiver someday.


The N.A.A.C.P.: Still on the Brink
The dismissal of the Rev.
Benjamin Chavis was a necessary and healthy move for the N.A.A.C.P., but many members and friends of the organization believe that this should be only the first step in a broader reform.
The N.A.A.C.P.'s board of directors needs to remake itself radically and take a stronger hand in setting policy and monitoring fiscal affairs.
That the 64-member board dismissed Mr.
Chavis as the group's executive director after 16 months of disastrous leadership suggests at least some awareness that change is needed.
But with the Chavis era ended, a crucial question remains: How can the board that allowed him to squander the N.A.A.C.P.'s money and damage its reputation get the organization back on its feet?


RULING PARTY'S CANDIDATE WINS PRESIDENCY IN MEXICO, BUT OPPOSITION MAKES GAINS
After a year of extraordinary turmoil that seemed to drag Mexico toward the brink of radical change, voters have decided to continue with the same party that has governed for 65 years, choosing Ernesto Zedillo Ponce de Leon as their next President, partial official results showed today.
Yet voters gave the opposition so much support on Sunday that the governing party may be forced to share power in a way not seen before in Mexico.


What the Cats Know
To the Editor:
As a longtime owner of cats, I have watched with fascination as my pets display affection, fear, jealousy, rudimentary memory, anger and dislike of specific people.


From One Problem to Bigger One for N.A.A.C.P.
Early last year, as it began a search for a new executive director that would end in the selection of the Rev.
Benjamin F. Chavis Jr., the N.A.A.C.P. faced declining membership, uncertain finances, difficulty in attracting blacks in their 20's and 30's, and a growing belief that it was becoming out of date.
In the aftermath of Mr.
Chavis's stormy 16-month tenure and his dismissal on Saturday, the organization's board faces the same problems.
But it also faces a $3 million debt and a loss of credibility for failing to oversee the executive director's activities adequately.


The Facts of Life: How to Interrogate Your Internet Link
ALTHOUGH the total population of the global computer network called the Internet is a subject of considerable debate, there is no doubt that it is growing very fast.
Whether there are 3 million active Internet users or 30 million, the numbers are more than doubling every year.
A click on the geometric progression module of my calculator reveals that, in theory at least, everyone in the solar system will be connected to the Internet by the time the Whitewater hearings conclude.


Special Counsel Is President's Prerogative
To the Editor:
The stir about the conduct of Judge David B. Sentelle, who presides over the panel that replaced the Whitewater special prosecutor Robert B. Fiske Jr. with Kenneth W. Starr, shows the folly and unconstitutionality of the independent counsel statute.
Responsibility for selecting prosecutors of Federal crimes should remain where the Constitution placed it, in a politically accountable President, and should never have been given to life-tenured judges.


An Uncertain Mandate: Ernesto Zedillo Ponce de Leon
As Luis Donaldo Colosio lay dying in a Tijuana hospital on the night of March 23, an assassin's bullet in his head, a handful of his aides gathered in the office of Ernesto Zedillo Ponce de Leon, the manager of Mr.
Colosio's presidential campaign.
One phone line was open to the hospital, another to the residence of President Carlos Salinas de Gortari.
After a short while, some of the others began urging Mr.
Zedillo to join the President.
"That's where you have to be," one recalled having insisted, fearful that a rival for the suddenly vacant candidacy of the governing party might get there first.


Physicists Get Warmer In Search for Weird Matter Close to Absolute Zero
SIXTY-NINE years ago, theorists calculated that if a certain class of atoms could be chilled to temperatures below any that exist in nature, the atoms would merge with each other to become huge "superatoms": bizarre states of matter straddling the gulf between the everyday world and the ultra-small domain of quantum mechanics.
Recent advances at dozens of laboratories in the United States and Europe have encouraged some scientists to believe that they may be nearing this elusive goal.
The creation of a Bose-Einstein condensate, as this hypothetical superatomic state of matter is called, would be a historic landmark in physics, one that many physicists say would be worthy of a Nobel Prize.
It would not only demonstrate the validity of some outlandish predictions of quantum theory, but would create a form of matter that may never have existed anywhere before -- a substance with properties scientists can only guess at.


LDDS to Purchase Wiltel for $2.5 Billion
LDDS Communications Inc., striving to turn the Big Three of long-distance telephone service into the Big Four, agreed today to buy the Williams Companies' national fiber optic network for $2.5 billion in cash.
In acquiring Wiltel, the Williams telecommunications unit, LDDS would join AT&amp;T, MCI Communications and Sprint in having its own network.
Owning a network, instead of leasing capacity, will cut LDDS's costs and allow it to reach for major corporate customers, analysts said.


No Headline
"After risking my life, my family's life, my children, they are going to turn me away?" -- MIGUEL LUIS MARTINEZ, a Cuban refugee.  [ A17:2. ]


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; A hidden camera catches just how perky the staff at a consumer-electronics chain really is.
ONCE, patrons of fancy restaurants were surprised to find themselves drinking instant coffee.
Now they might drop their cups to see how one agency has reinvigorated the concept of hidden-camera commercials.
The hidden-camera spot is a time-tested advertising tactic that achieved immortality, or notoriety, in a long-running series of commercials in which Ayer Inc. concealed cameras to record the reactions of diners when told they were sipping Folgers instant instead of freshly brewed ground coffee.


U.S. Bonds Fall Along With Dollar
Prices of Treasury securities sagged yesterday, as bonds moved in tandem with the dollar's decline in world currency markets.
Traders said that the absence of new economic data or major events left the spotlight on currency.
According to analysts, the dollar's decline against the yen has been sparked by fears that the United State and Japan will not be able to settle their differences about reducing Japan's huge trade surplus with America.


Bombardier Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


At UConn, Holtz Stands for More Than a Name
Louis Leo Holtz Jr. hides nothing.
Would he be the University of Connecticut's new 30-year-old head football coach with a four-year, $380,000 contract if his name were Skip Smith rather than Skip Holtz?


11 Are Killed in Washington Collision


American Stores Co. (ASC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to July 30


Dr. Thomas Beam, 48, Infectious-Diseases Expert
Dr.
Thomas Roger Beam Jr., an expert on infectious diseases who was known internationally for his research on drug-resistant bacteria and viruses, died suddenly last Wednesday in his office at the Veterans Affairs Medical Center in Buffalo.
He was 48 and lived in Williamsville, N.Y.
The cause was a heart attack, according to the State University at Buffalo.
At his death, Dr.
Beam was a professor in the university's Department of Medicine and an associate professor in the Department of Microbiology in the School of Medicine and Biomedical Sciences.


Chang and Medvedev Face Up to Youth
About 80 young tennis enthusiasts crowded around Michael Chang and Andrei Medvedev inside a clubhouse in Central Park near 96th Street yesterday for a question-and-answer session.
Chang leaned over to Medvedev and told him that kids ask the toughest questions.
Like, do you have a girlfriend?


Coalition Seeking Converts To Its Reduced Health Plan
The bipartisan coalition that tried to cut through the health insurance tangle with a health plan calling for $100 billion in deficit reduction started trying to sell its proposal today in meetings with Democrats who have sought more sweeping changes.
Those Democrats had a different purpose: trying to find out how flexible the group calling itself the "mainstream coalition" was prepared to be in its pursuit of votes.


Wider Attack on Loan Bias Seen in Accord With S.&amp; L.
Aggressively expanding its attack on lending discrimination, the Clinton Administration announced a settlement today with a big Washington-area financial institution that it accused of refusing to do business in nonwhite neighborhoods.
The settlement challenged lending institutions to open new offices in black neighborhoods, a significant shift from previous cases that simply instructed lenders to cease refusing to make loans to minorities.


Jupiter Under Fire


Corrections
A report in the Chronicle column on Saturday about Mick Jagger's daughter Karis Jagger, who is directing her mother, Marsha Hunt, in a one-woman play about a black woman, misstated Ms.
Hunt's race.
She is black.


A Putdown for Baggio
ROBERTO BAGGIO, whose missed penalty kick in the World Cup final clinched the championship for Brazil, has not been a leader for Juventus, the team owner GIANNI AGNELLI said in remarks published yesterday in Rome.
Baggio, the world player of the year in 1993, has spent four seasons with Juventus, one of the largest clubs in the Italian League, leading the club in scoring over that span.
"He has given Juventus moderate achievements," Agnelli said. (AP)


Irvan's Condition Improves
Injuries to stock car driver ERNIE IRVAN's lungs continued to improve yesterday, but he remained unconscious on a ventilator two days after crashing during practice.
Irvan, one of the top Nascar drivers, hit the wall at about 176 miles an hour during a practice session Saturday at Michigan International Speedway in Brooklyn, Mich., after the right front tire on his Ford Thunderbird appeared to be cut.
He crashed into the wall in Turn 2 and sustained severe head and chest injuries.
He remained in critical but stable condition yesterday afternoon at St.
Joseph Mercy Hospital in Ann Arbor, Mich., Dr.
ERROL ERLANDSON said in a statement. (AP)


A Valley Kicks Its Heels Over Its Own Ball Team
IT was another sold-out game in the inaugural season of the Hudson Valley Renegades.
Skip Weisman, team president and general manager, was running around like a Secret Service agent, walkie-talkie in hand, trying to keep tabs on the ball park.
"We've been selling out since Day 1," he said, flushed and irritated that anyone would suggest otherwise.
"What you see is what it's been."


Bras Meant To Be Seen, Not Hidden
Remember the days before Madonna, when the bra was something worn under clothes?
When a bra strap showing at a wide neckline was a cause for concern?
No more.
Now there are bras designed to be seen, and not just on the beach.
For next winter's resort season, expect to see bras worn as replacements for blouses or sweaters.
They were visible in the recent showings as the third part of a three-piece suit or alone with shorts, pants or skirts for casual wear.
Sometimes the top of a sun dress or an evening dress was fashioned like a bra.


Topics of The Times; The Waffle Flips
In the broad category of Presidential irritants, cartoons and cartoonists hold a special place.
The late Richard M. Nixon had a thick hide when it came to written commentary, but the drawings of Herblock in The Washington Post seemed to launch him into an enemies-list frame of mind at warp speed.
President Bush was known to hold an undying grudge toward Garry Trudeau for depicting him as an invisible man.
Now Mr.
Trudeau, in his "Doonesbury" strip, has concluded his announced plebiscite for a visual symbol, or "icon," for President Clinton.
Yesterday's strip reported that by popular vote Mr.
Clinton would henceforth be embodied by a floating waffle.
It represents an interesting turn for Mr.
Trudeau, whose drawings and words occasionally appear on our Op-Ed page.
During the campaign, he was disposed in a kindly way toward Mr.
Clinton and sometimes jabbed his pen at critics of the candidate.


Border Crossings; Migration for Work and Play Is Binding a Working-Class Village to a Gilded Neighbor
Luis Lopez had long wanted to open a Mexican restaurant in Rye, confident that there was a fortune to be made in that gilded community of country clubs, estates and, more important, disposable wealth.
But after discovering the high rents for commercial space there, he opened his restaurant just a few steps from the Rye border in this scruffy harbor village on Long Island Sound, where he has slowly tapped the Rye market.


Lawmakers Are Warned on Constitutionality of Bills to Control Sex Offenders
Bills designed to toughen New Jersey's laws regulating convicted sex offenders began making their way through the legislative process today, but not without warnings from the Attorney General and some public interest groups that they may contain constitutional flaws.
Senator William L. Gormley, a Republican who is chairman of the Senate Judiciary Committee, which heard testimony on three bills today, said he wanted to make sure that "whatever bills are released by this committee will pass legal challenges down the road."


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-9  MEXICO PARTY KEEPS ITS HOLD  The party that has governed Mexico for 65 years apparently will stay in office, preliminary presidential election results show, but its candidate's low totals may require the government to share power.
A1


A Russian Bottled Water With a Saintly Twist
In earlier times, it might have been considered an unholy alliance, but the Russian Orthodox Church is working with a California businessman in a joint venture to bottle natural water from the Saint Springs for sale in Russia and soon the United States.
"New times," Archbishop Aleksandr explained as he briskly led an inspection tour of the bottling plant.
The Archbishop, who led the effort to turn the output of the church's natural spring into Russia's only domestically bottled still water, said he expected to turn a profit this fall.


Good News Looks Bad
To the Editor:
Top economic officials are frustrated that the Clinton Administration has not received more credit for recent economic growth.
The reason is simple.
The Federal Reserve Board's perverse logic has conditioned investors, economic analysts and everyone else to view growth not as a boon but as a dire portent of inflation and higher interest rates.
Nowadays, good news is bad news.
The Administration cannot receive credit where credit is due.
LOUIS JAY HERMAN  New York, Aug. 17, 1994


Influx of Russian Gangsters Troubles F.B.I. in Brooklyn
As a Brighton Beach subway train thundered overhead, a hit man pumped one fatal bullet into the back of Oleg Korataev's head.
It took four rounds in the face and chest to finish off another suspected gangster, Yanik Magasayev.
Alexandre Graber died thousands of miles away in a hail of automatic gunfire.
Near the Brighton Beach boardwalk, a gunman ambushed Naum Raichel, severely wounding him with three bullets in his chest and stomach.
That same day in Germany, Mr.
Raichel's brother, Simeon, was beaten into unconsciousness and suffered a brain concussion.


Directory Assistance For the U.S. On a Disk
THE big little disks known as CD-ROM's are taking off as general-interest consumer products, with games and graphics, reference works and even plain old books, which are not so plain anymore.
But whether the gambles of publishers, software developers and entertainment conglomerates pay off any time soon, the CD-ROM is already practically indispensable for many businesses and government agencies.
Nothing else affordable can hold so much information in so small a space, and nothing else can be searched in so many ways so readily.
There are voter lists and mailing lists, phone books and newspaper and magazine files.
So far, none of these pure data disks have the video and audio enhancements of those offered to a wider public, but they are packed with information.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
7.75
7.75
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
4.00
4.00
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
4.69
4.64
3.01
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.62
4.54
3.02
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.98
4.90
3.12
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.31
7.25
5.60
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.55
7.49
6.22
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.41
8.36
7.09
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.42
6.40
5.63
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


COMPANY BRIEFS
BERLITZ INTERNATIONAL INC., Princeton, N.J., a language services company and a subsidiary of Fukake Publishing Company, announced that it had completed the acquisition of Cross-Cultural Consulting Associates for undisclosed terms.
HANCOCK HOLDING CO., Gulfport, Miss., will acquire First Denham Bancshares Inc., Denham Springs, La., for about $26 million.


Crime Bill's Hurdle
The Senate opened debate on the crime bill yesterday with Democrats asserting that Republicans were trying to delay a vote in an effort to eliminate the measure's ban on assault weapons.
It was not clear how the much-disputed bill would fare after its revival in the House on Sunday.
Article, page A14.


Chess
A curious sidelight of the International Chess Federation's quarterfinals in Sanghi-Nagar, India, was that each player who was the first to win a game went on to lose the contest.
In short eight-game series like these, first blood has always been viewed as a great advantage, but it did not work that way this time.
Vladimir Kramnik of Russia won Game 3, but then lost Games 4 and 8 to Boris Gelfand of Ukraine; Jan Timman of the Netherlands won Game 1, but then lost Games 4 and 7 to Valery Salov of Russia; Vishwanathan Anand won Games 3 and 4, but, after losing Games 6 and 7, lost the speed-game playoffs by 0-2 to Gata Kamsky of Brooklyn.


MagneTek Inc.(MAG,N) reports earnings for Year to June 30


For Merrill, at Least, the Game Goes On
You remember him.
How can you not remember him?
You remember the roly-poly physique, the bulge of tobacco in his cheek, the way his whining players mutinied.
But because Stump Merrill managed the Yankees during those dreary and dormant days in the Bronx three years ago, he is remembered chiefly for chronic losing.
He has not changed his appearance, disposition or managerial style since his one chance to be somebody in the major leagues deteriorated because he was overwhelmed and underprepared.
Merrill manages the Class AAA Columbus Clippers, the Yankees' top farm team, and still harbors dreams of regaining a grander position at the next level.
Big league dreams and hopes for second chances wilt slowly, even for 50-year-old minor leaguer lifers.


The Great Fear in Burundi
Nervous outsiders have for weeks looked for signs that Burundi would follow its neighbor Rwanda on a bloody slide into genocide.
Both Central African countries have the same ethnic mix, roughly 85 percent Hutu, 15 percent Tutsi.
The massacres in Rwanda that claimed up to 500,000 lives followed a suspicious air crash in April in which the Rwandan President, a Hutu, was killed.
The same crash also killed Burundi's President, likewise a Hutu, resulting in political paralysis, sporadic killings and hair-trigger tension in a country rich in weapons.
Yet no comparable massacres have taken place since then in Burundi.
What keeps it teetering on the brink?


Boston Troupe, on First Visit, Shows Restraint
Ballet Theater of Boston waited 10 years to make its New York City debut.
That restraint was typical of the four dances the company presented at its debut performance, on Sunday afternoon at the Fountain Plaza in Lincoln Center Out of Doors.
Choreographed by Jose Mateo, the company's director, the ballets sounded markedly different from one another in the program notes.
But one would have been hard put to attach the descriptions to any one piece, for all the works unwound in a gentle, tasteful flow of meticulously rehearsed dance performed by well-trained classical dancers.
The opening work, "Schubert Adagio," was a good introduction to Mr.
Mateo's muted style.
Slow stretching extensions of the legs did stir the tranquil surface of the piece, but they were the closest things to agitation or near-passion in a dance described as revealing undercurrents of pain and loneliness.
Elena Martinson and Andrei Ustinov, formerly with the Kirov Ballet of St.
Petersburg, were the leisurely lovers in the ballet's central pas de deux.


Shifting Visa Rules Bar Chinese Scholar
To the Editor:
Wang Jingkai, a Chinese scholar, wants to study documents on Chinese history for a year at Pennsylvania State University.
He has financial support here.
Our embassy in Beijing rejected his request stating: "You have not shown that you have sufficiently strong family, social or economic ties to your place of residence to insure that your projected stay in the United States will be temporary."


Harnischfeger Industries Inc.(HPH,N) reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Clubs Are Aspiring To Define a 90's Spirit In Rock and Jazz
From Max's Kansas City in the 1960's to CBGB in the 1970's to the Knitting Factory in the 1980's, Manhattan's rock and jazz culture has always been defined by small clubs with enough vision to book vanguard acts.
This year, several new downtown clubs have opened with a view to becoming the musical focal points of the 1990's.
The entrepreneurs behind these new spaces have three things in common: vision, dedication and debt.


Medisave Appeals to Low-Income Employees; Police States?
To the Editor:
Representative Newt Gingrich has said that "you cannot get to universal coverage without a police state."


Suspicious Fire At Bronx Store Leaves 4 Dead
Trapped when a Bronx delicatessen erupted in flames, three men and a woman died yesterday in what Fire Department officials said was a suspicious blaze apparently fueled by gasoline.
A police officer who was among the first to arrive at the scene said four people were calling for help through the window guards at the back of the first-floor store.
With the windows barred and no back exit from the store, they had no way to escape, fire officials said.


The Health of Pope John Paul II Prompts Concern


Abidjan Journal; The Paris of West Africa Is Down at the Heels
On the Rue de Commerce here, long a showcase of French interests in the former African colonies, once-thriving department stores are now empty shells waiting to be bought up whenever a much-awaited economic rebound finally takes place.
Not far away, on the broad tree-lined Boulevard de la Republique, downtown Abidjan's main street, an older kind of commerce has taken over.


Leo Lerman, 80, Editor at Conde Nast Magazines
Leo Lerman, an editor, writer and critic who was associated with Conde Nast magazines for more than 50 years, died yesterday at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center in Manhattan.
He was 80 and lived in Manhattan.
The cause was pulmonary failure, said Gray Foy, his companion.


Topics of The Times; Copying California
Among the many good things to come out of California over the years is a remarkably successful anti-smoking advertising and education campaign.
In the six years since Californians voted on Proposition 99, which raised the state tax on tobacco products and directed that 20 percent be devoted to such a campaign, tobacco use has dropped by an astonishing 30 percent.
That's three times the national quit rate.
Two states, Massachusetts and Michigan, have followed suit.
Now the American Medical Association and the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation are making it possible for more to do the same.
They plan to distribute $10 million in grants to anti-smoking groups in 19 states, to help them push for California-like campaigns there.


Talks Seen in Jeopardy On Madison Sq. Garden
Negotiations on a $1 billion purchase of the Madison Square Garden properties by Liberty Media appear to be falling apart, a business executive close to Liberty said yesterday.
The executive said officials of Liberty Media, which is part of Tele-Communications Inc., the largest cable television system in the world, thought they had a handshake agreement five weeks ago with Viacom Inc., the owner of the properties.
But the talks have since foundered over negotiations on related transactions.


By Design; In Cheerleader Mode
The baby-doll dresses of summer are giving way to schoolgirl styles like jumpers, argyle sweaters and pleated cheerleader skirts.
They're for young women who grew up in blue jeans and think anything preppy is cool.
So the white cotton shirt that hung outside pants last year will now go under a jumper, perhaps a charcoal wool A-line by CK Calvin Klein ($230), a blanket plaid by Moschino ($140) or a tartan plaid by Item ($158).


Daulton Undergoes Surgery
DARREN DAULTON had a cancerous mole removed from his stomach last week and doctors declared the Philadelphia Phillies catcher in good health.
The mole, which was in the early cancer stages, was removed last Tuesday. (AP)


METRO DIGEST
NEW RUSSIAN GANGS GROWING IN BROOKLYN
The disintegration of the Soviet Union in 1991 spawned thousands of powerful crime gangs -- collectively known as the Russian mafia -- and some of these groups, officials warn, are establishing bases among emigre communities in the United States, particularly in South Brooklyn.


Giuliani Is Halting or Scaling Back Affirmative-Action Efforts
Eight months into office, the administration of Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani has scaled back or eliminated several programs aimed at enhancing the role of black, Hispanic and Asian New Yorkers in city government and is considering abandoning several other affirmative-action measures.
In doing so, Mr.
Giuliani is reversing initiatives that have become a staple of New York City government, particularly during the administration of Mayor David N. Dinkins, his predecessor.
The actions range from the dismantling of an affirmative-action program for female- and minority-owned businesses to little-noticed moves, like eliminating diversity as a factor in a screening committee's selection of candidates for judgeships.


Patterns
Shoes in a Glamour Parade
Manolo Blahnik's shoes are perfect for James Bond vixens with sexy double-entendre names.
They are the sort of shoes that should be toying with a man's pant cuff beneath a linen tablecloth, grinding a lipstick-stained cigarette into the pavement and dangling from red fingernails while their owner wades in the Trevi fountain.
His boots are the type one imagines Nancy Sinatra was singing about.


Corrections
An article on Aug. 11 about a dispute over racial balance in classes in the Montclair, N.J., school district omitted the standard that the district uses to define racial balance.
The omission left the description of the overall situation there incomplete.
The district defines a class as racially unbalanced if more than 75 percent of its students are white or more than 75 percent come from minorities.
By this standard, 7 percent of the district's elementary classes and 25 to 35 percent of its middle school classes are unbalanced.
Overall, 47.5 percent of Montclair's students are white, and 52.5 percent are from minorities.


Trial to Start Today for Trooper Accused of Fingerprint Faking
A New York State Police investigator charged with faking fingerprint evidence is to go on trial today in New City, N.Y., in the latest development in a two-year-old evidence-tampering scandal.
The investigator, Edward Pilus, 44, of Troop F in Middletown, is accused of fabricating evidence in a 1991 Rockland County carjacking.
He will be tried separately in Orange County on charges of faking evidence in a 1992 burglary there.


Mosquitoes' Tricks Still Exceed Remedies
THE perpetual whine around one's ears and the repeated slaps at the persistent airborne pests were like a retrospective weather report.
It was precisely 10 days after a major thunderstorm had drenched the St.
Croix River valley and the latest opportunistic crop of those infamous summer-spoilers -- mosquitoes -- had hurried through their transformation from egg to larva to pupa, producing bloodthirsty adult females intent on guaranteeing a next generation.
Here in Minnesota, where T-shirts sporting chest-sized mosquitoes call the insect the "state bird," it is little comfort to know that to a mosquito, human blood is second-rate, less tasty than that from birds and even buffalo.


Lax Procedures Cited in Fatal Colorado Wildfire
A Federal investigation into the blaze on a Colorado mountain that killed 14 firefighters last month found that firefighters and supervisors made crucial errors in judgment and violated safety procedures.
"We are painfully learning that mistakes were made," said Mike Dombeck, director of the Bureau of Land Management, which employed some of the firefighters who died.
"Breakdowns in communications, errors in judgment, lack of coordination. The same sort of mistakes people make every day. Only this time, the fuel and weather and flame magnified human error, with deadly and tragic consequences."


Field of Dreams Turns Into Nightmare in New Jersey
Only a dozen games remain in the season for the New Jersey Cardinals, leaders of the Class A New York-Penn League's McNamara Division.
With a 36-28 record, the team has sold out nearly all of its games at Skylands Park, in rural Sussex County, vindicating the team's decision to relocate from Glens Falls, N.Y.
But while the team is a success, a similar verdict cannot yet be rendered for the still-unfinished stadium's parent company, Skylands Park Management.


Pentagon, Buoying Troops, Will Cut Arms Development
Searching for more than $15 billion to finance pay increases and better housing for troops, Deputy Defense Secretary John M. Deutch has ordered the Army, Navy and Air Force to prepare plans to cancel or delay many new weapons systems in development.
Mr.
Deutch's two-page memorandum, sent last Thursday to the armed services, reflects the priority of the Pentagon's top leadership to keep the declining number of American troops in good spirits and combat-ready, at the expense of buying new fighter jets, warships and submarines.


Executive Changes
DURACELL INTERNATIONAL INC., Bethel, Conn., named Charles R. Perrin, president and chief operating officer, as its chief executive.
He succeeds C. Robert Kidder, who will continue as chairman.
Charles E. Kiernan, president of Duracell North America, was named to succeed Mr.
Perrin as chief operating officer.
David G. Bluestein, president of the international development markets unit, will succeed Mr.
Kiernan.
KAYSER-ROTH CORP., Greensboro, N.C., promoted Gary Malloch, its president and chief operating officer, to president and chief executive.


Baldwin Technology Co.  (BLD,A) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Not for the Weak-Kneed: Sudsing at 107 Floors Up
From the dizzying height of the World Trade Center's indoor observation deck on the 107th floor of Tower B came a view even more spectacular than the Statue of Liberty in miniature majesty below: the feet of Roko Camaj, life-size, up above.
Then came the rest of him, descending in his rig with squeegee, brush and sponge.
As spectators gathered to watch, Mr.
Camaj waved and the crowd waved back.
All except Kate Franklin of Louisiana, who put her hands to her mouth to mime apprehension.


2 Teen-Agers Are Arrested As Mugging Suspect Dies
Two Brooklyn teen-agers were arrested yesterday after they chased down a man who had robbed their 10-year-old cousin at knifepoint, then hit the man with a metal fence post and apparently caused fatal injuries, the police said.
The man, 41-year-old Mark Berry, had walked away from the beating on Sunday with cuts and bruises, the police said.
But later, he complained of chest and stomach pains and he died early yesterday, apparently of internal injuries.


Seagram Narrows Focus to TBWA
The Seagram Company said yesterday it had narrowed the review on its Chivas Regal Scotch whisky account to a single agency, TBWA Advertising, but had not yet awarded the account to that shop.
Billings on the account, previously handled by DDB Needham Worldwide until that agency was dismissed in June, were estimated at $10 million to $15 million.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
Johnson &amp; Johnson will buy Neutrogena for $924 million, giving it a strong brand for its skin and hair care business.
Neutrogena sells premium body oils, soaps and shampoos.  [ Page D1. ]


Refugees' Perilous Voyage Starts and Finishes in Cuba
The first Cuban refugees in 28 years to be refused asylum in the United States arrived here today, more than two thousand of them, to clusters of tents pitched as hastily as American policy had changed.
When the Coast Guard cutter Courageous slid up to the dock at 11:45 A.M., the 267 Cuban refugees it had plucked from frail rafts squatted glumly under a tarp stretched across its aft helicopter flight deck against the burning sun.
Earlier in the morning, three cutters had unloaded refugees picked up at sea and another, the Mohawk, came in in the afternoon.


Paxson Announces Retirement
JOHN PAXSON, a key part of three Chicago Bulls championship teams, announced his retirement yesterday, ending an 11-year National Basketball Association career.
Paxson, a 1983 graduate of Notre Dame, was signed as a free agent by the Bulls in 1985.
Paxson, who appeared in 772 regular-season games and 119 playoff games for the Bulls, is best remembered for hitting a 3-point shot with 3.9 seconds left in Game 6 of the 1993 finals.
The shot insured the Bulls of a third consecutive championship. (AP)


Negotiators Ready: Anybody Know Squeeze Sign?
Baseball's 11-day-old strike produced two definite developments yesterday, but nothing occurred to create the possibility of a third development: that the two sides will squeeze out of their stalemate when they resume meeting tomorrow.
In development No. 1, representatives of the striking players and their employers, with the help of Federal mediators, agreed to meet at 10:30 A.M. tomorrow for the first time since the day the strike began, Aug. 12.


Olympic Drug Tests Ignored
Nine positive drug tests at the 1984 Los Angeles Olympics were covered up, according to a BBC television program.
The drug-testing laboratory was shut down before the Games ended and files on the positive tests were destroyed, according to two anti-doping officials interviewed for yesterday's "On the Line" program.
While 12 positive doping cases were made public earlier during the Games, nine other positive tests were said to be never acted upon during the last two days of competition.
CRAIG KAMMERER, identified as director of the Olympic testing laboratory at U.C.L.A. at the time of the Games, told the BBC that five of the nine tests showed the presence of steroids.
The others showed testosterone and ephedrine. (AP)


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball American League  OAKLAND ATHLETICS -- Activated Geronimo Berroa, outfielder, from the 15-day disabled list.
Optioned Ernie Young, outfielder, to Huntsville of the Southern League.
Basketball  National Basketball Association


Driver of Delivery Truck Is Shot In Latest of Brooklyn Holdups
The holdups have become routine along Myrtle Avenue in Brooklyn.
The Hostess bakery truck was hit a month ago.
The robbery of the Pepsi truck came a week later, the take limited to the $40 torn out of the shirt pocket of the driver because the safe in the back was bolted to the floor.
The United Parcel Service delivery truck was next.
The routine continued yesterday in Bedford-Stuyvesant, its numbing familiarity broken only by gunfire.


WMS Industries Inc.(WMS,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


NBC Adds Rashad To 'N.F.L. Live'
NBC continues to remake the "N.F.L. Live" studio show.
The network recently made Greg Gumbel host of the program, and yesterday added Ahmad Rashad as co-host and Jim Gray, formerly of CBS, as its roving game reporter.
NBC said the show would expand to one hour on Sept. 4, the first day of the regular season.
Fox Sports will have an hour-long program all season.
Rashad, who spent 1983 to 1988 on the show, will be in the studio each week, delivering a feature, filling part of the role once played by O. J. Simpson.


INSIDE
More Rwandans Fleeing
The Rwandan flow resumed, with as many as 50,000 more people trying to leave their country, as Zaire reopened its border.
Page A6.
Hostility to H.M.O.'s
H.M.O.'s, once a centerpiece of President Clinton's health plan, are losing some luster in Congress as lawmakers trade horror stories.
Page A12.
Results on Blood Samples
Prosecutors said that genetic tests suggested matches between the blood of O. J. Simpson and samples found at his former wife's house.
Page A10.
Approaching Absolute Zero
As scientists near the elusive goal, they may find a hypothetical super-atom so big it could be visible to the naked eye.
Science Times, page C1.


Sports of The Times; Stewart Still In There Pitching
WHEN Dave Stewart took off his Toronto Blue Jays uniform for the last time before the strike of 1994 started, he knew more than most major leaguers that Yogi Berra was right.
It was deja vu all over again.
Stewart came to the majors in 1981 and walked right into a season that was marred by a 50-day players strike.
Now, in this, his 14th and final season, Stewart sits idle as a players' strike with the potential to wipe the final 52 days off the schedule closes in on its third week.


Once in Forefront, H.M.O.'s Lose Their Luster in Health Debate
In President Clinton's first blueprints to redesign the nation's medical system, health maintenance organizations were a centerpiece of efforts to restrain costs and a model for the health plans in which most Americans would enroll.
But in Congressional debate in the last six months, H.M.O.'s have lost some of that early luster.
Lawmakers have been surprisingly hostile to such organizations and other forms of managed care, which try to achieve savings by limiting patients to specified doctors and hospitals.
They say such health plans, especially those that seek profits for investors, skimp on care to save money.


Top Echelon Of Mobsters Is a Threat
In Russia, they are called Vory v Zakone, "thieves-in-law," the top criminal echelon.
For American law-enforcement agencies, they are a new threat.
Jim E. Moody, chief of the Federal Bureau of Investigation's organized-crime section, said an ominous sign in the growth of Russian underworld activities in the United States has been the sightings of four or five Vory v Zakone.
The highest-ranking thief-in-law to arrive here is Vyacheslav Kirillovich Ivankov, say F.B.I. and other law-enforcement agencies.


Edberg Brightens After Tough '93
Stefan Edberg can empathize with Jim Courier.
Edberg, one of the top five players in men's tennis over the past decade, spoke while the day session of the Waldbaum's Hamlet Cup was being washed away by rain.


RESULTS PLUS
FOOTBALL  Bears Edge Chiefs  Steve Walsh hit Tyrone Williams with a 32-yard touchdown pass with 3 minutes 7 seconds left last night, lifting the visiting Chicago Bears over Kansas City, 21-18, before the Chiefs' biggest preseason crowd in 20 years.
Walsh drove the Bears (3-0) 80 yards in just four plays, aided by two penalties.
After the touchdown, Walsh hit Ryan Wetnight with a 2-point conversion pass.
The Chiefs (2-2) then zipped downfield behind Steve Bono and had a 1st-and-goal from the 4-yard line.
But on fourth down from the 2, the Chiefs passed up the expected overtime-causing field goal and tried to pass.
But Bono tripped coming out from center when his own lineman stepped on his foot and was ruled sacked.


Marion Langer, 85, Expert on Widowhood
Dr.
Marion F. Langer, a former executive director of the American Orthopsychiatric Association and an expert on widowhood, died on Wednesday at her home on the Upper West Side of Manhattan.
She was 85.
The cause was cancer, said Karen Kun of the association's staff.


Intel and AT&amp;T Join Forces on Video Telephone
In an effort to overcome barriers to the acceptance of the video telephone, Intel and AT&amp;T announced an alliance today designed to accelerate the growth of personal computer-based video-conferencing systems.
The two companies said they would work together to build standards based on an AT&amp;T video-conferencing network known as Worldworx and on Intel's Proshare desktop video-conferencing system.


U.S. WILL EXPAND PATROLS TO STOP CUBAN REFUGEES
The United States moved today to expand its picket line of patrol vessels in the Florida Straits as hundreds of Cubans set sail for Florida despite the Clinton Administration's efforts to stem the exodus.
The Coast Guard reported that 2,548 refugees had been picked up at sea by midnight Monday, adding to the 1,293 refugees taken aboard United States ships on Sunday.
Today's was the highest daily figure since Cubans began the newest mass departure from their island home.
All will be transferred to the American naval base at Guantanamo Bay.


As Senate Debates Crime Bill, Weapons Ban Is the Focus
The Senate opened debate on the crime bill today as Democrats warned that some Republicans were still trying to eliminate the bill's ban on assault weapons.
Senator Phil Gramm, a Texas Republican who opposes the ban, said he would try to stall the $30.3 billion bill procedurally so he could add what he said were tougher sentences for criminals and to cut what he said was wasteful social spending.


France's New Breed Of Opera Singers
The travails of French opera have become almost a cliche by now.
The latest scandale, Myung-Whun Chung's abrupt dismissal as music director of the Paris Opera, would only seem to confirm the cliche.
Never mind that this seems to have been a pure power struggle between two ambitious men, and that the winner, Hugues Gall, the designated director of the company, is himself a man of proven taste and vision.
The dismissal still looks bad in the short run, yet another "proof" that when it comes to opera, the French haven't a clue.


CHRONICLE
Students at some 25 New York City public schools can look forward to personal appearances by MIDORI, one of the world's foremost violinists, during the coming school year.
The concerts for students in grades 3 through 8 are being arranged by Midori &amp; Friends, a nonprofit organization created two years ago by Midori, who is 22.
The planned 10- to 12-week program, an outgrowth of a pilot project earlier this year, will include a concert and informal talk by Midori at each school.
There will also be follow-up performances and discussions by young musicians representing classical and jazz groups and brass quartets.


Simpson Genetic Testing Bolsters Prosecution Case
In new evidence that could tie O. J. Simpson more closely to the scene of the killing of his former wife and her friend, prosecutors disclosed today that preliminary genetic testing suggested matches between the blood of Mr.
Simpson and samples found at his home and at the home of Nicole Brown Simpson.
The disclosures, which were made today in court filings by the Los Angeles Country District Attorney's Office, came as prosecutors and defense lawyers continued to wrangle in another hearing over the relevance of DNA testing in the case and how to split physical samples, like blood and hair, for testing.


Microsoft Names A New Agency
The Microsoft Corporation yesterday named Anderson &amp; Lembke in San Francisco to handle its technical product advertising account, which had been at the Los Angeles office of Ogilvy &amp; Mather Worldwide for the last six years.
As Anderson was awarded the account, it was dismissed by its previous computer client, Sun Microsystems Inc.
The Microsoft account, with billings estimated at $50 million, was one of several that Ogilvy Worldwide resigned when it won the International Business Machines Corporation's worldwide account in May.
Christine Santucci, a spokeswoman for Microsoft in Redmond, Wash., confirmed a report of the assignment yesterday in the Advertising Age Daily Fax.


Q&amp;A
Tidal Wave or Ripple?
Q.  Is it possible that a tidal wave could wash over Brooklyn Heights?


Clinton's Plan for Immunization Of Children Suffers a New Blow
In a sudden reversal, the Clinton Administration has abandoned plans for a national vaccine warehouse, which was to store and distribute vaccine as part of a campaign to immunize children across the country starting Oct. 1.
The demise of the warehouse is the latest in a series of setbacks to a Clinton initiative that, when first proposed in 1993, called for providing free, Government-subsidized vaccines to all children.
The program has since been scaled back several times and, with cancellation of the plan for a vaccine warehouse, even less of the President's proposal survives.


Medisave Appeals to Low-Income Employees; Healthier and Wealthier
To the Editor:
"Don't Be Seduced by Medisave" (editorial, Aug. 16) contains inaccuracies about medical savings accounts.
But most surprising is your lack of understanding about how markets work.


Pesticides May Leave Legacy of Hormonal Chaos
IN a new wave of concern about synthetic chemicals in the environment, some biologists are warning that trace amounts of pesticides and other man-made substances may be interfering with the action of reproductive hormones and thereby damaging the fertility of various animal populations, including humans.
The evidence is far from conclusive.
But the economic and political stakes are high; should the new fears prove justified, a large group of important industrial chemicals might have to be curbed.


Before Reforming Welfare, First Provide Quality Child Care
To the Editor:
Many are asking how the Clinton welfare proposal will affect children.
We have convincing evidence that forcing mothers to work when decent child care is not available will endanger their children.
The prospects are terrifying.


Books of The Times; A Mild-Mannered Vampire in Paris
The Secret Life of Laszlo, Count Dracula  By Roderick Anscombe 409 pages.
Hyperion. $22.95.
As the enormous popularity of Francis Ford Coppola's lush, phantasmagoric movie "Bram Stoker's 'Dracula' " (1992) and Anne Rice's campy Vampire Chronicles have demonstrated, vampires do indeed enjoy successive lives.
The vampire as Bela Lugosi has given way to the vampire as Frank Langella and Gary Oldman, and soon (in the forthcoming movie of Anne Rice's "Interview With the Vampire") the vampire as Tom Cruise.
We've been treated to handcuff-wielding vampires in Pittsburgh ("Innocent Blood"), vampires battling Valley Girls in Southern California ("Buffy the Vampire Slayer") and cannibalistic vampires who make the club scene in Los Angeles (Bret Easton Ellis's "Informers")


Curtice-Burns Foods Inc.(CBI,A) reports earnings for Qtr to June 25


North Korea Radio Hints at Opposition
A North Korean radio broadcast today hinted at opposition to the transfer of power from the late Kim Il Sung to his son Kim Jong Il.
Six weeks after the death of his father on July 8, Kim Jong Il has appeared to have become the country's new leader.
But he has still not been confirmed either as general secretary of the ruling Korea Workers' Party or as state president.


PHH Corp.(PHH,N) reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


On My Mind; Drunk In Damascus
The Syrian Government has kicked out one terrorist but still has a full warehouse of them left.
That is the real importance of the story of Carlos the Jackal, now in a Parisian jail, possibly recovering from the built-in hangover he must have from lying around drunk in Damascus for years.
If the Syrians ever decide that they want peace with Israel or hope to get off the U.S. list of terrorist nations, they will have to clean out that warehouse and do a few other things not getting much attention right now.


Klein, C.W. Post Quarterback, Is Sticking With Falcons
Atlanta Falcons
Perry Klein, a fourth-round draft choice from C. W. Post, has won the No. 3 quarterback slot with the Atlanta Falcons, beating out veteran Bob Gagliano.
Klein, who threw for 3,757 yards and 36 touchdowns for the Division II school in Greenvale, L.I., , after transferring from the University of California-Berkeley, said he hasn't had time to think about his status.
"The key is to keep progressing every day, mentally and physically, and to try and keep from being overwhelmed," said Klein yesterday from the team's Suwanee, Ga., training quarters.
"At this level, every time you think you've pulled even, boom, something happens to kind of throw you off. But from a confidence standpoint, I came here feeling I'd make the team, so all I'm doing is meeting my own expectations."


Shiloh Industries (SHLO,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Delta Seen in AT&amp;T Pact
Delta Air Lines Inc. and the AT&amp;T Corporation will announce today that they have formed a joint venture to sell information-management services, according to people familiar with the companies' plans.
As part of the agreement, AT&amp;T will take over many computer operations at Delta, the nation's third-largest airline.
Delta is seeking savings from all its operations as part of its goal to cut $2 billion from its annual operating costs by 1997.


As French Leave Rwanda, Critics Reverse Position
The desert camouflage vehicles filled with departing French troops had barely worked their way through the crush of Rwandans at the Zairian border Sunday morning, when the refugees rushed at the new force of protectors, shouting and throwing sticks and stones.
The Ethiopian United Nations soldiers who had replaced the French backed off, so Zairian soldiers on the other side of the Rusizi River fired their automatic weapons in the air to keep the Rwandans from crossing the closed border.
Throughout a tense day of confrontation, the Ethiopian soldiers were generally on the sidelines, slumped in wooden chairs or milling about, looking more frightened than disciplined.


Market Place; Loews has several ways to play a $200 million payout from CBS.
THE LOEWS CORPORATION, controlled by Laurence A. Tisch, stands to get $200 million or more from selling shares in CBS back to CBS.
And it is possible that Loews will also get some phenomenal tax breaks -- enabling it to pay little in the way of taxes on the payout and to save more money if and when Loews ever decides to sell off its CBS investment.
Just what Loews's plans are is not clear; the company said yesterday there would be no comment.
But one indication will come in the next few months.
If Loews, which now has a 19.5 percent stake in CBS, goes into the open market to buy more shares, it will be a clear sign Loews is planning to take advantage of the tax provisions.


Dow Eases 3.89 as Traders Show Caution
Worried by the dollar's continuing fall, despite a rate increase by the Federal Reserve that should have raised its value, stock traders pulled back sharply from trading yesterday.
The leading stock indexes closed essentially unchanged, while bonds fell with the declining dollar.


Go for Gin Sprinting Back Into Title Race
Nick Zito cast his vote today for the 3-year-old champion of 1994, and guess who got it?
That's right, his colt Go for Gin, the winner of the Kentucky Derby but the missing horse last Saturday when Holy Bull and Tabasco Cat were grappling in the Travers.
Go for Gin has been missing most of the summer because Zito decided to skip the distance and the demands of the Travers and take a different route to the important fall races.
But his horse will return on Wednesday as the favorite in the Forego Handicap, a Grade I sprint at seven furlongs and a stepping stone to the Woodward Stakes and a return match with the leading candidate, Holy Bull.


CHRONICLE
ANN JORDAN of Lake Ronkonkoma, L.I., is planning to go to college this fall, but she can't make up her mind what to study.
She is considering taking history, but that's not written in stone.
Originally, she had thought about computers but "it didn't seem sensible," she said.
She then considered law but, in her own words, "I wouldn't live long enough to graduate."
Ms.
Jordan is 92, and the classes she hopes to attend at Dowling College in Oakdale, L.I., will be her first college experience.
A high school graduate, she retired from Con Edison 30 years ago after 35 years there as a secretary.


Probing Venus's Craters
The history of the pockmarked surface of Venus, the result of impact craters and volcanic activity, has been a point of contention among researchers ever since the spacecraft Magellan began providing images of the planet in August 1990.
Scientists did not understand why images of Venus showed a high number of impact craters in pristine states, unlike craters on other planets, which exhibit varying degrees of decomposition.


The Rules of the Game: Women Must Play
It was game day, and Beth Almond's answering machine was filling up with the usual desperate messages.
"We'll see you at the game."
"We really need you at the game."
"If you're not there, we can't win."
"I'll pay you if you come to the game."


A Goodbye to N.F.L. Wars From Old Soldier Williams
Bill Parcells, who had coached him for most of his pro football career, called him "the best-conditioned player I've ever had." Wellington Mara, who owned the team, was so moved when the Giants let him go that he wrote him a long, touching thank-you letter.
This year, when he moved to the Jets after 11 seasons with the Giants, his old teammates were almost as elated as he was that he got a job.
But today, it all ended for Perry Williams.
To start with, 33-year-old cornerbacks are scarce in the National Football League (the oldest is Darrell Green, 34, of the Redskins).
The fire was not burning the way it once did.
And the Jets had to cut 14 players by Tuesday and seemed ready to cut him.
So he retired.


Albert P. Blaustein, a Drafter Of Constitutions, Dies at 72
Albert P. Blaustein, a law professor who dedicated nearly three decades of his life to drafting constitutions for nations in transition, died on Sunday at Duke University Hospital in Durham, N.C., after suffering a heart attack.
He was 72.
A fervent believer that a constitution could help a nation define its legal, political and moral identity, Mr.
Blaustein wrote the constitutions now in use in Liberia and Fiji, contributed large parts of the constitutions of Zimbabwe, Bangladesh and Peru, and had a hand in the drafting of about 40 others, including those of Nicaragua, Romania and post-Soviet Russia.


Morrison Books Hide for Bout
TOMMY MORRISON will try to recapture the World Boxing Organization heavyweight title from HERBIE HIDE of Britain in Hong Kong's first world title fight on Oct. 23, organizers said yesterday.
Morrison lost the title to MICHAEL BENTT in Oct. 1993, and Bentt then lost it to Hide in March. (AP)


Danitra Vance, 35, an Actress; Worked at Shakespeare Festival
Danitra Vance, an actress and performance artist who appeared in "The Colored Museum" and "Spunk" at the New York Shakespeare Festival, died on Sunday at the home of her grandfather, Clarence M. Edwards, in Markham, Ill.
She was 35 and lived in Brooklyn.
The cause was breast cancer, said her companion, Jones Miller.


Price Waterhouse Nominates a Chairman
James J. Schiro, vice chairman of the metropolitan New York region for Price Waterhouse has been nominated to become the firm's chairman and senior partner, the firm announced yesterday.
If confirmed by the Big Six accounting firm's partners, Mr.
Schiro, who is 48 years, will succeed Shaun F. O'Malley.
He will become the 11th chairman at Price Waterhouse since 1890, when the firm first opened its doors in the United States.


Sunglass Hut International (RAYS,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to July 30


For Japan, a Growing Deficit in Foreign Visitors
Dressed in T-shirts, shorts and sunglasses, Mike and Jo Ozimek of Philadelphia were strolling recently along the Ginza, Tokyo's glitziest shopping district.
Mr.
Ozimek described Japan as the safest and most interesting country in East Asia, and said he would love to live here.
It was his fifth visit and his wife's first.
But Mr.
Ozimek admitted that he would probably never have come to know Japan if his job with a computer company had not brought him here on business trips, like this one.
And Mrs.
Ozimek said that, while she was enjoying the trip to a country she had hardly given a thought to visiting before, she was intimidated by the $400 cost of a brief visit to Mount Fuji, a little more than an hour away.


Massimino Will Stay
ROLLIE MASSIMINO said yesterday he intends to remain as Nevada-Las Vegas's coach, despite being told again that he won't be paid the remainder of nearly $2 million secretly promised by former school officials.
Massimino emerged from an hourlong meeting with KEVIN GUINN, the school's interim president, to say he believes he still will be paid the extra $375,000 a year called for in the secret supplemental contract.
Massimino said he believes the supplemental contract -- signed with a private nonprofit group -- is a legal and binding contract and that he will be paid.
Massimino said he doesn't plan to sue to try and collect the money. (AP)


Researcher's Infection Raises Concerns for Laboratory Safety
A Yale researcher is in isolation at Yale-New Haven Hospital under treatment for a potentially deadly infection contracted after a laboratory accident with a rare virus he was studying.
And health officials have imposed surveillance measures on about two dozen people with whom he had recent, close contact in Connecticut and Massachusetts.
The surveillance is aimed at stopping further transmission of the extraordinarily dangerous microbe known as Sabia virus.
Related to the deadly agent of Lassa fever, it first came to light in 1990 in the Brazilian city of Sabia.


Russians And Germans Agree to Fight Nuclear Theft
Russia and Germany agreed today to cooperate to prevent the smuggling of nuclear materials by tightening border controls and improving the exchange of information between their intelligence agencies, officials of both countries said.
A series of seizures in Germany of bomb-grade nuclear material, including one large shipment of 10.5 ounces of plutonium 239 on a Moscow-Munich flight, prompted three days of talks here between Chancellor Helmut Kohl's intelligence coordinator, Bernd Schmidbauer, and top Russian nuclear and security officials.


Muslim Preachers in Egypt Condemn Population Conference
Muslim militant preachers have condemned a United Nations population conference that is to be held here next month, prompting a private warning from Egyptian security agents to call off such sermons, a militant leader said here today.
"Some brothers are preaching against this corrupt, immoral conference in the mosques," said the leader, an important militant figure in Imbaba, a poor section of Cairo that is the city's biggest fundamentalist stronghold.
"But others may decide to defend Islam by killing, and they would be willing to die in the process. If the West is afraid of blood, it should stay away from us." He spoke on condition that he not be identified.


Fleet Injected $5 Million To Prop Up Fund Prices
Some of the best-performing investments in three of the Fleet Financial Group's money market mutual funds went so awry that the banking company had to inject $5 million into the funds in July to keep their share price constant at $1.
In 1992, the managers of Fleet's money funds, which have about $1.9 billion in assets, sought to protect the funds against rapidly declining interest rates.
So, they bought $260 million of securities known as structured notes, which carried a floating interest rate that changed more slowly than most other rates.


Rwandans Resume Flight Across Border Into Zaire
The month-long movement of Rwandans into Zaire resumed in full force today after the United Nations, under pressure from Zaire, agreed Sunday that refugees would enter the country only at one border crossing and only aboard trucks.
According to United Nations officials, there are currently 50,000 Rwandans making their way to Zaire across the miles of twisting, mountainous terrain that stretch from the Nyungwe National Forest.


Purolator Products Co.  (PFIL,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Johnson To Acquire Neutrogena
Johnson &amp; Johnson agreed today to pay $924 million for the Neutrogena Corporation, giving the big health care and consumer products company a strong mass-market brand for its expanding skin and hair care business.
The acquisition of Neutrogena, which makes premium brand health care products for women, reflects the continuing consolidation of consumer products into the hands of companies with strong international distribution systems, analysts said.
Last month, for example, Avon sold Giorgio Beverly Hills to Procter &amp; Gamble in order to concentrate on its core cosmetics business.
P.&amp; G. has been building its international fragrance business since 1991, when it purchased Max Factor from Revlon.
Overseas Opportunities
For Johnson &amp; Johnson, overseas opportunities are among Neutrogena's biggest draws.
Only about a fourth, or $72 million, of Neutrogena's $307 million in projected sales this year will come from abroad, according to Diana Temple, an analyst at Salomon Brothers.
That is much less than at other personal care products companies.
Avon and Gillette, for instance, each derive about two-thirds of their sales overseas, she said.


Orchard Supply Hardware Stores Corp.(OSHC,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Mexico's Choice
Although Sunday's presidential election in Mexico was not as clean as it should have been, on present evidence it was the cleanest in living memory.
That should give President-elect Ernesto Zedillo Ponce de Leon the mandate he needs to carry political and economic reform through its difficult next phase.
A credible Mexican election is also a relief for the U.S.
Immigration, border commerce and the North American Free Trade Agreement increasingly link the fates of North America's two giants.


Roof Collapses on Five-Story Building


Observer; A Most Cryptic Scrawl
"Rob the rich" was the advice scrawled on a flat surface just outside the Boston Public Garden.
Although it has been three weeks since I saw it, it still torments me.
Like so much writing that looks simple -- "The truth will set you free," "To thine own self be true," and so forth -- "Rob the rich" has power to lead the mind down labyrinthine corridors until it winds up trapped at uncertainty.


Houston Ballet Cancels Shows at City Center
The Houston Ballet has canceled its shows at City Center, which were to be Nov. 9 to 13.
In its announcement yesterday, the company cited "economic considerations" as the reason.
This is Houston's second withdrawal from City Center in two years.
The company reduced a projected $700,000 deficit for fiscal 1994 to $120,000, it said.
But it anticipates another deficit, of $400,000, for 1995.
The costs of a New York season would have added about $265,000 to the 1995 deficit, said Joyce Moffatt, the managing director of the troupe.
The company has also canceled two one-week home seasons devoted to the presentation of new ballets.
It is to appear at the John F. Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts in Washington in October 1995.


Dorel Industries reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Officials See More Hirings Of Police in Anti-Crime Bill
Although it reduced the amount of money they would receive, officials in the New York metropolitan region welcomed approval by the House of Representatives of a revised $30.2 billion anti-crime package.
They said it would bring millions of dollars to the area for a hodgepodge of prevention and prosecution measures.
For cities throughout the region, the measure would mean thousands of additional police officers, more financing to jail criminal immigrants, funds for community schools and money to hire new prosecutors and judges.


Battle on Crime Bill Tests Clinton's Strategic Skills
With the tenacious battle that transformed a devastating defeat on the crime bill into Sunday's victory in the House, President Clinton made clear over 11 exhausting August days just how vital he considers the measure to his own political future.
As Mr.
Clinton had imagined it, this was to be the month that universal health care became the law of the land.
Instead, with the health plan in peril, it was a time that the President and his aides had to throw all of their energy into rescuing their initiative on crime, concluding that it was the one issue on which voters demanded action.


Medisave Appeals to Low-Income Employees; Gramm Spoke for Us
To the Editor:
When Hillary Rodham Clinton mocks Senator Phil Gramm of Texas for declining to criticize Social Security and Medicare after his attacks on national health care proposals, she underlines one reason for the principled opposition of many conservatives to further Government entitlements: once programs are in place, they become politically unassailable.


Historic Hurricane Could Catch Northeast With Its Guard Down
SOONER or later, meteorological circumstances will conspire to hurl another storm as strong as the legendary hurricane of September 1938 against a complacent Northeastern United States, and its cost in lives and property could be the highest ever exacted by a hurricane in this country.
Or so concludes a new analysis of past hurricane behavior and present Northeastern development.
Only sheer chance kept this from happening in 1985 and 1991, when Hurricanes Gloria and Bob, respectively, struck the Northeast, according to the author of the study, Dr.
Nicholas K. Coch, a geologist at Queens College.
Had either of those storms drifted into a certain meteorological "slot" as the 1938 hurricane did, it could well have been more catastrophic than Hurricane Andrew, the most destructive tropical storm ever to hit the United States mainland.
Andrew struck southern Florida in August 1992.


Response to Clinton's Policy Proves As Varies as Waves of Cuban Exodus
Not long into Fidel Castro's revolution, two armed men from the new Government came to Efrain Veiga Sr.'s lumber yard in Havana and asked him to hand over the keys.
His business confiscated, Mr.
Veiga soon sent his 9-year-old son to an aunt in the United States, and a year later, in 1962, he and his wife followed.
"The one who should have left was Fidel," the 73-year-old Mr.
Veiga said.
"But what were we supposed to do? Work for the Communist Government? I can say I never worked for them."


Ogilvy Sets Team For I.B.M. Account
Ogilvy &amp; Mather Worldwide said yesterday that it had named a team of senior executives to handle the worldwide I.B.M. account, with billings of $400 million to $500 million, that it was awarded in May.


CHRONICLE
Elvis Presley fans were treated to a lunch yesterday marking the 17th anniversary of two concerts that never took place -- the singer died six days before his scheduled Aug. 22, 1977, performances at the Nassau Coliseum.
The event at the Milleridge Inn in Jericho, L.I., attended by some 150 men and women who still had their 1977 tickets or were fan club members, included appearances by Elvis impersonators and an opportunity to apply for a refund for the unused 1977 tickets, priced at $12 and $15.


2 Police Officers Wounded in a Subway Shootout
In a shootout that apparently involved police officers in civilian clothes firing at each other, two officers were wounded, one of them critically, in a crowded subway station on the East Side of Manhattan yesterday evening.
The shooting took place at 7:10 P.M. in the station at 53d Street and Lexington Avenue and set off a panic among commuters, who dropped to the platform, ducked to the floor of their train or tried to flee the station.


Corrections
A report in The Living Section on Wednesday listing Greenmarket locations in New York City included an erroneous entry supplied by the Greenmarket Project.
The Greenwich Village market, at Gansevoort and Hudson Streets, has not been open since July 30; Community Board 2 has scheduled a public hearing for Sept. 7 to consider reopening it in another location.


France's New Breed Of Opera Singers
The travails of French opera have become almost a cliche by now.
The latest scandale, Myung-Whun Chung's abrupt dismissal as music director of the Paris Opera, would only seem to confirm the cliche.
Never mind that this seems to have been a pure power struggle between two ambitious men, and that the winner, Hugues Gall, the designated director of the company, is himself a man of proven taste and vision.
The dismissal still looks bad in the short run, yet another "proof" that when it comes to opera, the French haven't a clue.


Corrections
A picture caption in Weekend on Friday with a Critic's Choice article about a tribute to Vincent Price at the Film Forum misidentified a woman shown with Mr.
Price in a scene from "The Tingler," because of incorrect information provided by the theater.
She was Pamela Lincoln, not Judith Evelyn.


Telefonos de Mexico
The American depository receipts of Telefonos de Mexico, the national telephone company, are so widely held that investors use it as a proxy for the entire Mexican stock market.
Some investors, apparently pleased with the results of the Mexican election yesterday, bid up the A.D.R.'s.


Pre-Strike Proposal Revealed
The major league baseball season could have continued uninterrupted if the owners had agreed to a pre-strike proposal by Robert Reich, the Secretary of Labor, a lawyer close to the labor dispute said last night.
Reich, the lawyer said, made a proposal to both sides, asking the players not to strike and the owners not to implement their salary cap unilaterally in the off season.


For Medical Consumers
To the Editor:
Although much has been said about allowing the free market to regulate medical costs, nothing has been done to provide the consumer with information to make intelligent choices.


James McCurdy, 72, Designer and Racer Of Ocean Sailboats
James A. McCurdy, a noted naval architect who embellished traditional design to create modern sailboats, died on Sunday at Huntington Hospital in Huntington, L.I.
His death was caused by complications from heart failure, said his wife, Faith Higgins McCurdy.
He was 72.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Intel plans a huge fall campaign for Pentium, its latest and most powerful computer chip.
IF you soon see commercials for computer microprocessors on the Comedy Central cable network, or during "Frasier," "Mad About You" and "Saturday Night Live" on NBC, it will be no joke.
The commercials, scheduled to begin running on those networks and others in mid-September, are part of a huge fall campaign for Pentium, the latest and most powerful chip from the Intel Corporation.
Print advertisements and radio commercials, due to start next week, are also part of the campaign by Intel, the nation's leading producer of microprocessors for personal computers, as are billboards and displays in stores.


Relationship Ends in a Squabble
The relationship between the New York office of D'Arcy Masius Benton &amp; Bowles and Pro Player ended in a squabble yesterday, only five months after the agency was awarded the company's licensed sports apparel account.
The agency said it had resigned the account, but Pro Player said it had dismissed the agency.
The two sides could not even agree on billings; D.M.B.&amp; B. estimated them at $2 million, Pro Player at $5 million.


Metropolitan Diary
DEAR DIARY:
The time: a recent Monday evening around 6 o'clock.
I was on my way home from work and popped into the Calvin Klein department on the third floor of Bloomingdale's.
I saw no sign of a salesclerk, so I gathered a few outfits and headed for the fitting rooms.
I must have spent close to an hour trying on, taking off, trying on again, pondering what seemed right or not so right for me.
I decided to check the racks one more time, except that when I emerged, the lights were out.
"Hello, hello," I called, thinking we might be having a blackout.
Then it dawned on me: "My God, the store has closed and I'm locked in Bloomingdale's!"


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
The merger of Macy and Federated faces opposition from the New York State Attorney General, who called on Federated to sell all 12 Macy's stores in metropolitan New York.  [ Page D1. ]


Embargo Dries Up Haiti Fuel Supply
The sweating and ragged men and women who sell gasoline in the black market on the side of the road here have a saying: you never appreciate the tail of a donkey until you try to catch one running downhill.
In one more absurdity in an absurd place and time, the United States and relief groups may have to rely on this market to power hospital generators and the trucks that take food and medicine to Haiti's poor in a nation slowly being squeezed dry by an international embargo.


Downsizing's Casualties
To the Editor:
Albert J. Dunlap is a symbol of capitalism's contradiction.
At Scott Paper Company, he has been brought in to fire 30 percent of the employees (Business Day, Aug. 15).
In the bargain, he has made a tidy profit.


Paralympics Sue U.S.O.C.
Organizers of an Olympic-style competition for disabled athletes sued the United States Olympic Committee in Federal court today, contending that the U.S.O.C. is improperly attempting to claim royalties from the disabled athletes' mascot.
Blaze, a mascot resembling a Phoenix and designed by the Paralympic organizers, is a symbol for its games scheduled for Atlanta in August 1996.


Delta and AT&amp;T to Develop Travel Systems
Delta Air Lines Inc. and the AT&amp;T Corporation said today that they were teaming up to develop computer and communications systems for the travel industry, and Delta said it would jump-start the new business by signing itself up as the first customer.
The new venture is AT&amp;T's first big effort to enter the computer "outsourcing" business, in which corporate customers hire an independent company to develop and manage complex information networks that handle jobs like billing and data-base management.


Spartech Corp.(SEH,A) reports earnings for Qtr to July 30


CHRONICLE
For the last decade, the backs of 200 New York buses have carried large advertising posters with sometimes puzzling and sometimes humorous messages.
One of them read "She ditched him -- JOHN WEITZ ties and all." Another two-liner acknowledged that the offbeat approach wasn't always easy to decipher.
It simply said: "I don't understand John Weitz advertising. You're kidding."
The observers who follow such things, amused or irritated, will have a respite next month.
Mr.
Weitz, the designer, is donating his bus-advertising space to Phoenix House, the drug-abuse service agency in New York.
The message will say "Need Help? Call 1-800-COCAINE, Phoenix House."


Corrections
An article on Aug. 9 about the stabbing of seven people in a New Haven coffee bar referred incorrectly to one of the people on the scene.
He is Bruce Shapiro, a stabbing victim, not Ruth Shapiro.
No one named Ruth Shapiro was involved in the incident.
The article also said Mr.
Shapiro was married, but he is not.


U.S. Petroleum Data
In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
Aug. 19
Aug. 12
Aug. 20
1994
1994
1993
Gasoline production, daily
7.5
7.4
7.2
Distillate production, daily
3.3
3.3
3.1
Gasoline stocks
207.5
207.9
203.2
Distillate stocks
134.7
131.5
124.0
Crude imports, daily
7.5
7.9
6.4
Product imports, daily
2.7
1.9
1.6
Crude stocks
325.7
328.5
343.6
Crude production, daily
6.5
6.5
6.6
Refinery utilization (%)
95.0
95.5
94.0
Source: American Petroleum Institute


Minor Parties File Petitions For Pataki and Rosenbaum
Supporters of the two Republican candidates for governor filed petitions today aimed at making sure their names are on the general election ballot in November no matter who wins the primary next month.
The Rev.
Al Sharpton, who is running for the United States Senate, had also announced his intention to collect signatures to form a new party, but the State Election Commission said it had not received the petitions today, the deadline for placing independent parties on the primary ballot in November.


La-Z-Boy Chair (LZB,N) reports earnings for Qtr to July 30


Canadian Fracmaster reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Executive Changes
LONDON FOG INDUSTRIES, Darien, Conn., named James Milligan, chairman of the executive committee, as chief executive and John Varvatos, vice chairman and executive vice president of product design and merchandising, as chairman, succeeding Arnold Cohen, who left the company.
NATIONAL COMPUTER SYSTEMS INC., Minneapolis, named Russell A. Gullotti president and chief executive.


Inquiry at Utility Finds Questionable Spending
An internal investigation into the gas and electric utility serving Rockland and Orange Counties has found almost $4 million in questionable spending, including $885,000 in bogus business expenses billed by the company's former chairman and other executives.
Investigators said the former chairman, James F. Smith, used company funds to pay for personal expenses like vacation visits to Europe and Russia, gift baskets for friends, tickets to Broadway shows, expensive wine and $37,158 worth of food for private parties at the company's conference center in Sullivan County.


Strike Shuts Key Plant For G.M.
A United Automobile Workers union local struck a General Motors components plant in Indiana today, cutting off the supply of crucial parts to G.M. assembly plants nationwide.
The assembly plants had enough inventory of the parts, including bumpers and headlamps, to operate today, a company spokesman, John Shea, said.
He declined to say how many assembly plants might be affected, or whether production could be disrupted as soon as Wednesday.
"We're not getting into any speculation now," he said.


Uni-Select reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


CHC Helicopter reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Law Proposed to End Adoption Horror Stories
There seems no end to adoption horror stories these days, what with the spectacle of children like Baby Jessica and Baby Richard torn between competing sets of adoptive and biological parents.
Now, after five years of anonymous and arcane labor, a group of judges, lawyers and scholars has approved a model adoption law intended to prevent such battles.
Yet the proposed law is stirring debate as heated as the adoptions themselves.
It touches on nearly every issue that has roiled adoption circles, from fathers' rights to transracial adoptions.


METRO DIGEST
IN SUBWAY, OFFICERS FIRING AT OFFICERS
All but one of the eight gunshots that turned a crowded East Side subway station into a battlefield Monday night were fired by police officers mistakenly aiming at each other, police officials said.
The remaining shot, they said, occurred when a suspect dropped his shotgun and it went off.
In the tumult, a white New York City police officer opened fire on a black undercover transit officer, hitting him four times.
A1.
Officer Peter Del Debbio, who shot a transit police officer, had lived through another hellish night in the subway, a night that cost him part of his finger and no small amount of pride.
B4.


Ousted N.A.A.C.P. Leader Goes to Court
The Rev.
Benjamin F. Chavis Jr. argued in court today that the N.A.A.C.P. should be ordered to reinstate him as its executive director because, he said, the group's board had failed to follow its own procedures when it dismissed him on Saturday night.
In a suit filed on Monday in District of Columbia Superior Court, lawyers for Mr.
Chavis asserted that the board failed to give him sufficient notice before an emergency board meeting on Saturday that it might consider his dismissal and failed to give him enough time to prepare a defense or call witnesses on his behalf.


The Cookies That Ate a New Market
In the beginning there was the Snackwell's Devil's Food Cookie Cake, the no-fat, no-cholesterol snack that was such a hot seller that some devotees were following delivery trucks to supermarkets.
Then there were five siblings including Snackwell's Wheat Crackers, Oatmeal Raisin Cookies and Chocolate Chip Cookies.
And they were shipped to the consumers, who devoured them in such numbers that the Nabisco Biscuit Company could not keep up with the demand.
Then came still more crackers and cookies -- a total of 11 Snackwell's categories abroad in the land.


In America; Chavis's Noisy 15 Minutes
There were a few hundred people in the auditorium of Paul Laurence Dunbar High School on Monday night, but for all practical purposes Ben Chavis was alone.
Clinging desperately to the final seconds of his 15 minutes in the spotlight, Mr.
Chavis has chosen, in his typically clumsy and contentious way, not to go quietly.
Just an hour or two earlier his lawyers had gone to court to try to block Mr.
Chavis's ouster as executive director of the N.A.A.C.P.
Now he was onstage, attempting to salvage whatever ego gratification he could from his so-called "crucifixion."


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
7.75
7.75
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
4.00
4.00
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
4.69
4.64
3.01
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.62
4.54
3.02
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.98
4.90
3.12
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.31
7.25
5.60
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.55
7.49
6.22
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.41
8.36
7.09
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.42
6.40
5.63
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


F. Lee Wendell, 78, Marketing Executive
F.
Lee H. Wendell, a retired management consultant who was long active in Harvard University alumni affairs, died last Wednesday at Lake Forest Hospital in Lake Forest, Ill., where he lived.
He was 78.
The cause was cancer, his family said.


Rep. Gallo Drops Out of Race, Citing Problems With Health
Citing health problems, Representative Dean A. Gallo, Republican of Parsippany, withdrew today as a candidate for re-election to the Congressional seat he has held for 10 years.
Mr.
Gallo, who won a hard-fought primary election in June against three opponents, said he had learned over the Fourth of July weekend that a prostate cancer condition diagnosed and treated in 1992 was no longer in remission and would require further treatment.
Mr.
Gallo, who is 58, also underwent hip replacement surgery in March.


40 G.O.P. SENATORS POSE NEW HURDLE FOR THE CRIME BILL
The bipartisan feelings that briefly flowered on Sunday when House Republicans joined Democrats to pass the crime bill vanished today as Senate Republicans threatened to block the bill in the upper chamber.
Senator Bob Dole, the minority leader, collected the signatures of 40 Republicans who, he said, would vote with him to scuttle the bill passed by the House on Sunday and force the Senate to work from an earlier bill that did not have a ban on assault weapons.
If those commitments are firm, under Senate rules Mr.
Dole would have enough votes to block the House-approved bill on a procedural challenge.


Pope's Health Is Prompting New Concern
The Vatican insisted today that Pope John Paul II was making "excellent" progress during a vacation in the mountains of northern Italy, despite concern over his health and questions about the potential hazards of the visit he plans to Sarajevo.
The worries about the 74-year-old Pope's physical well-being resurfaced on Sunday when he seemed to grimace in pain while descending from a platform after he had said Mass.


Recycling Bins Should Also Permit Reuse
To the Editor:
The effort by newspaper companies to redesign newspaper recycling receptacles for train stations to prevent people from taking the newspapers out is a disgrace.


No Headline
"A disconcerting number of rafters probably don't make it. It's certainly enough for us scientists to be extremely worried about it and consider this a tragedy." BRUCE R. ROSENDAHL, dean of the Rosenstiel School of Marine and Atmospheric Science at the University of Miami.  [ A15:1. ]


A Child at the Center Of a Deadly Business
"Fresh" was shown as part of this year's New Directors/New Films series.
Following are excerpts from Janet Maslin's review, which appeared in The New York Times on April 1.
The film opens today.
In addition to being the most commercially viable film to come out of this year's New Directors/New Films series, Boaz Yakin's "Fresh" is likely to be the most controversial.
"Fresh" is the story of the title character, an impassive black 12-year-old.


New Jersey Pier Fire on the Hudson Is Still Smoldering


Wine Talk; 2 1/2 Decades Later, A Very Good Year
THEY will be celebrating a milestone at Opus One next week.
Opus One is the name of a winery, an architectural tour de force in the Napa Valley in California; it's also the name of its wine.
The celebration is for the 1991 vintage, the first to be made at the winery.
But the party has been almost 25 years in the making, having survived big egos, a big price on the wine, a big construction problem and a serious disease in the vines.


Kukoc: Union Criticizes N.B.A.
The National Basketball Association's rejection of the contract signed last week between TONI KUKOC and the Chicago Bulls was denounced yesterday by the head of the players' union.
"Once again the league is simply venting its frustration over its loss in court last year," said CHARLES GRANTHAM, executive director of the National Basketball Players Association.
Kukoc signed his new contract after exercising his right to "opt out" of the contract he signed with the Bulls last year.


Filipino Protesters Seek Amends From Japan Over Wartime Ordeal


Food Notes
A Bigger Mrs. Green's
The average Manhattan supermarket could easily fit into the 12,000 square feet of space occupied by Mrs.
Green's Natural Market in Eastchester, N.Y.
The market, which opened last week at 780 White Plains Road (Route 22), is the first in the region on the scale of stores like Mrs.
Gooch's in California.
Most of the products the market carries are organic.
Mrs.
Green's has a wall of vitamins and an aisle of cosmetics, but it devotes proportionately less space to nonfood items than do most health-food stores.
All the produce is organic.
Last week, there were three kinds of plums ($1.99 to $2.29 a pound), the mixture of salad greens called mesclun ($6.99 a pound), honeydew melons (99 cents a pound) and corn on the cob (99 cents each).
The store also has an impressive array of organic frozen foods, and it sells free-range chicken but no meat or fish.
"You could not have done this five years ago," said Harold Hochberger, the owner.
"There were fewer growers and manufacturers and, in this area, many fewer distributors."
Mark Feldman, a former chef at Florent and Luma in Manhattan, is in charge of the prepared foods, which include a fine tofu-dill spread, Greek barley salad, barbecued tempeh, a hefty and juicy bulgur burger and nonwheat chocolate cupcakes made with spelt, a type of grain, that could pass muster with a devoted chocoholic.
"It's not easy because everything we make has no something," Mr.
Feldman said.
"No wheat, no dairy, no eggs, no oil or no meat. We even have a dish with no soy for people who can't eat that."
Mrs.
Green's -- (914) 472-0111 -- is open every day and offers delivery and catering.
A smaller Mrs.
Green's opened three years ago at 365 Central Park Avenue in Scarsdale, N.Y.
Gefilte Fish and More
You are not likely to find Cajun blackened gefilte fish on many menus for Rosh ha-Shanah, the Jewish New Year, which begins at sundown Sept. 5.
But how about gefilte fish cakes, using the usual gefilte fish mixture, for patties to saute and serve hot, like faux crab cakes?
Tempting variations are offered in "Traditional Jewish Cooking" by Betty S. Goldberg (Jonathan David Publishers, $24.95), which mainly emphasizes the classics.
The recipes are clearly presented and explained with historical and cultural asides, making the book an excellent primer on this blend of Eastern European, Middle-Eastern and American food.
There are few low-fat compromises, although vegetable oil or olive oil are suggested as substitutes for traditional chicken fat.
Preparations are modernized by using a food processor, but the recipes depend on ingredients like pot cheese, eggs, brisket and organ meats that predate the era of cholesterol counting.
Even the egg cream is made with whole milk.
Mothers-in-Law, Beware!
Delicate little oval pastries called cat's tongues and lady fingers have nothing on a kind of Italian flat bread called lingue di suocera.
Translation?
Mother-in-law's tongues.
Each one is a foot long.
Grace's Marketplace, 1237 Third Avenue (71st Street), is importing these delicious, thin, crackerlike breads from Genoa, a little like the Armenian crisp bread lavosh.
A box with 10 ounces of mother-in-law's tongues is $9.50.
The same amount in a wooden gift box is $40.
The bread is also sold in bulk for $10 a pound.
New Home in Napa Valley
The American Institute of Wine and Food, an educational organization based in San Francisco that was founded in 1981 by Julia Child, Robert Mondavi and others, is going to get a new headquarters in the town of Napa, Calif., in the Napa Valley.
Mr.
Mondavi has donated land for a new Center for Food, Wine and the Arts.
An extension for the Davis campus of the University of California, which specializes in wine, will also be situated in the center.
Roberta Klugman, the executive director of the wine and food institute, which now has 7,000 members and 34 chapters, said the organization would not have to pay rent in the new center.
"The whole thing is Robert Mondavi's vision," she said.
It will be about five years before the building is ready.
Garlic Variations
The Peconic River Herb Farm in Calverton, L.I., is to hold its annual garlic festival on Sept. 17, from 9 A.M. to 5 P.M.
There will be lectures, cooking demonstrations, garlic-related items for sale and workshops.
Admission is $10 a car.
Reservations are necessary for the workshops, which cost $15 to $35 and will be held from 9:30 A.M. to 12:30 P.M.
A buffet lunch from noon to 2 P.M. -- including garlic gazpacho, dips and a chicken dish -- is $25.
Tickets can be reserved by sending checks payable to the farm to 310-C River Road, Calverton, N.Y. 11933.
Information: (516) 369-0058.
Scratch-and-Sniff Beer
Some magazines arrive drenched in the latest Calvin Klein perfume.
But advertisements in the Aug. 22 issue of Newsweek, the Sept. 8 Rolling Stone and the Sept. 15 Sports Illustrated take a different route.
They're for Samuel Adams beers, and they have a scratch-and-sniff patch infused with the aroma of hops.
It's vaguely fruity but not enough to induce thirst.


Study Suggests 2 Fatty Acids May Help Keep Hearts Healthy
JUST when consumers think they have mastered the connections between dietary fats, cholesterol and heart disease, another finding emerges to confuse the issue.
People who perhaps reluctantly replaced butter and other highly saturated fats with margarine and polyunsaturated vegetable oils were recently advised to eat less margarine and to use more monounsaturated olive and canola oils.
Meanwhile, Federal health officials are recommending that all kinds of fats be used sparingly and that grains and other complex carbohydrates form the bulk of a healthful diet.
Now researchers from the Boston University School of Medicine say that all this advice is off base and will not adequately reduce the risk of fat-clogged arteries that lead to heart attacks and strokes.
Rather, their preliminary studies indicate, a very low-fat diet may in itself touch off heart disease.
They found that a major risk factor was an insufficient intake of two polyunsaturated fatty acids that are as essential to human nutrition as vitamins, minerals and protein.


Bonilla's Big Interest Goes Beyond Bucks
Bobby Bonilla is going back to work this week.
No, not to that job, the one in which he stops ground balls at third base and hits home runs for the Mets.
No, this one involves the business of baseball.
Or more precisely, the business of trying to get baseball back on the field for the first time since major league players struck on Aug. 12.


Climbing to the Top in Pop: Rewards and Punishment
Hank Williams The Biography By Colin Escott With George Merritt and William MacEwen.
Illustrated. 307 pages.
Little, Brown.
Patsy The Life and Times of Patsy Cline By Margaret Jones Foreword by Loretta Lynn.
Illustrated. 335 pages.
HarperCollins. $23.


Struggling Hospital Shows Signs of Improving, O'Rourke Says
Four months after appointing a new commissioner to shore up the struggling Westchester County Medical Center, County Executive Andrew P. O'Rourke said today that the hospital was showing signs of improvement.
From April to June, Mr.
O'Rourke said, the medical center increased its emergency-room admissions and transfers from other hospitals while it decreased the average time that it took to discharge its patients.


The Beach on the Street; In Torpid Summer, the Fire Hydrant Yields an Ocean of the Imagination
Children came and went constantly to the spewing fire hydrant, dousing themselves and others.
Jamick Paris, who is 7, stood right next to the hydrant until water dribbled down his legs and you could hear the slap-slap of drops on the pavement.
Then, in their unruffled innocence, he and a friend laid down in the middle of the street and let the water run over them.
Laughing, Jamick ducked behind the hydrant and, nimbly working his fingers over the spray cap, directed the arc of water so that it splashed the others.
They galloped away, as if trying to flee a swarm of wasps.
Some whooped with glee.
Some, their faces dripping, threatened to get him back.


Westvaco Corp.(W,N) reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Citation Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to July 3


Big B Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to July 30


QVC INC. (QVCN,NNM)
QVC Inc. reported a 12 percent drop in second-quarter earnings yesterday, citing the costs of expanding television home shopping to Britain and Mexico.
Net income for the three months ended July 31 was $11.7 million, or 25 cents a share, down from $13.3 million, or 26 cents a share, a year earlier.
Revenue, however, rose 15.6 percent, to $303.3 million from $262.4 million.


Corrections
A picture caption yesterday with an article about Russian organized-crime activity in Brooklyn described incorrectly the shooting of Naum Raichel, which law-enforcement officials said was linked to organized crime.
Mr.
Raichel was wounded in the attack; he was not killed.


Ratings Drop For Aetna
Heavy losses from insurance claims for asbestos and environmental pollution that have plagued the Aetna Life and Casualty Company in recent years have now contaminated its blue-chip life insurance subsidiary, which yesterday lost its top-notch AAA rating from the Standard &amp; Poor's Corporation.
The rating agency reduced most of Aetna's debt ratings and claims-paying ratings slightly, with the Aetna Life Insurance and Annuity Company dropping to AA from AAA.


Justice Limits Larry Hogue's Detention
Larry Hogue, the mentally ill man accused of years of menacing behavior on the Upper West Side of Manhattan, was ordered by a State Supreme Court Justice yesterday to remain in the Creedmoor Psychiatric Center for no more than three months.
His lawyer had suggested that Creedmoor was trying to delay his release to avoid political criticism.
The decision, by Justice Patricia Satterfield of Queens, was a compromise with the hospital, which asked to keep Mr.
Hogue for six more months, and Mr.
Hogue, who had requested to be released to an outpatient program in 60 days.


Hoechst Celanese Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


O for a Song: Court Gives 33 1/3 Jingles
Steve Karmen has written such classics as "I Love New York," "Aren't You Glad You Use Dial" and "Weekends Were Made for Michelob." When it comes to composing musical sales pitches for a state, a soap or a beer, Steve Karmen has few peers.
But in the critical view of a Federal appeals court in Manhattan, Steve Karmen is no Cole Porter.
Despite his impressive list of memorable tunes, the court ruled yesterday that Mr.
Karmen was entitled to only a tiny percentage of the royalties accorded more famous songwriters.


Toll Brothers Inc.(TOL,N) reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


CHRONICLE
It is almost expected that every guest at a benefit dinner will take home a few free goodies like perfume, cosmetics or T-shirts, but there will be an added twist to the give-aways at the Art and Soul dinner-dance on Saturday at the Parrish Art Museum in Southampton, L.I.
The plan is to give one guest at each table a personal memento contributed by one of the well-known creative people associated with the Hamptons.
Among the mementoes already sent in are a baseball cap with Chevy Chase's signature, a song book from Marvin Hamlisch and a signed photograph by Arthur Elgort.


RAGTAG FLEET LEAVING CUBA
Despite the Clinton Administration's newly announced policy denying asylum to Cuban refugees for the first time in 28 years, thousands of Cubans continue to make the treacherous journey in makeshift rafts.


Why New York Hasn't Warmed to Metrocard
To the Editor:
Re your Aug. 17 news article on the snub of the transit card by New Yorkers: The "electronic token" will not be a best seller until all stations and buses are equipped to use it.
We have long supported fare discounts on quantity purchases and time-based passes to encourage increased transit ridership, particularly during off-peak hours.
Testifying in favor of the last fare increase, we called for an end to multiple-fare zones.


'Getting to Know You': Giants' Secondary Song
The Giants' secondary is fast, quick and young.
But it also is new, unsophisticated and not what the Giants are accustomed to.
Until the secondary becomes solid, the team may struggle.
If the Giants' entire defense shows more cohesion and more aggressiveness in Saturday night's preseason finale against the Bears in Chicago, its outlook will be brighter for the season opener Sept. 4 against the Philadelphia Eagles at Giants Stadium.


Hanes Selects Gyro Advertising
The Hanes Hosiery division of the Sara Lee Corporation in Winston-Salem, N.C., has selected Gyro Advertising in Philadelphia, a small agency that specializes in campaigns aimed at consumers in their 20's, as the first agency to handle advertising for its new E. G. Smith E. Magination line of socks and tights.
Billings were not disclosed.


Off the Menu
The Nicholson Diet
Jack Nicholson needed to lose 50 pounds for his role in the movie "Wolf." Enter Tommy Baratta, an old friend who is a chef and owner of Marylou's, a cozy restaurant at 21 West Ninth Street.
It took Mr.
Nicholson four months to lose the weight on Mr.
Baratta's low-fat diet.
He has kept it off, despite the munching in the movie.
Mr.
Baratta now travels with and cooks for Mr.
Nicholson, at places including his house in Southampton as well as in the restaurant.


On Campus; Study of Sign Language Booming at Rochester
After Spanish and French, the most popular foreign language at the University of Rochester is American Sign Language.
More than 120 sophomores, juniors and seniors have already pre-registered for American Sign Language 101, filling six sections and squeezing out most freshmen.


Random House Venture
Random House Inc. will join forces with Knowledge Adventure Inc. to develop and market multimedia titles.
Terms of the agreement, announced yesterday, were not disclosed.
In November, the companies will publish the Random House Kid's Encyclopedia, a CD-ROM multimedia encyclopedia for children ages 7 to 12.
Random House will also distribute Knowledge Adventure's software titles to bookstores.
Knowledge Adventure, based in La Crescenta, Calif., produces interactive multimedia products, including educational software.


CHRONICLE
PRINCE PHILIP, the Duke of Edinburgh, will be the first member of the British royal family to visit Israel when he takes part in a ceremony in Jerusalem in October honoring his mother, Princess Alice of Greece.
The Princess, who is credited with saving the lives of three Jews in Greece during the Holocaust, died in 1969 at the age of 84 and is buried in Jerusalem.
She sheltered members of the Jewish family in her home in Athens.
Buckingham Palace, which made the announcement, said: "Members of the royal family are always advised by the Foreign Office when traveling abroad. The Foreign Office felt that the time was right for this visit to Israel."


Diversity Encouraged By Merrill Lynch
To the Editor:
The premise that Merrill Lynch would invest in a minority-owned brokerage firm to take bond business away from other minority-owned and women-owned firms stands the truth on its head (front page, Aug. 11).


Lebow Inducted Into Track Hall of Fame
Fred Lebow, the founder and guiding spirit of the New York City Marathon who is stricken with brain cancer, was inducted into the National Track and Field Hall of Fame yesterday in a ceremony at Tavern on the Green.
Fittingly, the announcement was made just across from the blue line in Central Park that serves as the finish to the marathon, which celebrates its 25th anniversary Nov. 6.


Miami Defensive End Beats Odds All Way Back to Field
Few people expected Rusty Medearis to be a member of the University of Miami football team this season.
On Sept. 26, 1992, his left knee was badly damaged on a block by Hicham El-Mastoub of Arizona.
Medearis underwent 13 hours of surgery and the prognosis by Dr.
John Uribe, the team physician, was grim: don't play again or you could end up crippled.
Nearly two years later, after being granted unusual medical redshirt status, the 23-year-old Medearis, a sixth-year defensive end, has looked so good in scrimmages that he is very likely to start.


Eating Well
LONG before the term "fat free" became an important marketing tool, there were several crackers that fit that description.
Among them were Melba toast and Wasa bread.
Dieters have eaten them for decades -- unadorned -- to stave off hunger pangs.
No one else would dare; they are so dry that they can cut the inside of the mouth.
Crackers without fat generally suffer from another defect as well -- they have no taste.
And when they are not being used for dipping, as a base for a spread or crumbled in a bowl of soup, these faults stand out.


Climbing to the Top in Pop: Rewards and Punishment
Hank Williams The Biography By Colin Escott With George Merritt and William MacEwen.
Illustrated. 307 pages.
Little, Brown.
Patsy The Life and Times of Patsy Cline By Margaret Jones Foreword by Loretta Lynn.
Illustrated. 335 pages.
HarperCollins. $23.


Violinists Win I.R.S. Challenge
Two New York Philharmonic violinists who fought the Internal Revenue Service in court have won the right to claim a tax deduction for their rare early-19th-century violin bows.
In a decision that could affect thousands of professional musicians, judges in Federal Tax Court in Washington ruled on Monday 10 to 7 in favor of the violinists.
Lawyers for the Internal Revenue Service, led by Pamela Cohen, argued last December that the two Philharmonic players, Richard and Fiona Simon, could not claim their bows as a deduction because the bows, made by the French master Francois Tourte, were works of art that appreciated in value with the passage of time and fetched large sums in the collectibles market.


Grover Washington, Jazzy
Every so often, a musician who has prospered in pop-jazz decides to dust off the old jazz credentials.
On Monday night at the Blue Note, it was the saxophonist Grover Washington, who has just made a straightforward jazz album, "All My Tomorrows" (Columbia).
Mr.
Washington's way of crooning ballads on soprano saxophone has been emulated by the best-selling likes of Kenny G. It was the best portion of his set; in "Nature Boy," he caressed every phrase, stating the melody with breathy delicacy and clarity, bubbling over into ornament at rare moments.
As Freddie Cole and Jeanie Bryson whisper-sang "For Heaven's Sake," Mr.
Washington inserted shapely, seductive obbligatos.


Elway Blasts Preseason Games
Having played in about 50 preseason games over the course of his career -- the equivalent of more than three full regular seasons -- JOHN ELWAY could restrain himself no longer.


A Long, Slow Road From Glass to Mirror


Despite Clinton's Order, Travelers Going to Island
Charter flights have continued flying to Cuba despite President Clinton's weekend announcement that he was halting them to punish Fidel Castro for encouraging refugees to escape the island.
The delay in implementing his order was forced by the need to work out new regulations on air travel between Miami and Havana, Treasury Department officials said today.


Following A modern Prince Around His World
Tonight, as was breathlessly reported when "Charles: The Private Man, the Public Role" was shown in Britain, the royal known in the British tabloids as the heartless husband intimates that after his marriage to Princess Diana came apart he found comfort in the arms of Camilla Parker-Bowles.
But that is only a passing tingle in a generally sober two-hour look that brings us as close to His Highness as commoners are likely to come.
The program's producer, Jonathan Dimbleby, trailed the heir to the British throne for about 15 months, on official rounds and during off-hour fishing, skiing and gamboling with his two sons.
On the royal airplane heading here and there, Mr.
Dimbleby respectfully inquires into the Prince's feelings about his line of work and related matters.


New Jersey Pier Fire on the Hudson Is Still Smoldering


FLIGHT FROM CUBA: THE VOYAGE -- U.S. Scrambling to Cope With the Rising Tide of Cuban Refugees; Straits of Florida Hide the Unknown Toll of a Rush to Freedom
They set out in foam boxes, inner tubes and packing crates that pass for rafts, loading their flimsy vessels with bare essentials -- a plastic container with water, fried meat and bread, an image of the Virgin Mary or a Santeria deity tucked away, a compass pointing north.
And as they do, Cubans by the thousands are disregarding warnings not to embark on the dangerous journey across the Straits of Florida.
Unstated but implicit in the warnings are the many rafters who are feared dead.


Nerekhta Journal; In a Factory Town, Soviet Feudalism Dies Hard
The urban veneer of this small industrial town is melting away.
Chickens and goats roam the courtyards of huge Soviet apartment complexes, and cucumber and potato plants, not begonias, sprout out of window boxes and kitchen gardens.
Nerekhta's factory workers have not been paid for months, and many are turning into citified subsistence farmers.
Survival tips, instead of gossip, now dominate the town's small talk.
"We grow our own food and we borrow from my mother's pension check," is how Galina Razzhivina, 39, a bookkeeper, described her household accounts.
She and her husband, Mikhail, 36, work at the largest local plant, known simply as the Mechanical Factory, and neither has received a salary since May.


Why Punish the Cuban People?
President Clinton's abrupt reversal of 28 years of Cuban refugee policy last Friday looked clumsy enough, but over the weekend he made it worse.
Seeking to punish Fidel Castro for unleashing the latest refugee tide, Mr.
Clinton ended up also punishing ordinary Cubans.
He cut off all cash support from their relatives in the U.S., rather than the 50 percent cut originally announced.
By raising the temperature on Cuba when it should be trying to cool it, the Administration could yet convert a rhetorical emergency into a real one.
The package of pressures the President unveiled on Saturday did include two legitimate spurs to greater freedom in Cuba -- increased radio broadcasts and a new U.N. initiative on human rights.
It also included a cutoff of charter flights from the U.S. -- unwise, since Cuban freedom is served by more contacts with Americans, not less.


New York City's Pot of Gold
New York may be on the verge of acquiring an unexpected windfall -- millions of dollars in private money to be dipped into for the public good.
A new investment fund sponsored by the New York City Partnership is seeking to raise $100 million from wealthy individual and corporate donors; $15 million has already been pledged on the basis of a mere 15 telephone calls.
The Partnership's fund-raising is based on a powerful and proven idea: spread development money in the right places at the right moments and the whole city will profit.
Formed in 1978, just as New York was emerging from its last great fiscal crisis, the Partnership includes executives from more than 150 of the city's largest companies.
Among them is the Wall Street financier Henry R. Kravis, who proposed the new fund after researching similar economic-development efforts by corporate leaders in cities like Atlanta and Minneapolis.
Mr.
Kravis has been named chairman.


INSIDE
Macy-Federated Merger Faces a Snag From Albany
The merger of Macy and Federated faces opposition from the New York State Attorney General, who called on Federated to sell all 12 Macy's stores in metropolitan New York.
Page D1.
A Priest's Logic on Abortion
Father David Trosch, a renegade priest, says that moral logic justifies killing abortion doctors.
Page A12.
Blockbuster Approves Sale
The board of Blockbuster Entertainment agreed to sell the company to Viacom for $8.4 billion.
Page D1.


Man Is Struck and Killed by Subway Train
A man was struck and killed yesterday by an IRT train near the subway station at 96th Street and Broadway in Manhattan, delaying tens of thousands of riders for more than two hours, a Transit Authority spokeswoman said.
The man, who was not immediately identified, was walking on the tracks in a tunnel when a northbound No. 1 train hit him at 4:32 P.M., said the authority spokeswoman, Melissa Farley.


Treasuries Are Buoyed By Strong Note Auction
Prices of Treasury securities gained yesterday, as the beleaguered dollar held firm in the world's currency markets.
The bond market also got a lift from the Treasury's two-year note auction, which according to several traders, went better than expected, with good retail interest from both small and large investors.


Volunteers Line Up to Patrol Prospect Park


Winner in Mexico Calls for 'Dialogue' With Other Parties
Bolstered by new election returns that showed his long-ruling party sweeping to a wide victory in the Congress, the winner of Mexico's presidential race, Ernesto Zedillo Ponce de Leon, has invited his opponents to discuss the policies his government will put into place.
In an interview, Mr.
Zedillo said he was proposing "a broad dialogue to build a platform of government" that would include "the best of the political platforms of all parties."


Police Classes Are Postponed By Giuliani
After largely shielding New York City's Police Department from his budget knife, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani announced unexpectedly yesterday that he would delay for two months the start of the next two classes of recruits at the Police Academy.
The Mayor, who had opposed such a step during budget negotiations with the City Council last spring, said it would save about $10 million in salaries and pension costs for a total of 1,600 trainees.
The first of the two classes was to start next Monday.


Stocks Soar as Dollar Gains; Dow Up 24.61
The stock market surged yesterday after currency speculators pulled back from their attack on the dollar and the the currency lifted a little in value.
A more valuable dollar makes dollar-denominated assets, like stocks and bonds, more valuable.
But despite the seemingly large movement in stock prices, the leading stock indexes have merely returned to previous levels earlier in the month.


Outside Income for British M.P.'s Is Questioned
As a consultant to a Scottish electricity company, Philip Gallie keeps it up to date on what is happening in the House of Commons and sets up meetings with legislators.
The company, Scottish Power P.L.C., pays him an undisclosed fee -- probably around $15,000 a year -- and gives him use of a company car.
But the consulting job is just a sideline for Mr.
Gallie.
He is better known as the Member of Parliament for Ayr, on Scotland's west coast, and for serving on the Select Committee on Scottish Affairs.


Thwack! The Sure Sound of Courier Coming Back
Jim Courier hasn't won a tennis tournament in more than a year, has dropped from No. 1 to a distant 11th, and just last week threatened to skip next week's United States Open, a declaration of dissatisfaction with his game that spurred talk he was quitting tennis.
Cancel that threat.


RESULTS PLUS
TRACK AND FIELD  Christie Runs Spectacular 100  Linford Christie completed a spectacular return to the Commonwealth Games yesterday in Victoria, British Columbia, winning the 100 meters with the sixth-fastest time in history.
The 34-year-old Englishman bowed and blew kisses to the crowd after he won the gold medal in 9.91 seconds, his third games record in as many races over the past two days at Centennial Stadium.
Christie, the world champion and 1992 Olympic gold medalist, won his 20th gold medal in an international competition and repeated as games champion.


Health Care Bill's Prospects Dim With the Hardening of Stances
Health care legislation is hanging by a fraying thread.
Eleven months after President Clinton proclaimed a bold -- and complex -- proposal to guarantee health insurance to all Americans, the last clear legislative path toward that goal seems to be closing.
Last Friday's bipartisan proposal by the self-styled "mainstream coalition," which seemed to pro-Administration Democrats to offer a welcome basis for negotiation, looks less encouraging today after the group's Republican leader, Senator John H. Chafee of Rhode Island, continued to present it in all but "take it or leave it" terms.


John J. P. Kilgallen; Physician, 95
John J. P. Kilgallen, a physician who spent more than half a century transforming the New York Racing Association's medical department from a one-room nursing station into an innovative health service, died on Friday at the Courtland Gardens nursing home in Stamford, Conn.
He was 95.
His family said he died of natural causes after suffering from internal bleeding.


Long Island's Wines Gain in Stature
LONG ISLAND is steadily emerging as New York State's signature wine region, as maturing producers offer ever more sophisticated whites and reds to a growing clientele.
The wine business is only 21 years old on the East End of Long Island, and many of the wineries are less than half that age.
But with the trial-and-error fumblings of the early years largely behind them, Suffolk County's leading producers are seeing sales rise along with quality.


Campbell Names an Assistant
MIKE MURPHY, an assistant coach with the Toronto Maple Leafs the last three seasons and once the head coach of the Los Angeles Kings, joined the Rangers yesterday as an assistant to the new coach, COLIN CAMPBELL.
"I was quite happy here; it's the mecca of hockey," Murphy said from Toronto.
"But the Rangers made me an offer that was impossible for me to turn down. It was just a fiscally sound decision."


Medieval Shenanigans, Even With Donkeys
Set in 15th-century France and featuring a dignified English cast, "The Advocate" begins with what looks like a pretty fair Monty Python moment.
A man is fitted with a noose, about to be executed for having had "carnal knowledge of the she-ass here present." By his side, and also about to be hanged, is a sexually complicit donkey, since this story is set at a time when animals and inanimate objects could be tried under civil law.
When a last-minute pardon arrives, it's not for the man but for his impassive-looking consort.
"She is released without stain to her character," intones a solemn magistrate (Michael Gough), who then presides over the man's execution.
Decked out in face grime and a fancy array of medieval millinery, the local peasants watch eagerly as justice is done.


Tyson Names Co-Managers
Two longtime associates of MIKE TYSON have been named co-managers of the former heavyweight champion, who is serving a six-year sentence in an Indiana prison for rape.
JOHN HORNE and RORY HOLLOWAY will manage Tyson's fighting career if and when it resumes, according to a fax issued from Horne's Albany home.
Tyson has been at the Indiana Youth Center in Plainfield, Ind., since March 1992 for rape. (AP)


Exodus Is Very Different From '80 Boatlift
Some here have labeled the latest Cuban exodus Mariel II, but there are some major differences from the 1980 boatlift that brought about 125,000 Cubans to Florida.
State Department statistics show that the influx over the past week exceeds the rate during the first week of the Mariel boatlift.
During that week of April 21, 1980, 6,053 Cuban refugees arrived in Florida, compared with 8,491 who arrived in the last five days.
A total of 7,634 arrived in the second week of Mariel in 1980, and then the pace tripled, with about 21,000 Cubans arriving each week for the next three weeks.
By the end of the exodus, State Department figures show, 124,779 Cubans had arrived.


The Vaccine Debacle
Shortly after President Clinton took office, his Administration announced that it would provide free vaccinations for all youngsters -- rich, poor and in-between.
The goal was laudable and sounded simple.
But the Administration's attempts to reach it have been tortured beyond belief.
During the cramped Reagan years, the price of vaccine went up and Federal funding for childhood immunization went down.
Congress, and eventually President Bush, pushed for more money.
The 1991 Dallas measles epidemic proved a cautionary tale: 95 percent of the sick children had not been vaccinated because they were too young for school enrollment and their health providers did not have enough free vaccine for everyone.


Subway Chaos: Officer Firing at Officer
All but one of the eight gunshots that turned a crowded East Side subway station into a battlefield Monday night were fired by police officers mistakenly aiming at each other, police officials said yesterday.
The remaining shot, they said, occurred when a suspect dropped his shotgun and it went off.
In the tumult, an off-duty New York City police officer opened fire on a black undercover transit officer, hitting him four times, at least twice in the back, the officials said.


Aldus and Adobe Lay Claim to Digital Publishing
Anybody old enough to remember the days before the personal computer is also old enough to remember when Paul Brainerd, founder and chairman of the Aldus Corporation, coined the term "desktop publishing" and helped turn every marketing assistant, account manager and college student into a self-styled publisher.
Ten years later, desktop publishing is a $2 billion industry.
Now, with Aldus expecting to complete a $500 million stock-swap merger next week with another leader in the field, Adobe Systems Inc., the companies hope together to achieve similar success in the emerging market of "electronic publishing."


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-11  MEXICO WINNER OFFERS DIALOGUE  The winner of Mexico's presidential election said he would seek a dialogue with his opponents, but he did not seem to be convinced that he would have to bring his opponents into the Government.
A1  FEARS FOR MEXICO'S LEFT  Mexico's left wing is so splintered by its poor showing that there are fears that it might be cut off from the political process and then turn to more violent ways to be heard.
A10


After Years of War, Hope in Sri Lanka
After 11 years of war with the Tamil Tiger guerrillas that have blighted this once-idyllic nation with assassinations, dead-of-the-night "disappearances" and mass graves, Sri Lanka has begun to hope that the worst of its nightmare may be over.
Many in this tropical island in the Indian Ocean remain wary.
But after at least 35,000 deaths in the conflict, Sri Lankans hoped the election this week of a new Prime Minister was a watershed in a war that had settled into a seemingly hopeless stalemate.


COMPANY BRIEFS
COLUMBIA/HCA HEALTHCARE CORP., Louisville, Ky., a health care services provider, has signed a letter of intent with Clarkson Regional Health Services to acquire the 300-bed Bishop Clarkson Memorial Hospital in Omaha.
The terms were not disclosed.


Novell
Shares of Novell Inc., the computer networking company, rebounded yesterday after dropping sharply on Monday.
Novell warned late Friday that third-quarter earnings would be 15 percent to 20 percent below Wall Street expectations.
The company cited lower-than-anticipated revenue from Wordperfect, which it acquired in June, as hurting earnings.


A Bumper Year for Bugs
Louder, definitely louder.
That is the emphatic if impressionistic judgment about the nightly katydid chorus this August, ventured by a dozen householders and nature-watchers from Georgia to Connecticut.
The weather is the cause: a punishing winter, a cool spring and a wet summer, an ideal combination for insect eggs and larvae, and bad for the predators and soil fungi that kill them.
Hence what Dr.
Louis Sorkin, an entomologist at the American Museum of Natural History, calls "higher than average species populations" for everything from crickets to mosquitoes.
From there, it all depends on one's perspective.
Consider the grasshopper, which is said to cause $80 billion in crop damage every year, whose five-to-seven-year cycle is now peaking.
Farmers around Washington D.C. contend that the green creatures have munched away whole fields of alfalfa and soybeans; backyard gardeners in Virginia report that "gourmet grasshoppers" are cleaning out beds of basil, sage and mint.
It is small solace for victims to be reminded by agronomists that grasshopper guano is excellent fertilizer for next year's crops.


Rose L. Coser, 78; Taught Sociology At Stony Brook
Rose Laub Coser, a sociologist and professor emeritus at the State University of New York at Stony Brook, died on Sunday at her summer home in Wellfleet, Mass.
She was 78.
Dr. Coser, who lived in Cambridge, Mass., died of kidney failure, her family said.


Corrections
A brief report in the Company News column of Business Day on Saturday about the acquisition of the Pioneer Bank by the Bank of Boston Corporation misidentified the institution that was purchased.
The Pioneer Bank bought by the Bank of Boston is the largest cooperative bank in Massachusetts, not a subsidiary of Pioneer Bancshares Inc. in Chattanooga, Tenn.


Bank of Montreal reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


DEERE &amp; CO. (DE,N)
Deere &amp; Company said yesterday that earnings for the company's third quarter rose 73.7 percent, helped by higher-than-expected sales of heavy equipment in North America and better-than-expected results from overseas operations.
Deere reported earnings of $157.7 million, or $1.82 share for the quarter, which ended on July 31, compared with $90.8 million, or $1.19 a share, for the quarter a year earlier.
Deere took a $9.3 million charge for an accounting change in the year-ago quarter.


Goldman Buys 28% Stake In Ralph Lauren's Empire
An investment fund managed by Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company has purchased a 28 percent stake in the intensely private Polo Ralph Lauren Corporation for $135 million, creating a partnership between two of New York's trophy institutions.
Goldman is the first outsider to gain a stake in Mr.
Lauren's vaunted retail, apparel and home furnishings empire, which was among the first fashion companies to sell a life style instead of just products.


Commerical Intertech Corp.(TEC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


U.S. Government Broadcasts to Cuba, And Wonders If Anyone Is Listening
Hour after hour, the airwaves in Cuba are filled with a single message: Don't go.
In Spanish, from antiseptic United States Government studios here, the reasons are listed again and again: The waters are unsafe.
Hurricane season has started.
People are dying.
American policy has changed.
There is no welcome for survivors.
Refugees are detained.
Don't go.


Nordson Corp.(NDSN,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


When the Car Crashes, Talent Means Nothing
Tchaka Shipp still can't remember the accident.
Kevin Simmons remembers it like his home phone number.
The two talented New York City basketball players, here to attend the University of California-Irvine, flipped their car in mid-July when one of them fell asleep at the wheel.


Furon Co. (FCBN,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to July 30


Corrections
A picture credit on Monday with a photograph of the choreographer Joseph Wilson performing at Lincoln Center misspelled the photographer's name.
It is Tom Brazil.


For Russians on a Shopping Spree, New Delhi Is a Magnet
At a bustling little market on the edge of the diplomatic enclave, foreign window shoppers and serious buyers in sunglasses, shorts and T-shirts stroll in the summer heat, glancing at signs in Russian.
This is the Yashwant Place Shopping Center, better known as Little Russia, where Indian storekeepers speak fluent Russian.
Even the menus at the tiny Tibetan restaurants are in Russian.


Michaels Stores Inc.(MIKE,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Population Conference Isn't About Abortion; A Planet Threatened
To the Editor:
"Population Enrichment vs. Population Control," a full-page ad Aug. 15, misrepresents and misstates important aspects of the draft program of action to be considered at the International Conference on Population and Development in Cairo.


Southwestern Flavors With a Sweet Surprise
COMBINING corn with black beans, red pepper and jalapeno is a traditional Southwestern dish.
But if instead of leaving the corn kernels whole, they are pureed and cooked with a little milk, their sweetness becomes a welcome surprise.
Either serve each component of the meal separately or pile the bean mixture and the pork on the flour tortillas and roll them up like burritos.
Game Plan Heat broiler, if using.
Marinate pork Prepare corn and beans through Step 2 Prepare stove-top grill, if using, and grill or broil pork Finish corn and beans Slice pork Grilled Chinese Pork
8 ounces pork tenderloin  2 teaspoons reduced-sodium soy sauce  4 teaspoons dry sherry  1 teaspoon lemon juice  Fresh or frozen ginger to yield 1 tablespoon coarsely grated.
1. If using broiler, turn it on, and cover broiler pan with aluminum foil.
2. Wash, dry and trim excess fat from pork. Cut in half crosswise.
3.
In bowl large enough to hold meat, combine soy sauce, sherry and lemon juice.
Grate ginger, and add.
4. Turn pork in marinade to coat.
5.
If using stove-top grill, prepare.
Grill or broil pork, browning on all sides, basting with marinade once or twice.
Cook 7 to 10 minutes, until pork is slightly pink inside.
Slice and serve.
Yield: 2 servings.
Approximate nutritional analysis per serving: 165 calories, 4 grams fat, 80 milligrams cholesterol, 235 milligrams sodium, 25 grams protein, 2 grams carbohydrate.
Creamed Corn and Black Beans
4 ears corn (about 4 cups kernels)  1/3 cup skim milk  16 ounces canned no-salt-added black beans  6 ounces whole red pepper or 5 ounces chopped ready-cut red pepper (1 1/4 cups)  1 jalapeno  1 small clove garlic  1 tablespoon rice vinegar  2 whole wheat flour tortillas  1/8teaspoon salt  Freshly ground black pepper.
1.
Shuck corn and scrape kernels from cobs.
Coarsely chop half of the kernels in food processor; spoon into saucepan.
2.
Combine milk with remaining kernels, and process to cream; stir into saucepan.
Cook corn over low heat about 7 minutes, to blend well and cook through.
3. Wash and drain beans, add to corn and cook 1 minute.
4.
Wash, trim and finely chop red pepper; wash, seed and mince half the jalapeno (more if desired).
5. Heat tortillas in toaster oven.
6.
Mince garlic.
Take the corn mixture off the heat, and add garlic, pepper, jalapeno and vinegar.
Season with salt and pepper, and stir well.
Yield: 2 servings.
Approximate nutritional analysis per serving: 530 calories, 3 grams fat, 1 milligram cholesterol, 570 milligrams sodium (before salting), 30 grams protein, 105 grams carbohydrate.


To Church's Dismay, Priest Talks of 'Justifiable Homicide' of Abortion Doctors
After saying grace over his pancake breakfast in a crowded fast-food restaurant here, the Rev.
David C. Trosch, clad in a clerical collar and black shirt, explained the logic for his theory that an ordinary citizen could be morally justified in killing abortion clinic doctors and staff members.
"There is full human life, by Christian common belief, in the womb following conception," said Father Trosch, a Roman Catholic priest.
"They are persons worthy of defense, like any born person, and they must be defended by any means necessary to protect them, including the death of the assailants, which in this case would be the abortionists and their direct accomplices."


Ivanisevic Quits With A Grimace In Hamlet
If Goran Ivanisevic did not have enough problems playing on a hard court, he can add another one to the list.
Ivanisevic, the second-ranked player in the world who was top-seeded here, abruptly pulled out of his first-round match at the Waldbaums Hamlet Cup against Richey Reneberg today, complaining of an injury to his left hip flexor.


Call From the Pulpits to Awaken Interest
With considerable ambivalence, several black groups are scrambling to generate support for changes in health care coverage at a time when the Clinton Administration's effort is slowing and amid grumbling about the inadequacy of the plans before Congress.
At the center of the effort to awaken black interest in the issue are the black churches.
A coalition of nearly two dozen professional, civil rights and advocacy groups have this month been pressing black ministers to talk up health care from the pulpit.
They want black congregations to begin letter-writing, telephone and telegram campaigns to lawmakers urging them to support efforts to overhaul the health system.


Anti-Dumping Terms Preserve U.S. Trade
To the Editor:
"Mr. Clinton: Defend Your Trade Pledge" (editorial, Aug. 19) misrepresents the profit deduction provision that the Senate Finance Committee approved as part of the antidumping code in the Uruguay Round implementing legislation.


Jets and Meola Part Ways but Stay in Touch
They gave Tony Meola a dozen footballs, a kicking tee and told him to go home and practice.
And maybe, the Jets told him today, he can return soon.
The Jets were encouraging to Meola, who tried to live out his fantasy of switching from World Cup soccer goalie to National Football League kicker.


William Ross, 78, Theatrical Producer
William Ross, a theatrical producer, died yesterday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 78.
The cause was heart failure, his family said.


Sun Accounts Are Put in Review
Sun Microsystems Inc. said yesterday that it had placed in review its systems and software accounts, with combined billings estimated at $21 million to $23 million, after parting ways with Anderson &amp; Lembke in San Francisco.
Colleen M. Choy, a spokeswoman for Sun in Mountain View, Calif., said that the company was compiling a "short list of about five agencies," but declined to identify them.
She said Sun was leaning toward agencies with worldwide capabilities for the systems portion of the account, with billings estimated at $15 million.
The software portion has billings estimated at $6 million to $8 million.


Police Agencies Share Rules for Recognition
The shootout on Monday in which two police officers were wounded by other officers happened so fast that even perfect training and procedure might not have prevented it, police officials said yesterday.
But there are rules and procedures for how and when officers can fire their weapons -- rules intended to prevent injury to bystanders, to avoid use of unnecessary or excessive force against suspects, and, of course, to avoid "friendly fire" errors like the one Monday night.


Accounts
*
Softkey International Inc., Cambridge, Mass., to Mullen Advertising, Wenham, Mass., as the first agency to handle the consumer software company's account.
Billings were estimated at $5 million to $8 million.


In First, Michigan State Opens Women's Shelter
Michigan State University is not the sort of place usually associated with domestic violence.
Its 40,000 students live in dorms spread across thousands of leafy acres or in apartments nearby, and many are single.
But when a new president arrived last year, his wife proposed a novel social service: an on-campus shelter for battered women.
The campus police chief embraced the idea, and the shelter opened in June.
It is believed to be the first of its kind in the country.


E.P.A. Seeks Emissions Agreement for Northeast
Besieged by auto makers, environmentalists and state officials, the Environmental Protection Agency is trying to broker an agreement in a fierce debate over whether to force the auto industry to begin selling low-emission cars, including electric cars, in the Northeast by the turn of the century.
The outcome of the battle will determine not only what sorts of cars will be sold in 12 Eastern states from Maine to Virginia, but also what other measures these states will take to meet the strict requirements of the 1990 Clean Air Act.


Media Sale Is Cleared By Board
After months of uncertainty, the Blockbuster Entertainment Corporation said late yesterday that its board had voted unanimously to recommend that the company be sold to Viacom Inc.
The proposed sale would involve a swap of Viacom's securities for Blockbuster's stock at the same terms that Blockbuster had initially accepted in January.


Top New York Official Opposes Macy's Merger
The New York State Attorney General, G. Oliver Koppell, said yesterday that he would oppose the proposed merger of R. H. Macy &amp; Company and Federated Department Stores Inc. unless Federated agreed to sell all 12 Macy's stores in the New York metropolitan area, including the chain's fabled store in Herald Square.
In a statement that stunned Federated and could bog down the effort to bring Macy out of the bankruptcy proceedings that have already stretched more than two years, Mr.
Koppell said he had concluded that the proposed combination would decrease competition in the New York department store market, inevitably resulting in higher prices and fewer shopping choices for New Yorkers.


SALE OF PETRIE STORES' RETAIL OPERATIONS MADE FINAL
The Petrie Stores Corporation, which operates 1,700 specialty stores and is based in Secaucus, N.J., said yesterday that it had made final the sale of its retail operations to an investor group led by E. M. Warburg, Pincus &amp; Company for $190 million in cash.
The investor group will assume a "substantial portion" of Petrie's liabilities, though Petrie will retain some contingent liabilities.
Milton Petrie, who owns 60 percent of Petrie's shares, has agreed to vote his shares in favor of the transaction.
The sale must win the approval of two-thirds of Petrie's shares outstanding.
The agreement is contingent upon the completion of an exchange of 40.4 million Toys "R" Us shares, which are the company's most valuable asset, for 37.1 million new Toys "R" Us shares that are to be issued directly to Petrie's shareholders.
The exchange is contingent on Petrie's selling its retail operations.


Mexico's Perilous Second Act
During the terms of Mexico's last two presidents, the purchasing power of consumers has declined by 60 percent, unemployment has doubled, emigration to the United States has not abated and nearly a quarter of the work force has taken to moonlighting -- or to hawking cheap wares on the streets -- in a struggle to survive.
On Sunday, three major presidential candidates stood before the electorate.
Cuauhtemoc Cardenas of the leftist Democratic Revolutionary Party promised economic justice for the peasants.
Diego Fernandez de Cevallos of the National Action Party, a right-of-center group, promised to throw out the crooks who have been running the country.
In contrast, Ernesto Zedillo Ponce de Leon of the ruling Institutional Revolutionary Party, which has monopolized the presidency since 1929, promised only more of the same.


FLIGHT FROM CUBA: THE OVERVIEW -- U.S. Scrambling to Cope With the Rising Tide of Cuban Refugees; Washington Considers Housing Newcomers at Mainland Sutes
Alarmed that its new policy of keeping out Cuban boat people has failed to stem the flow of refugees, the Clinton Administration is considering greatly expanding the capacity of the naval base at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, to handle them.
With the flood of Cubans picked up at sea exceeding 2,000 for the second straight day, some Administration officials said they might be forced to consider an emergency option: placing the Cubans in military bases and other Federal properties on the mainland, as was done during the Mariel exodus of 1980 when 125,000 Cubans left for the United States.


Silent Castro Puzzling U.S. Aides
After encouraging an immigration crisis with the United States by permitting disgruntled Cubans to take to the high seas, Fidel Castro has suddenly and unexpectedly fallen silent, raising concerns about what additional moves he might be planning.
Normally not a man at a loss for words, the Cuban leader has made no significant public statements since President Clinton announced on Saturday that Cuban-Americans will no longer be allowed to visit or send remittances to relatives on the island and that anti-Castro broadcasts to Cuba will be increased.


Innovative Saxophone Structures
The saxophonist Tim Berne announced five song titles before his late set on Monday night at the Knitting Factory, starting with "What Are the Odds" and ending with "Slight Discrepancy in the Figures." But where those titles corresponded with the uninterrupted hour of music that followed was a matter of conjecture.
Mr.
Berne is one of jazz's structural innovators; he doesn't abide by the traditional format of theme-solos-theme.
Where that form is circular, Mr.
Berne's pieces are loops and spirals, whorls and lattices; a fully stated theme may appear at the beginning or the end of a piece, or it may be scattered amid improvisations, or fragments of it may be detached and reassembled.


Devils Give Brylin a Contract
The New Jersey Devils signed center SERGEI BRYLIN, the club's second selection in the 1992 entry draft, to a multiyear contract yesterday.
Terms were not disclosed.
Brylin, 20, spent the last three seasons with the Central Red Army club in his native Moscow.
Last season, he finished seventh on the club in scoring. (AP)


Police Officer Shot In a Queens Pursuit
A police officer was shot and wounded while chasing a suspect on foot in the Corona section of Queens early today, the police said.
The officer, whose name was not released, was shot in the arm about 12:25 A.M. near the intersection of 108th Street and 43d Avenue, and was taken to Elmhurst Hospital Center, the police said.
Captain Thomas Fahey said at the hospital that the officer was not badly hurt.


Resurgence in Export Trade Invigorates Port of New York
As long as three football fields, its decks piled with so much foreign cargo that it looked like a floating warehouse, the freighter Raleigh Bay plodded into a dock here the other day for a stopover that once might have been decidedly lopsided: imports off, nothing back on.
But this time, in an increasingly common sight at the Port of New York and New Jersey, the ship took on a heartland's worth of American products, from chemicals to animal feed to medical supplies.
It was another indication that the export business, dormant for years, is revitalizing a port that had begun to slip from the ranks of the world's great maritime centers.


Personal Health; Toxic shock: out of mind, but still a serious threat.
TOXIC shock syndrome may have faded from prominent public concern but not from the medical record books.
This often-fatal disease may be nearly as common now as it was in the early 1980's, when it terrified menstruating women, especially those who used highly absorbent tampons.
Cases of toxic shock fell off sharply in 1984 after Rely, made by the Procter &amp; Gamble Company, and other superabsorbent tampons were taken off the market.
But according to data gathered in Minnesota, toxic shock cases slowly began to rise again as the staphylococcal bacteria that could produce the deadly toxin spread to more people.


TRANSACTIONS
Football  National Football League
ARIZONA CARDINALS -- Signed Shawn Moore, quarterback.
Waived Brett Wallerstedt, linebacker; Bernard Basham, defensive end; Brian Bollinger, guard; and Gene McGuire, center.
Placed Sean Wallace, safety, on injured reserve.


Juneau Reaches for the Stars
JOE JUNEAU, after spending much of his National Hockey League career making other players look good, gained star status himself yesterday by signing the most lucrative contract in the history of the Washington Capitals.


New Artistic Director Named For Circle in the Square
Josephine R. Abady, who was dismissed last January as the director of the Cleveland Play House, is to be the new artistic director of the financially troubled Circle in the Square Theater.
The appointment was announced yesterday by Theodore Mann, the theater's current artistic director and one of its founders.
Few details of the new management arrangement were available yesterday, and neither Mr.
Mann nor Ms.
Abady could be reached.
But a statement released by the theater said that Mr.
Mann, 70, and Ms.
Abady would share creative control of the company, which produced no plays last season and has reportedly been on the brink of shutting down for good.
It has been dark since "Wilder, Wilder, Wilder" closed in May 1993.
Three-Play Season Considered
The statement of Ms.
Abady's appointment said that two plays were planned for the coming season: a revival of "The Shadow Box," by Michael Cristofer, and Chekhov's "Uncle Vanya." A third production, a new American play that was not named, was said to be under consideration.


Germany's Two Main Far-Rightist Parties Plan to Join Forces
Leaders of Germany's two biggest far-right political parties, stung by electoral setbacks and poor showings in opinion polls, are seeking to put aside their rivalry and work together.
In a statement issued on Monday, Gerhard Frey, the millionaire publisher who leads the German People's Union, and Franz Schonhuber, a proud veteran of the Nazi SS who heads the Republicans, urged their followers "to build a relationship that will prevent us from blocking our own electoral progress."


New Game In Town As Baseball Talks Begin
In place of the usual position-by-position matchups that precede the World Series, Major League Baseball was left yesterday with a matchup of verbal positions by owners and players as they prepared for their first face-to-face bargaining-table confrontation of the 13-day-old strike.
The positions, as articulated by John Harrington of the Boston Red Sox and Brett Butler of the Los Angeles Dodgers, spelled out in painfully precise terms where each side stands for today's session in the presence of a team of Federal mediators.


Market Place; California's plan to control insurance rates stirs industry ire.
SHOULD insurance companies be treated like utilities, with state regulators controlling their prices so that no company makes too much profit, or too little?
That is the approach being adopted in California, where the state's Supreme Court last week upheld the voter-approved Proposition 103, which requires the insurance commissioner's approval before companies can change prices.
The court also supported the commissioner's right to approve insurance prices by a formula that sets a range of profits, expressed as a rate of return on the capital, that each company would be allowed.


Vote Setback Divides Mexican Leftists
After the stinging rejection of its candidate and of its radical image, the primary party of Mexico's left -- once a strong challenger to the Government party but a weak third in Sunday's presidential election -- is so divided that it is in danger of tearing itself apart.
The splintering of the left as a political force raises fears that the most disaffected parts of society will feel cut off from the political process.
The fears are made more real because of the armed uprising in Chiapas state on Jan. 1, launched by rebels who claimed they had been excluded from Mexico's political life.


Two Red Sox Have Surgery And Are Out for the 'Season'
Red Sox third baseman SCOTT COOPER and left fielder MIKE GREENWELL underwent arthroscopic surgery yesterday and will be out for the season if the strike ends.
Cooper, placed on the disabled list Aug. 7, had torn cartilage repaired in his right shoulder.
Greenwell, who injured his left shoulder when he ran into the wall on opening day, was put on the disabled list Aug. 4.
He also had torn cartilage repaired. (AP)


Schumann, Peaks and Valleys
Redemption took various orms this evening, as the Bard Music Festival ended here with a triumphant account of Schumann's oratorio "Das Paradies und die Peri." The Peri, who is barred from entering Eden because of her sullied birth, from the union of a mortal and a fallen angel, finally finds the precious key: a tear shed by a repentant sinner at the sight of a child at prayer.
This was the work that put Schumann on the compositional map in 1844, said John Daverio, a musicologist and violinist, in a preconcert lecture, and the quality of the music far transcends that of the Thomas Moore epic "Lalla Rookh," on which it is based.
Yet it is known today almost solely through recordings.


Simpson Lawyers Tell Court They Were Misled on Samples
During closing arguments today over the division of the blood samples in the O. J. Simpson murder case, Mr.
Simpson's lawyers argued that they had been misled about the amount of evidence available.
They urged that new DNA tests be conducted to determine whether the initial tests implicating Mr.
Simpson were inaccurate because they were based on contaminated samples or because they were improperly performed.
Judge Lance A. Ito said that he would issue a ruling on Friday.


Woodstock '94 Repeated Safety Lapses
To the Editor:
"Woodstock, Not Quite Redux" (editorial, Aug. 17) notes some of the fundamental similarities and differences between Woodstock '94 and the original.
However, you forget to note the return of the failed crowd safety plan and miss the mark on moshing.


Where the Horseshoe Meets the Turf, You Will Find Bill Robinson
Bill Robinson says he really hasn't changed much these last 20 years, but that's debatable.
After all, in 1974 he was merely working on an assembly line.
Today, he runs one.
"I'm still the same guy I used to be," said Robinson, a trainer whose horses last year earned more than $10 million.
"But, yeah, sometimes when I think of all the things that have happened to me, I do feel like pinching myself."


Population Conference Isn't About Abortion
To the Editor:
This is a letter from two neighbors at the United Nations with a strong interest in population issues.


A Hearty, Economical Meal Made With Local Produce
IT isn't too late in the season to search the produce stands along country roads for locally grown vegetables and fruit.
Whenever possible, I buy from farms whose products are organically grown.
Virtually all the ingredients for this meal, except the strawberries, could be bought from local farmers.
It begins with a salad of onion, cucumber, dill and mint.


A School To Mark A Century Of Success
WHEN school opens in two weeks, Public School 6 on the East Side will start marking its centennial with a lot of tradition.
Just like Choate or Groton or any of those la-di-da, hoity-toity private schools.
Of course, there are people who think that P.S. 6, on Madison Avenue and 82d Street, is one of those la-di-da, hoity-toity schools itself, because its neighborhood is rich, or because its students are consistently near the top in citywide exam scores, or because all the sixth graders have to study Latin.


Corrections
A picture caption last Wednesday with an article about the effects of the Woodstock festival on Saugerties, N.Y., incorrectly described a woman displaying a T-shirt in a shop there.
She was Regan Mashayekhi, a worker at the shop, not a tourist.


India Aims to Expand Exports of Diamonds
India's diamond exporters are seeking a bigger role in an international market that they entered only 30 years ago.
India has held between 42 and 45 percent of the world market in cut and polished diamonds in the last four or five years, said Kamlesh Jhaveri, the president of the Bharat Diamond Bourse in Bombay, India's diamond trading center.
But he predicted "massive growth" in Indian diamond exports over the next decade and looks for his country's share to rise to 50 or 55 percent.


Merrill Corp.(MRLL,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Alike, Yet Different, Two Officers' Paths Cross
Officer Peter Del Debbio, who shot a transit police officer by mistake during a chaotic gunfight on a subway platform on Monday evening, had lived through another hellish night on a subway train in August 1990 that cost him part of his finger and no small amount of pride, the police and family members said yesterday.
That time, three young muggers attacked and mutilated him in a robbery on an N train.
They held him at knife point and whipped him with his own pistol.
Then, discovering he was a police officer, they held him down and sliced off part of his finger while his horrified fiancee looked on, the police said.


Sanderson Farms Inc.(SAFM,NMM) reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Sports of The Times; Opening Question For Owners
WHEN the baseball owners and the baseball players finally meet face to face today, here is one question the players might ask of management:
"Just out of curiosity," the players could begin, "when you talk about a salary cap based on a 50-50 split of income, just what income are you talking about?"


G&amp;K Services Inc.(GKSRA,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to July 2


Morgan Stanley Earnings Slide 46%
Not even the gloomy estimates of Wall Street analysts were sufficiently negative to predict second-quarter earnings at Morgan Stanley Group Inc.
The New York-based financial services firm said yesterday that earnings for its second quarter that ended July 31 had plunged 46 percent, attributed largely to falloffs in investment banking and trading revenues.
Analysts had been expecting Morgan to report earnings of $1.48 a share, according to Zachs Investment Research, which tracks the earnings estimates of securities analysts.
But Morgan said yesterday that it had earned $121 million, or $1.31 a share, for the quarter that ended July 31.
That compares with net income of $224 million, or $2.77 a share, for the corresponding quarter in 1993.
Net revenues for the second quarter of 1994 were $913 million, compared with $1 billion in the period a year earlier.


Fluke Corp.(FLK,A) reports earnings for Qtr to July 29


Corrections
The Key Rates table on the Credit Markets page of Business Day yesterday misstated the prime rate and the discount rate for Friday and Monday in some editions.
The prime rate on both those days was 7.75 percent, not 7.25 percent; the discount rate was 4 percent, not 3.5 percent.


ADC Telecommunications Inc.(ADCT,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Herb Rosenzweig, 'Whiz Kid' And Welfare Officer, Dies at 64
Herb Rosenzweig, a former welfare administrator for New York City, died on Saturday at New York University Medical Center.
He was 64 and lived in Manhattan.
The cause was a heart attack, his family said.


Baseball Adversaries Go to Bat and Strike Out
In more time than it takes to play a doubleheader, even today, baseball owners and striking players met yesterday and failed to advance labor negotiations any farther than their negotiators had in the previous two months.
The most positive development that emerged from a session in which a dozen owners and club executives and half a dozen players spoke to each other across a large U-shape bargaining table was agreement to meet again today at 9:30 A.M.


Accounts of Police Shooting Say Officer Fired After Victim Fell
The partner of the transit police officer who was critically wounded in the New York subway on Monday has told investigators that an off-duty police officer continued firing at the transit officer after he had been hit and had fallen face down, shooting him at least twice in the back, an official familiar with the investigation said yesterday.
The account of the partner, David Thompson, was similiar in some ways to that of another witness, a commuter who said he saw the off-duty officer stand over the transit officer and fire into his back three times at point-blank range.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-11  MORE AUTONOMY FOR PALESTINIANS  An agreement was initialed by Israeli and Palestinian negotiators to give Palestinians in the West Bank more autonomy over schools, health and welfare services and taxes.
A1


Saving Neighborhoods One Gate at a Time
GOOD fences may make good neighbors, but iron gates make good neighborhoods.
That's the opinion of a majority of the 5,000 residents of Five Oaks, a mixed-income, racially diverse neighborhood five miles north of downtown Dayton.
In 1992, after robberies had doubled in three years, the people of Five Oaks, in collaboration with local police officials, city planners and an urban-design consultant, adopted a crime-prevention technique that has been around for decades but is only now becoming an inescapable feature of the residential landscape -- iron gates designed to rebuff prostitution and drug dealing and the automobile traffic that often supports them.


New Wrinkle in Korea Issue: Who Is in Charge in North?
The North Korean nuclear issue, already fraught with dangerous uncertainties, is now punctuated by another troubling question mark: who is in charge in North Korea?
In recent days there has been a string of reports, some from North Korea, some amplified by the South Korean Government for its own purposes, hinting at strife over choosing a successor to Kim Il Sung, the Communist dictator who ruled North Korea for more than four decades until his death nearly two months ago.


Plea by Hockey Executive Is Expected in Fraud Inquiry
Bruce P. McNall, the former owner of the Los Angeles Kings hockey team and a rare-coin dealer to the stars, is expected to plead guilty as soon as this week to four criminal counts related to a Federal investigation of his banking practices, according to investigators and lawyers close to the case.
Mr.
McNall is president of the Kings but sold his controlling interest in the team in May before being forced into bankruptcy.
He is being investigated by the United States Attorney's office here for possibly falsifying loan documents to borrow more than $200 million from banks, including Bank of America, according to people familiar with the agreement.


Cuomo Pledges Technology School for Talented
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo said today that he would ask the State Legislature to approve financing next year for a high school of technology for academically talented students on Long Island.
Mr.
Cuomo, who made the announcement at a news conference with the Suffolk County Executive, Robert J. Gaffney, said the school would provide talent for high technology industries that were essential to Long Island's future.


Honda Posts 15.8% Gain In Operations
Buoyed by strong sales of its cars in the United States, the Honda Motor Company reported a 15.8 percent increase in its fiscal first-quarter operating income today on a 5.8 percent revenue gain.
Net income for the quarter, which ended June 30, nearly quadrupled from a year earlier, although much of the gain came from the sale of Honda's stake in the Rover Group Ltd., the British auto company.


Cost of Lead Cleanup Puts More Poor Children at Risk
In the bedroom of a South Bronx apartment, paint is peeling down to the bare wood of the door and window frames.
On the bed, Belinsky Solano, a 13-month-old boy with bright brown eyes, wriggles and smiles.
Recently, doctors found he had one and a half times the level of lead considered safe in his blood, and the peeling lead-based paint around him is the prime suspect.
"They said if it goes higher he could get brain damage," said Angie Diaz, the boy's mother.
She does not have the money to move to another building and the landlord said the income from rent would not pay for repairs to the building.
Ms.
Diaz expressed her feelings in a single word, "Trapped."


Clinton Says Coalition Plan Lacks Scope
President Clinton today criticized the health care plan of a bipartisan group of senators because it does not require employers to pay for their workers' insurance.
He said that not including such a provision prevented the plan from providing prescription drug coverage for the elderly or much money for long-term care.
Mr.
Clinton said the senators in the self-styled "mainstream coalition" were "walking away from what is the only known way to provide universal coverage, control cost increases in the out years and still generate enough money."


The Police Corruption Hearings
New Yorkers are getting encouraging signals from City Hall about prospective changes in how the police department does business.
The City Council Speaker, Peter F. Vallone, opens hearings today on a bill to create an independent agency to monitor police corruption, as recommended by the Mollen commission.
Mayor Rudolph Giuliani had approached the idea cautiously, but has now endorsed it -- though he has withheld judgment on the critical issue of the new agency's investigative powers.
Meanwhile, in the quality-of-life department, the Mayor has embarked on a plan for using citizens' patrols to deter crime in the city's parks, beginning with Prospect Park in Brooklyn and Marcus Garvey Park in Harlem.


Editorial Notebook: The Cozy Culture of Washington; Mr. Espy's Troubles Are Rooted in Custom
Because he accepted and in some cases solicited plane rides, sports tickets and other favors from companies he regulates, Mike Espy, the Secretary of Agriculture, deserves harsh criticism.
And while he insists he later reimbursed his corporate friends, and made no regulatory rulings in their favor, he may also have won himself the scrutiny of an independent counsel -- assuming that a panel of judges grants Attorney General Janet Reno's request for an investigation of Mr.
Espy's conduct.
At first blush, it seems baffling: How could Mr.
Espy, a former Congressman savvy in the ways of Washington, get into this mess?
But that's just the trouble.
He seems to have been blinded by his six years in the House to the impropriety of sponging off those with a huge stake in his official decisions.
After all, members of Congress do it all the time.


Corrections
An article and a headline in some editions on Monday about the New York City Congressional delegation's role in passing the House crime bill misstated the delegation's position in some copies.
The delegation was indeed united in voting to bring the bill to the floor, but two Manhattan Democrats, Charles B. Rangel and Jerrold L. Nadler, then voted against the bill itself.


Argentines Concede Missteps on Bombing
Despite announcements two weeks ago that Argentina had evidence linking Iranian diplomats to the bombing of a Jewish community center here on July 18, the Government is still far from knowing who carried out the attack and may never resolve the case, Argentine officials say.
The bombing killed 100 people and wounded scores of others.
The officials, who are familiar with the Government's investigation of the bombing and who spoke on condition of anonymity, said in recent interviews that the case against the Iranian diplomats was very thin, based mainly on circumstantial evidence provided by an Iranian dissident whose credibility was uncertain.


Regis Corp. reports earnings for Year to June 30


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article in Business Day on Monday, about the Dell Computer Corporation's introduction of a new line of computers based on the Intel Corporation's Pentium computer chip misidentified one of Dell's rivals in this market.
It is Gateway 2000 Inc., a South Dakota computer maker, not Gateway Communications Inc., a maker of computer networks based in Irvine, Calif.


Events: Shows, Classes And an East Side Tour
Baroque Art  Bard Graduate Center for Studies in Decorative Arts, 18 West 86th Street; (212) 721-4245.
"Baroque Splendor: The Art of the Hungarian Goldsmith," a show from the late 16th century through the 18th, starts today and continues through Oct. 30.
More than 200 items are on loan from the collections of the Hungarian National Museum in Budapest, including gold and silver platters and vessels, jeweled items, armor, textiles, engravings, ecclesiastical objects and historical portraits.


Short Sales Outstanding Set a Record for Nasdaq
Dark clouds continue to grow over the Nasdaq market.
Nasdaq reported yesterday that the number of shares held in short positions rose to another record in the latest month.
Nasdaq said that a total of 849 million shares were held in short positions as of Aug. 15, up 1.7 percent from 835 million in July.
The number of shares sold short and not yet covered -- the "short interest" -- have also been rising to record levels on the New York and American stock exchanges.


Shorewood Packaging Corp.(SHOR,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to July 30


Scientists See Hope for Harnessing an Elusive, Intense Laser
The "hard" X-ray laser -- an intense form of radiation once considered a potential weapon against ballistic missiles and long sought as a tool by molecular biologists and materials scientists -- may at last be within the reach of research laboratories.
A team of scientists led by Dr.
Charles K. Rhodes of the University of Illinois at Chicago has discovered a new way to produce X-ray laser pulses of almost incredible intensity by jostling the inner electron shells of atoms.


Rare Bizet Comic Opera Is to Be Presented
A concert performance of Bizet's rarely heard one-act comic opera "Djamileh" is to be the featured work in the opening concert of the American Symphony Orchestra's 1994-95 season, on Sept. 25 at 3 P.M. at Avery Fisher Hall.
The concert, called "Paris in the 1860's: The Origins of Impressionism," will be presented in conjunction with an exhibition of Impressionist works at the Metropolitan Museum of Art.
The program will also feature excerpts from Offenbach's operetta "La Vie Parisienne."


GC Cos. (GCX,N) reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Cameron Ashley Inc.(CMSH,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Drinking Less, for the Children's Sake
AT first, Tricia Swanson was delighted that she, her husband and their two young children had an invitation for the perfect four-day summer weekend, at a sumptuous lakefront home, along with two other families.
But soon after they arrived, Mrs.
Swanson, a 40-year-old substitute teacher who lives in Mill Valley, Calif., realized with horror that she had not taken her daughters, Layne, 5, and Karin, 3, on the Brady Bunch vacation she had imagined.
Several of the adults spent the day drinking: gin fizzes at breakfast, martinis at mid-morning, afternoon beers, predinner mai tais, wine with dinner.


CHRONICLE
Hong Kong's Legislative Council probably doesn't have any idea of the peripheral credentials of a young man who will soon be working for one of its members.
The curriculum vitae of DAVID C. VIOTTI, 24, one of 15 young men and women just named Luce Scholars, include membership in Phi Beta Kappa; a degree from Georgetown University, where he majored in government, and studies at Oxford University.
Less well known is that Mr.
Viotti, a native of Colorado Springs, was named Funniest Person on Campus at Georgetown and was a member of an improvisational comedy group at Oxford.


Health Care's Genial Wheeler-Dealer
When John Berlinger Breaux, the Louisiana Democrat who is at the center of fading hope for compromise on health care legislation, emerged from a Senate Democratic caucus the other day, a pile of waiting reporters glommed onto him like iron filings on a magnet.
"We're going in circles," the trim, tanned Senator told them with the merest hint of a smile.
"But we're moving aggressively."


U.S. Humanities Endowment Makes Grants
The National Endowment for the Humanities has announced 307 grants, totaling $29.7 million, for the third quarter of 1994.
The grants, announced Monday, will support projects in scholarship, education and public programming.
A little more than $6.4 million in grants went to institutions in New York State, with New York City accounting for $4.2 million and two of the largest grants nationwide.
American Social History Productions in Manhattan will receive $750,450 to make the first hour in a projected five-hour documentary film series titled "Forever Free: America in the Era of Emancipation and Reconstruction." The New York Center for Visual History, also in Manhattan, will receive $552,493 for a one-hour documentary on the Polish writer and war correspondent Ryszard Kapuscinski.


S. Carolina Experiences Fresh Surge By G.O.P.
The Republican nominees for governor, lieutenant governor and attorney general who emerged from run-off primaries in South Carolina on Tuesday were all, until four years ago, promising white Democrats.
The flow of such talent into a Republican Party that two decades ago could have met in a telephone booth and could hardly dream of holding a competitive primary and run-off is part of a realignment that has made South Carolina perhaps the most two-party state in the South.


CHRONICLE
It could be that life as a royal dog isn't all that exciting: the corgis and dorgis of QUEEN ELIZABETH II have been looking for action again.
The monarch returned to London on Tuesday from a visit to Canada, unaware that three of her dogs had just caused no little excitement.
London newspapers reported that the three slipped away from royal aides waiting to greet the Queen at Heathrow Airport, hurtled across the grass and, growling and snarling, circled a German shepherd police dog.
The small terrorists were recaptured before any blood was spilled.


Compensation Panel Cleared
The Justice Department cleared the way yesterday for a brokerage industry group assembled by Arthur Levitt Jr., the chairman of the Securities and Exchange Commission, to discuss possible changes in the ways retail brokers are compensated.
The department said it would not raise antitrust objections to the Compensation Practices Committee, which will hold its first meeting in September.
The panel is to discuss methods of compensation, though it will avoid reviewing exact levels of compensation.
The task force is headed by Daniel P. Tully, the chairman of Merrill Lynch and Company.


With Most of Mexican Vote Counted, Zedillo Lead Grows
With the official vote count nearly complete, Ernesto Zedillo Ponce de Leon slightly increased his sizable lead today in Mexico's presidential election, even as officials said they had uncovered plans to sabotage the computers used to tabulate the votes.
By this afternoon, with more than 88 percent of the estimated 36 million hand-marked ballots from Sunday's election counted, Mr.
Zedillo had 50.08 percent of the vote.
It was not clear whether the final percentages would push his total over the 50.47 percent that Carlos Salinas de Gortari received in 1988 in what was the lowest ever turnout for the ruling Institutional Revolutionary Party, or PRI, since it first gained the presidency in 1929.
Exceeding 50 percent also would enable Mr.
Zedillo to avoid the difficulty of being branded a President elected by a minority of the voters.


Let High Schools Shop For Supplies and Save
To the Editor:
As a New York City school supervisor, I am pleased Schools Chancellor Ramon C. Cortines believes it is necessary to modify the way the Board of Education buys supplies.
This should be simplest to do in high schools, which the Chancellor controls.


All Haitians Are Tuned In to the Rumor Mill
The story spread like wildfire: a secret underground pipeline had been built under the border and was pumping gasoline from the Dominican Republic into Haiti, defying international sanctions.
That fanciful tale going around this month was then succeeded by reports of dozens of clandestine laboratories being built in the countryside to make poison for use against American invaders.
Millions of Haiti's people live beyond the reach of newspapers, television and even radio, but everyone here, from illiterate peasants to the rich, has a lifetime subscription to the flourishing word-of-mouth network known as "telediol," or "mouth television." Part rumor mill, part oral news service, telediol is one of the most accessible and effective means of communication for Haitians.


International Ban for Maradona
DIEGO MARADONA, the Argentine soccer star, has been banned from playing nationally or internationally for 15 months because he took a banned stimulant during the World Cup.
A disciplinary panel for FIFA, soccer's world governing body, decided on the sanction against Maradona for his failure of a drug test after Argentina's second match of the World Cup against Nigeria on June 25.
Five days later, Maradona, 33, captain of the Argentine team, was banned from the rest of the World Cup.


Durable Orders Slid 4.2% in July
Orders for machinery and other big-ticket goods dropped in July by the biggest amount in two and a half years, the Commerce Department reported today, a surprisingly weak figure that tended to allay fears of an overheated economy.
But while today's report of a 4.2 percent slide in orders for durable goods contributed to smart rallies in the inflation-wary bond and stock markets, many economists were skeptical that it reflected a slackening in actual business activity.


House Democrats Far Short of Votes for Health Care Plan, Tallies Find
Confidential vote counts by the most ardent supporters of universal health insurance show that House Democrats are far short of the votes needed to pass sweeping health care legislation.
The counts are hardly a surprise.
Democratic leaders in the House have not begun to whip their partisans into line, and they have conceded for weeks that they cannot pass the legislation they want today.
The Senate is even less eager to embrace widespread changes in the health care system.


U.N. Rwanda Rights Effort Is Hurt by Understaffing
The United Nations efforts to monitor human rights in Rwanda and to bring to justice those suspected of taking part in massacres are understaffed and ill-equipped, officials said today.
Only 3 of a planned 20 monitors have arrived in Rwanda and they do not have communication equipment or vehicles to allow them to move around the country.


Robert Ballard 20,000 Bytes Under the Sea
DR.
ROBERT BALLARD is racing down a winding road on Cape Cod in a blinding summer rainstorm.
Headlights of oncoming cars loom like huge, menacing blurs through the drenched windshield.
Dr.
Ballard keeps his foot steady on the gas pedal.
He seems totally unaware that the wipers on his sleek black Mercedes hang limp, like strands of seaweed.
In fact, it is a lot like driving under water, an experience that is terrifying for his passenger but not for him: the bottom of the ocean is his second home.


All's Topsy-Turvy as Sampras And Graf Put Racquets Down
If Pete Sampras will be coming into the United States Open cold, Steffi Graf will be coming in lukewarm at best.
Sampras, the defending Open champion who is universally regarded as the world's best player, pulled out of the Waldbaum's Hamlet Cup here this morning, where he was to have played doubles with Richey Reneberg later tonight.
Graf, the women's No. 1, announced her withdrawal today from the SNET Classic in New Haven suffering from an inflammation of the joints in her back.


Stock Market Surge Startles Wall Street
Shaking itself out of a summer-long torpor, the stock market staged a remarkable rally yesterday, with the Dow Jones industrial average surging 70.90 points, or almost 2 percent, to 3,846.73.
The magnitude of the rally stunned Wall Street.
Some analysts said it could signal a recovery in stocks, which have been under pressure since the Federal Reserve began raising interest rates in early February.
Others doubted the rally's momentum would be long-lived.
Several factors fed the rally.
Bond prices have risen, while the dollar has come out of its tailspin.


Jet Awaits His Punts at Ground Zero
The Jets' biggest concern, says Coach Pete Carroll, is punt returns.
And Aaron Glenn's preseason statistics leave room for concern: four punts handled (or mishandled) for zero yards.
Carroll hopes all that will change in Tampa, Fla., on Friday night when the Jets oppose the Tampa Bay Buccaneers in their preseason finale.
He said Glenn will be the punt returner and one of two kickoff returners, but he did not exactly give the rookie a vote of confidence.
Glenn said he knows he must produce.


End of the Dog Days? Dow Surges 70.90
Shaking itself out of a summer-long torpor, the stock market staged a remarkable rally yesterday, as the Dow Jones industrial average surged 70.90 points, its second-biggest one-day gain this year.
Wall Street was divided on what the rally meant.
Some analysts said it could signal that the stock market was ready to recover much of the losses that began after the Federal Reserve began raising short-term interest rates in early February.
Other analysts said the rally would be short-lived, perhaps dying this week.


Strawbridge &amp; Clothier (STRWA,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to July 30


Petsmart Inc.(PETM,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Corrections
An entry in the listing of new equity issues in Business Day on Monday included erroneous information supplied by MCM Corporate Watch about the size and type of New Vision Technology Inc.'s expected offering this week.
It is a secondary offering of 1.9 million units, each consisting of one common share and one warrant.


Nigeria's Tarnished Brass
The reckless soldiers who govern Nigeria seem to have a single response to anything that displeases them: Lock up everybody who is out of step, even if that means half the country.
Since the country in question happens to be the most populous in Africa, a major exporter of oil and a volatile mix of a dozen cultures, 250 languages and 3 unstable regions, this martial misrule has to be of serious concern to Africa, Washington and the world.
It would appear that the army manual stipulates these rules for dividing, demoralizing and impoverishing a potentially great nation:


Corrections
An article in Science Times on Aug. 16, about a suit charging that rankings of physics journals published in rival journals are false advertising, omitted a portion of the judge's ruling in dismissing part of the case.
The judge ruled that efforts by the American Institute of Physics and the American Physical Society to advertise and promote the rankings were commercial in nature, not constitutionally protected free speech, and that this part of the case could proceed.


Transit Police Training Video Urges Restraint
The action happens so fast that the scene is almost a blur.
A woman rushes upstairs from a New York City subway platform and screams at a nearby Transit Authority police officer: "There's a man with a gun down there."
The officer, who is white, draws his gun and rushes downstairs, where he confronts a black man and a Hispanic man on the platform, holding a gun on a white man.
With the grainy realism of cinema verite, the officer approaches the three men with his gun trained on them.
Then there is the sound and flash of gunfire.


Mayor's Veto of Food Vendor Bill to Stand
Backing away from a confrontation with Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani, the City Council has decided not to challenge his veto of a bill that would have allowed food vendors to operate on streets where the Mayor had sought to crack down on illegal vending.
The bill would have allowed food vendors to operate on 17 midtown streets that had previously been restricted and that have been subject to a vigorous enforcement effort by the Giuliani administration.
The bill was approved in June by the Democratic-controlled Council by a 40-to-11 vote.


A Not-So-Odd Mideast Couple
Like it or not, Middle East peace is in the firm grasp of the same tough and idiosyncratic characters we have hated and distrusted in the regional conflict.
Our ambivalence about these Arab leaders is becoming a major obstacle in managing the transition from war to peace -- especially the implementation of the Palestinian-Israeli agreement and efforts to produce a Syrian-Israeli peace, which would transform the region.
Yasir Arafat makes all the decisions for the new Palestinian authority.
This frustrates many Palestinians, the Israelis and virtually all foreigners and world economic institutions.


Agency Presses S.&amp; L. Inquiry In Arkansas
The Resolution Trust Corporation asked a Federal court today to enforce subpoenas for a wide variety of documents against Gov.
Jim Guy Tucker of Arkansas as it investigates possible civil suits against him in connection with the collapse of the Madison Guaranty and Trust Company in his state.
The trust corporation, the Federal agency charged with sorting out the widespread problems in the nation's savings and loan associations, also asked the Federal court to enforce similar subpoenas against James P. McDougal, the onetime chairman of Madison, which collapsed in 1989 at an estimated cost to taxpayers of more than $60 million.


Where an Island Vacation Is Only 20 Minutes Away
On hot summer days, when the stresses of everyday life become too much, Eileen Curtin escapes to an island.
"It's so therapeutic to go," said Ms.
Curtin, 30.
"As soon as you get on the boat, you leave your worries behind."


No Headline
"The Presidency is an important job. But there are other important jobs. And much, indeed most, of the important work that needs to be done in our country will have to be done outside of the Federal Government. For the present time, that's where I plan to be." -- WILLIAM J. BENNETT, former Education Secretary.  [ B7:4. ]


In a Dispute, Peru's Leader Bars His Wife From Official Duties


Edwina d'Erlanger; Socialite Was 87
Edwina d'Erlanger, the widow of Baron Leo d'Erlanger, died Aug. 18 in a hospital in Geneva, where she had lived since 1975.
She was 87.
The cause of death was a stroke, according to her sister, Mary Whelan Prue Warburg.


Baseball Adversaries Meet


Hollywood Wunderkind's Fall and Rise
The Kid Stays in the Picture  By Robert Evans  Illustrated. 412 pages.
Hyperion. $24.95.
The great age of the Hollywood mogul was over by the time Robert Evans became Paramount's head of production in the mid-1960's, but no one let Mr.
Evans know.
So he reigned with the shameless exuberance of an old-time studio czar, living large and attracting talent of every stripe.
He lived in a house with a 2,000-rosebush garden, as he is fond of mentioning.
And he held weekly at-home screenings, at which "among the mainstays were Warren, Dustin, Jack, Roman," etc.
Generous to a fault, in 1969 he was renting cars for 14 different aspiring actresses.
And "today, of the 14 girls, six have become internationally famous stars, none earn less than a million bucks a year."


Storage Scam: False Address, No License
MOVING is a tricky business.
There's the physical and emotional irritation, the potential damage to one's belongings and the chance that the final bill will be twice the estimate.
And for the truly unfortunate, there's also the storage warehouse that doesn't exist -- or at least not at the address the mover advertised in the telephone book.
Last year, more than 1,200 complaints against moving and storage firms were filed with the New York City Department of Consumer Affairs, New York State Department of Transportation and the Better Business Bureau.


CASTRO RULES OUT ANY MOVE TO HALT FLOW OF REFUGEES
Challenging President Clinton's decision to send Cuban refugees to Guantanamo naval base as an "absurd response" to the mounting immigration crisis between the United States and Cuba, Fidel Castro said tonight that he would make no effort to halt the flow of people leaving his country.
Speaking on state television, the Cuban President said the United States was to blame for the exodus that began earlier this month and is growing by the day.
New policy measures announced by Mr.
Clinton in recent days only "make the problem more complicated," Mr.
Castro said.


Sports of The Times; A Lesson In Economics Is Ignored
IF God is truly "in the details," as the saying goes, the major league baseball owners and the striking players must worship different deities.
Because both sides can offer up proof positive that the game is only the way they say it is.


Lac Minerals Agrees to Friendly Takeover
The board of Lac Minerals Ltd. agreed today to a friendly takeover by the American Barrick Resources Corporation after Barrick sweetened its offer to $1.6 billion, the two Toronto-based companies said.
The deal means that Barrick is the likely victor in the takeover fight for control of Lac, which pitted it against Royal Oak Mines Inc., a smaller, Vancouver-based mining company, which first made an offer for Lac's shares on July 7.
Battle Is Closely Watched
If it succeeds with its bid for Lac, an underperforming Canadian gold company, Barrick would become the world's largest gold producer outside South Africa.


Brinksmanship Prevails in Fight on Crime Bill
The majority and minority leaders of the Senate appeared locked in a game of political brinksmanship over the well-worn crime bill today, with the prestige of the White House at stake.
But neither George J. Mitchell, the Democratic leader, nor his Republican counterpart, Bob Dole, seemed prepared to move first.


Garden Q.&amp;A.
Coloring Hydrangeas
Q.
I have long admired the billowing blue-pink hydrangeas.
I would like to grow them, but it's a total mystery to me how to get the varied color. -- Deborah S. Clemens, Mount Gretna, Pa.


Hardening Its Stance, U.S. Expands Guantanamo Camp
The Clinton Administration today ordered a vast and immediate expansion of its capacity to house fleeing Cubans at Guantanamo Bay and said it was prepared to maintain encampments of Cubans at the base or perhaps in third countries for the indefinite future.
Faced with an ever-surging flow of refugees, the Administration made clear that it intended to expend enormous effort to accommodate the Cubans in tent cities abroad without allowing them to spill onto American shores.


Chinese Star Given 2-Year Ban
A female Chinese swimmer tested positive for drug use, and has been banned from competition for two years and stripped of her three Goodwill Games gold medals, the official Xinhua News Agency reported yesterday from Beijing.


People
*
Gerald D. McGee, executive vice president and managing director at the Los Angeles office of Ogilvy &amp; Mather Worldwide, was named to the new position of executive vice president and client service director on the I.B.M. account in North America. *
David J. Marchi, group vice president at the Ryan Partnership, Westport, Conn., was promoted to president, succeeding Thomas Libonate, who will continue as president of parent D. L. Ryan Companies.


Officer Shot in Gun Battle With Suspect
A New York City police officer, responding to a report of a fight early yesterday in Queens, was wounded in a gun battle with a suspect, who was also wounded, the police said.
After the suspect was caught, the police learned that he was wanted in connection with a killing in June.
Both the officer, who was shot in the arm, and the suspect, who was hit in the groin, were in stable condition at Elmhurst Hospital Center yesterday.


More Consolidations in Mutual Funds
The consolidation of the mutual fund business into fewer, but larger, companies moved ahead yesterday with the announcement of plans to merge the American Capital Corporation, a subsidiary of Travelers Inc., with Van Kampen Merritt Companies, owned by Clayton Dubilier &amp; Rice, an investment partnership.
The new company, to be headed by Richard S. Braddock, former president of Citicorp and now a partner at Clayton Dubilier, hopes to eliminate many of the weaknesses that hindered Van Kampen Merritt and American Capital as separate companies.


Episcopalians Soften Stance On Sexuality
The bishops of the Episcopal Church passed a broad statement today that affirms marriage as the standard for sexual relationships but acknowledges that a significant minority of people are homosexuals and that the church must "respond pastorally" to people whose sexual behavior falls outside traditional norms.
But in a reflection of deep divisions among Episcopalians over sexual issues, the bishops reduced the document's status from a "pastoral teaching" to a "study document" and appended a statement by conservative bishops that calls for chastity outside marriage and says the church cannot condone homosexuality.


A G.O.P. Star Rejects a Race For President
At a time when most Republican hopefuls are still mulling over whether to run for President, one of them, William J. Bennett, announced today that he would not join the race.
Mr.
Bennett, a former Education Secretary and director of drug policy, cited family and professional reasons for not seeking the Republican nomination, leaving up for grabs the religious conservatives who have been his biggest supporters.


CHRONICLE
A $10 million copyright infringement lawsuit against the singer BILLY JOEL has been dropped, The Associated Press reported yesterday.
Alan Friedman, Mr.
Joel's lawyer, said that GARY ZIMMERMAN, the claimant, had received no money; Carl Person, Mr.
Zimmerman's lawyer, confirmed that.


Jansen, Happy on Television, Announces His Retirement
Having finally won an Olympic gold medal and busy with endorsements and a new career as a television commentator, DAN JANSEN announced his retirement from speed skating yesterday.
Jansen, 28, won a gold medal in the 1,000 meters at Lillehammer, Norway, in February, ending years of Olympic frustration.


Catholic Leaders' Dilemma: Abortion vs. Universal Care
The nation's largest private provider of health care, the Roman Catholic Church, finds itself of two minds when it comes to new health care legislation.
It desperately wants universal coverage.
But it cannot live with a provision that many legislators are likely to insist on including: guaranteed coverage for abortion.


House Proud
MIRIAM GILBERT stamps her feet confidently on her new front porch and then gazes down at her new narrow stoop.
"It feels strong; it feels solid," she says.
Ms.
Gilbert has just brought the stoop and porch with their fanciful woodwork back to her 140-year-old row house in the Fort Greene Historic District, in Brooklyn; they were missing for at least 30 years.
They not only restore texture and depth to the facade, she says, but can also teach passersby the wonders of fine craftsmanship: a small slant to the floor allows the porch to drain, 11 tiny wooden triangles hold up each step, handrails are grooved to fit against fluted columns.


Cordis Corp.(CORD,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


The Art of the Everyday
ANOTHER type of artist might cringe, but Charlotte Culot is perfectly flattered if her paintings are called decorative.
The Belgian-born artist, now living in southern France, simply invokes Matisse and the vibrant clash of his anything-but-tame interiors.
"I don't mind being called decorative at all," Ms.
Culot said by telephone from Newport, R.I., where a show of her works closed on Saturday.
"Little objects are what life is all about. People don't look enough at the things right there around them. And suddenly, they're gone. I try to enjoy every single piece."


Study of Virus Halted at Yale After Mishap
At the request of Federal officials, Yale University has temporarily halted research into the rare virus that infected a university scientist in a laboratory accident earlier this month.
But there are no plans to close the lab where the accident occurred, state health officials said.
Yale has asked state and Federal health officials to review all procedures used at the laboratory at its medical school and to recommend any necessary changes.


Arias Up and Calls It Quits
Eleven years ago, Jimmy Arias made it all the way to the United States Open semifinals, where he lost to Ivan Lendl before a full house on the Stadium Court at the National Tennis Center.
Yesterday, on Court 18 before 100 of the curious and nostalgic, Arias succumbed in the first round of Open qualifying.
Afterward, he said farewell to the tennis tour.


Furon Co. (FCBN,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to July 30


Board Agrees On Ballots In Chinese
After failing to comply for two years with a Federal law requiring Chinese translations on ballots, the New York City Board of Elections has reversed itself and agreed to provide the translations in the Sept. 13 primary for the first time.
The board had said there was not enough room on the ballots to fit the translations and that printers hired to produce the ballots were unable to handle Chinese characters.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  *
Applied Materials Inc., Santa Clara, Calif., is selling $100 million of 8 percent senior notes due in 2004 at 99.269 to yield 8.108 percent through Morgan Stanley &amp; Co.
The noncallable issue is rated Baa3 by Moody's Investors Service and BBB- by the Standard &amp; Poor's Corp.
*
H.
F.
Ahmanson &amp; Co., Irwindale, Calif., is selling $125 million of 7.875 percent subordinated notes due in 2004 at 99.534 to yield 7.943 percent through Lehman Brothers.
The noncallable issue is rated Baa3 by Moody's and BBB by S.&amp; P.


Judge Rejects Chavis's Effort to Be Reinstated in N.A.A.C.P. Job
A judge refused today to order the N.A.A.C.P. to reinstate the Rev.
Benjamin F. Chavis Jr. as executive director, saying that if Mr.
Chavis believed that the organization had improperly dismissed him, he could sue for breach of contract.
The ruling by Judge Herbert Dixon of the Superior Court of the District of Columbia temporarily halted the skirmishing between the association and Mr.
Chavis, who was dismissed on Saturday over accusations of financial mismanagement and personal misconduct.


Economist Hired by Union Disputes Owners' Loss Claims
The Milwaukee Brewers, owned by Bud Selig, the acting commissioner, and one of the clubs most often cited as the epitome of a small-market team in trouble, are financially healthy and appear to have economic problems only because of excessive general and administrative costs.
That assessment is one of many intriguing conclusions reached by Roger Noll, a Stanford University economist, in an analysis of major league baseball's financial data that was commissioned by the Players Association.
The clubs provided the information to the union to bolster their contention that baseball needs a new economic system in which the clubs would have cost control.


Transactions
Football  National Football League
DENVER BRONCOS -- Waived Reggie Johnson, tight end. Signed Will Furrer, quarterback.


Park Strollers Thwart Attack On 9-Year-Old
A group of people enjoying a sunny afternoon in Prospect Park in Brooklyn saved a 9-year-old girl from being kidnapped by a convicted sex offender yesterday, the police said.
Detective Mary Ann Mullin, a police spokeswoman, said that the man, who was a stranger to the girl, tried to lure her to his home with the promise of video games.


A Dash for Bridal Bargains in Filene's Basement


METRO DIGEST
OFFICER'S PARTNER DETAILS SHOOTING The partner of the transit police officer who was critically wounded in the subway on Monday has told investigators that an off-duty police officer continued firing at the transit officer after he had been hit and had fallen face down, shooting him at least twice in the back, an official familiar with the investigation said.
A1.
A transit police videotape is aimed at preventing the kind of shooting that occurred.
B2.


Williamstown Museum Selects a Director
Michael Conforti has been named director of the Sterling and Francine Clark Art Institute in Williamstown, Mass.
The appointment of Mr.
Conforti, the chief curator at the Minneapolis Institute of Arts, was announced this week.
Beginning on Nov. 7, Mr.
Conforti is to oversee a renowned collection of French Impressionist paintings, Old Master paintings and American works and significant collections of silver, prints, drawings, sculpture and porcelain.
The Clark Institute, founded in 1955, also has a research library with some 130,000 volumes.


Bye-Bye, 1969
To the Editor:
I couldn't help laughing when I read "Lost at Woodstock" (Op-Ed, Aug. 19), Martha Bayles's article whining for the pop music of 1969.
What Ms.
Bayles has shown is that she, much like everybody else who gets older, doesn't understand the music listened to by the younger generation, and therefore makes judgments such as "performances are less about music than primal scream therapy for Generation X," and today's "rage-venting music" is "artistically impoverished and trite."


The People's Lawyer
To the Editor:
Many have expressed hopes (and doubts) that Kenneth W. Starr will be impartial as the Whitewater special prosecutor, as if strict neutrality were the supreme qualification.


Goods Data Help to Raise Bond Prices
Prices of Government securities surged yesterday on a weaker-than-expected economic report, a better-than-expected Treasury auction and a stronger dollar.
The combination lifted the market to its best day since the Federal Reserve raised interest rates a week ago.
The price of the 30-year Treasury bond rose 30/32 , to 10016/32 .
Its yield, which moves in the opposite direction from price, fell to 7.46 percent, from 7.54 percent on Tuesday.
The yield was the lowest since Aug. 17, when it was 7.39 percent.


Coast Guard and Navy Divert 70 Ships to Refugee Crisis Off Florida
Scrambling to keep up with the flow of Cuban refugees, the Navy and Coast Guard have diverted to the crisis more than 70 ships on the East and West Coasts that had been used for interdicting drugs, patrolling fisheries or tending buoys.
More than 8,500 Coast Guard and Navy personnel at sea and ashore have joined what military officials say is one of the largest rescue operations of its kind.
That includes about 350 marines on board the Coast Guard vessels to provide security.


A Goodwill Gesture by Indians
Pitcher MATT TURNER, who continues to undergo chemotherapy treatments for Hodgkin's disease, was released yesterday by the Cleveland Indians so that he can receive the remainder of his contract, a team official said.


ABC's 'Roseanne' Move Seen as Threat to NBC
It seemed like a bold move: ABC is replacing one of its biggest shows, "Roseanne," with an even bigger show, "Home Improvement," as its gladiator of choice to take on NBC's "Frasier" on Tuesday nights when the new television season begins next month.
But the move wasn't really bold at all, industry executives said yesterday.
Instead, they argued, the scheduling shift announced by ABC this week was both a smart programming maneuver, because it left NBC few or no good options, and sound business strategy, because it protects ABC's enormous financial investment in "Roseanne" with no expected cost in lost advertising revenue.


Gender Gap Continues to Close on S.A.T.'s
Citing significant strides in math and science by women of all ethnic backgrounds, the College Board said today that the male-female gap on Scholastic Assessment Test scores continued to narrow among high school students last year.
Releasing the annual report on S.A.T. scores, Donald A. Stewart, the president of the College Board, which oversees the tests, said:


National Trustco reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Two Appointments At Foote, Cone
Foote, Cone &amp; Belding Communications named replacements yesterday for two top executives.
Fred Wray, senior vice president and media director at FCB North America in Chicago, was promoted to executive vice president and worldwide media director at the parent company.
He succeeds Joseph W. Ostrow, who is leaving after seven years to become president and chief executive of the Cabletelevision Advertising Bureau in New York.
Mr.
Wray, 40, will assume responsibilities for all worldwide media operations.


A Legend Is Seeking Power Role
Martina Navratilova won't be the first retired athlete to segue into politics, but she's probably the first to run against her own longtime doubles partner, Pam Shriver.
The post at stake in this curious competition is the presidency of the WTA Tour Players Association, a position held by Shriver for the last three years.
At an election to be held in New York City Sunday night, the fourth-ranked Navratilova, an outspoken advocate of challenging the tennis establishment, will attempt to block Shriver's re-election bid.


Lechters Inc.(LECH,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to July 30


Career Horizons Inc.(CARH,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Russian Reunion on Sharks
Left wing VIKTOR KOZLOV may have a chance to play side-by-side with his boyhood heroes, San Jose Sharks wing SERGEI MAKAROV and center IGOR LARIONOV.





Animal Anti-Cruelty Laws Protect Rats Too
To the Editor:
In the case of the rat killer of Hillside, N.J., it is repugnant that a man who cruelly killed an animal is called a hero while another man, charged with enforcing laws to protect animals against cruelty, is called unreasonable for trying to do his job.


Penn Traffic Co. (PNF,A) reports earnings for Qtr to July 30


INSIDE
Powerful Hollywood Chief Is Leaving Disney Studios
Jeffrey Katzenberg is resigning as chairman of Disney Studios.
Mr.
Katzenberg had sought, and failed, to get the No. 2 job at Walt Disney, the studio's parent company.
Page D1.
Gates Against Crime
It may sound simple, but the residents of the Five Oaks neighborhood in Dayton, Ohio, put up 35 curb-to-curb gates and watched violent crime fall by 50 percent.
Page C1.


Woods, 18, Advances In Amateur
Tiger Woods, the 18-year-old amateur sensation from Cypress, Calif., won his first-round match today in the United States Amateur Championship, defeating Vaughn Moise of Kingwood, Tex., 2 and 1.
Moise, 46, who is a PGA Tour rules official, hit his tee shot into the water at the infamous 17th hole, the Island Green, which is the signature hole at the Stadium Course at the TPC Sawgrass, home of the PGA Tour.


Sunrise Medical (SMD,N) reports earnings for Qtr to July 1


Chairman of Disney Studios Resigns
The Walt Disney Company announced today that Jeffrey Katzenberg, the longtime chairman of its Disney Studios and one of Hollywood's most powerful executives, was leaving at the end of next month.
Mr.
Katzenberg had sought -- and failed to get -- the No. 2 job at the Walt Disney Company, after Disney's president died in a helicopter accident last April.
Disney said it was reorganizing its filmed entertainment business by creating two distinct operations, one for motion pictures and one for television.
Mr.
Katzenberg's film-making responsibilities will be partly assumed by Joe Roth, the former chairman of 20th Century Fox and now head of Caravan Pictures, a Walt Disney movie label.
Promotion at TV Unit
Richard Frank, who had served as president under Mr.
Katzenberg at the Disney studio since 1985, has been promoted to chairman of the newly created Walt Disney Television and Telecommunications unit.


Corrections
The excerpts last Thursday from the Senate's health care debate misattributed the first statement, a discussion of insurance company practices.
That excerpt, nine paragraphs long, was taken from a statement made by Senator Edward M. Kennedy, Democrat of Massachusetts, not Senator Charles E. Grassley, Republican of Iowa.


Tech Data Corp.(TECD,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


U.S. Has Itself to Blame for Cuban Refugees
To the Editor:
President Clinton has made the first real change in Cuba policy in 28 years by "adjusting" the Cuban Adjustment Act of 1966.
But by stating once again that he will continue to enforce the embargo against Cuba and the Cuban Democracy Act, the President is allowing a small minority of ultraconservatives in Miami to dictate United States policy.


Montreal Journal; A 'Free' Quebec? In Many Tongues, a Firm 'No!'
Italian-born Johnny Cicchino, who has lived in Canada for 25 of his 52 years and now owns a fruit and vegetable business in one of the biggest and busiest Montreal food markets, says the idea that Quebec might separate from Canada is "crazy, completely crazy."
"We all work here together," Mr.
Cicchino declared, arms waving expansively at the workers crowding around his colorful stall, beside bins brimming with figs, tomatoes and melons.
"We speak French, English, Italian -- it makes no difference. We're all good friends. We don't want anybody ordering us to speak French."


A Rest Before a Journey's End


Sylvia S. Goldstein; Educator, 84
Sylvia S. Goldstein, a teacher and administrator in New York City public schools for almost half a century, died on Saturday in the Sarah Neuman Nursing Home in Mamaroneck.
Mrs.
Goldstein, who lived in Lido Beach, L.I., was 84.
The cause was congestive heart failure, said her daughter, Claire Meadow, of Larchmont, N.Y.


Washington Finds Way to Upset Edberg
The sixth time was the charm for MaliVai Washington.
After having never won a set against Stefan Edberg in five previous meetings, Washington won two tonight in a 6-0, 3-6, 6-3 second-round upset of Edberg at the Waldbaum's Hamlet Cup.


Quiet Winners in House Fight on Crime: Women
With the Senate snared in the second act of a summer stock drama on the crime bill, House members are taking a closer look at the paper trail left by their furious late-night trading as they careened toward consensus last week.
After all the uproar over what conservative critics called "pork" in the $30.2 billion crime measure, the fretting over total failure and the dimming -- finally -- of the C-Span lights, what they are finding is that the quiet winners in the bill that finally emerged are women and children.


Alfred Hurwitz, 85, A Combat Doctor And Chief Surgeon
Dr.
Alfred Hurwitz, a decorated combat surgeon in World War II who served as chief of surgery at hospitals in Connecticut, New York City and Florida, died on Sunday at the Maine Medical Center in Portland.
He was 85 and lived in Kennebunk and Liberty, Me.
The cause was cancer of the pancreas, his family said.


Where to Find It
SLIPCOVERS, once upon a time, were all about practicality, a quick way to make ugly furniture pretty and usable again.
But in the 1980's, they turned fashionable, with whimsical fabrics and flounces.
And now, in tune with the lean 90's, they blend fashion and practicality.
"After the 80's, everything got simple -- lots of white linen with pleated corners and no shirring," said Mischelle Arcus, a Manhattan slipcover designer.


Hutu and Tutsi Mill the Rice and Set an Example
A day in Rwanda's rice-growing region is a reminder that not every Hutu is a killer or a refugee.
At the rice-milling cooperative here, men are again working eight-hour days, shelling, bagging and selling the rice brought in by members, Hutu and Tutsi.
The cement factory, which employs both Hutu and Tutsi, may reopen soon.


Ollie North Enjoying Run To the Top in Senate Race
As a call-in host here egged him on this morning before a live radio audience, the candidate for the United States Senate swigged a cup of water, then squirted it between the gap in his front teeth high into the air, hitting a target nearly 10 feet away.
"Bull's eye! Dead on!" said Oliver L. North, the former lieutenant colonel in the Marines, who still likes to prove he has that can-do spirit.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
7.75
7.75
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
4.00
4.00
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
4.63
4.64
3.03
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.52
4.56
2.97
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.86
4.90
3.08
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.20
7.28
5.49
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.46
7.54
6.17
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.31
8.39
7.05
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.39
6.40
5.63
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Firefighters Invoked in a Sympathy Charity Scam
It is the kind of charity that few people can say no to: a fund for the families of firefighters who died in the line of duty, some after clinging to life for weeks.
But one such charity that raised thousands of dollars from New York City businesses was a fake, fire officials said, and the scheme is a common one.
Law enforcement officials said yesterday that a Pennsylvania man previously convicted of fraud had raised about $143,000 by calling New York businesses and individuals, and asking for money for the families of firefighters James F. Young, Christopher J. Siedenburg and John J. Drennan.


Market Place; Blockbuster's shareholders are angry over accord with Viacom.
SHAREHOLDERS in Blockbuster Entertainment were not happy campers yesterday.
News that Blockbuster's board had agreed to recommend a merger with Viacom, at a price lower than Blockbuster had negotiated only eight months earlier, angered many shareholders, sent Blockbuster's price falling and raised the specter that the deal might not go through when shareholders finally vote on Sept. 30.
During what one participant described as an "aggressively hostile" telephone conference call yesterday, analysts argued that Blockbuster was selling out a low price, given the company's 30 percent growth in operating cash flow.


Caesars World Inc.(CAW,N) reports earnings for Year to July 31


N.C.A.A. Sues Florida Regents
The N.C.A.A. sued the Florida Board of Regents yesterday, seeking to void a state law that has prevented it from acting on the eligibility of several Florida State players who took part in an illegal shopping spree.
The National Collegiate Athletic Association wants to overturn a 1992 law that has kept it from actively investigating possible rules violations at Florida State and also at the University of Miami, said the N.C.A.A.'s enforcement executive, DAVID BERST.


Giants Get a Kick Out of This Linebacker
The arms on Corey Miller look like something out of a Popeye episode.
His biceps, or guns as some of his Giants teammates call them, are as big as most people's thighs.
He can bench-press 480 pounds.
That's a golf cart with Dan Reeves sitting in it.
On his light days, he benches 225 pounds 36 times.
Ho-hum.
At 6 feet 2 inches and 255 pounds, the 25-year-old Miller is a tremendous physical presence.
He is also the backup place-kicker.
That's right.
The backup kicker.
If Brad Daluiso goes down, Miller and all those muscles would attempt a field goal.


The So-Called World Of an Adolescent Girl, As Interpreted by One
The built-in obstacle for a dramatic series about teen-age life that aims to engage an adult audience has to do with its level of sophistication.
It needs to be authentic enough that, on the one hand, it's persuasive and maybe even instructive about the angst and perplexity and exhilaration of the adolescent Zeitgeist.
On the other hand, you don't want it to be too authentic.
That would be stultifying (or terrifying), like living with your neighbors' kids.
Where's the entertainment in that?
"My So-Called Life," the much-ballyhooed new series that has its premiere tonight on ABC, bravely takes on this problem, and even adds a degree of difficulty.
The stories are ostensibly told from the point of view of the main character, a 15-year-old girl named Angela Chase; much of the action is accompanied by her voice-over narration, literally making the show's narrative voice her own.


Harcourt General (H,N) reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Digital Chooses Three Agencies
The Digital Equipment Corporation said yesterday that it had selected three agencies to handle its advertising and marketing communications accounts with annual worldwide spending estimated at $90 million.
DDB Needham Worldwide in New York was named as the worldwide lead strategic and creative agency on the advertising account with billings estimated at $35 million to $40 million.
As expected, Digital's marketing communications account, with billings estimated at $50 million, was divided between the Ryan Partnership in Westport, Conn., and Maritz Inc. in Fenton, Mo., to handle duties like direct marketing and sales promotion.


Methode Electronics Inc.(METHB,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Sapiens Account Goes to Anderson
Sapiens International, a software company based in Carey, N.C., said yesterday that it had selected the New York office of Anderson &amp; Lembke to handle its account, which had been at Aspen Communications in Norcross, Ga.
Billings were estimated at $4 million to $6 million.
Anderson was awarded the account after a two-month review.
A campaign is expected to begin in October.


Sharks' Irbe Bitten by His Dog
San Jose Sharks goaltender ARTURS IRBE has declined to discuss what made his dog Rambo bite him on his left hand.
Irbe was recovering well from a fractured finger, nerve damage and a severed artery in his left hand after his dog bit him last month at his home in Latvia, team doctors said.


Whether it's creative license or addled 'adspeak,' Madison Avenue is awash in misspellings.
IF u can reed this, may bee its time too work on Maddison Avenue.
The advertising industry, as that worst-case sentence suggests, seems increasingly in need of spelling lessons.
More advertisements are appearing in magazines and newspapers -- and sometimes on television -- replete with misspellings that range from minor mistakes in tiny type in the texts to major mishaps in large-type headlines.


Rights of Aliens
To the Editor:
Anthony Lewis, in criticizing a Clinton Justice Department brief opposed to the free speech rights of resident aliens, tries to bolster his case by distinguishing resident aliens from aliens seeking entry, who "have no rights" (column, Aug. 19).


Economic Scene; Taxing employee medical benefits may help cure some of the problems in the health care system.
SURPRISE: Senator Phil Gramm, doyen of the hard right, and the A.F.L.-C.I.O., standard-bearer for the remnants of the New Deal coalition, stand as one on a key element of health care reform.
Well, maybe it is not such a surprise.
For the subject is taxes -- specifically, why their constituents should not have to pay more.


The Police Release a Video in Hopes of Catching a Killer


Stretching the Borders
Ever since Americans began moving to the suburbs in droves after World War II, banks and savings and loans have followed them, opening branches up on tree-lined Main Streets and at freeway junctions to serve them.
Now the Justice Department, in a groundbreaking settlement of a home loan discrimination case on Monday, has told lending institutions that they cannot simply choose to serve affluent white suburbs and ignore nearby poor and minority areas.
In its case against the Chevy Chase Federal Savings Bank of Chevy Chase, Md., the Government argued that simply by locating its branches only in affluent, white, and mostly suburban areas surrounding the District of Columbia, the savings and loan had discriminated against the black population of the District's inner city and poorer suburbs.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Markets
Stocks staged a powerful late rally that startled Wall Street and left analysts divided on its meaning.
The Dow Jones industrial average jumped 70.90 points, or 1.88 percent.
Some saw the surge as a sign that the market was ready to recover the losses that began after the Federal Reserve started raising rates, while others said the rally would be short-lived.  [ Page D1. ]
Treasury prices surged, helped by weakness in orders in durable goods and a stronger dollar.
A auction of five-year notes also bolstered the bond market.  [ D13. ]


The Show's Sold Out? Don't Always Believe It
New York is probably the toughest city in which to buy concert tickets.
Seats at shows by popular acts can sell out in anywhere from 4 to 90 minutes, and even performances that sell slowly elsewhere in the country often sell out in a day or two in New York.
But just because a show is sold out one day doesn't mean it will be sold out the next.
For some time, savvy concertgoers have known that if they check in with Ticketmaster or a concert hall's box office daily after a show has sold out, there will eventually be tickets available.
Occasionally, the tickets will be for prime seats in the front rows.
So for those who still want to attend the coming sold-out shows by Aerosmith, James Taylor, Morrissey and the Stone Temple Pilots, there are other ticket options besides scalpers.


Starr Filed No Brief for Women's Group
To the Editor:
In your call for Kenneth W. Starr to step down as Whitewater independent counsel (editorial, Aug. 18), you state that he "was working on a legal brief for a conservative women's organization opposing President Clinton." The Independent Women's Forum is not conservative, does not oppose President Clinton and has not asked Mr.
Starr to prepare a legal brief.
The forum is troubled by the notion that any man should enjoy legal immunity from charges of sexual har- assment.
We asked Mr.
Starr, among others, to explore with us the constitutional question of whether or not a sitting President is immune from civil liability for nonofficial acts before taking office.
While we might decide to take some sort of action, no such decision has been made.
It is therefore quite a leap for you to conclude that "Mr. Starr passed from public commentator to litigating opponent."
We speak for women working to raise families and build careers.
We consider ourselves neither conservative nor liberal, but sensible.
Our interest in the Paula Jones case was prompted by a concern that if the immunity defense prevailed, it might serve as a precedent for powerful men to avoid or delay accountability for the sexual harassment of less powerful women.
ANITA K. BLAIR  Pres., Independent Women's Forum Arlington, Va., Aug. 18, 1994


Showalter Avoiding Delicate Matters
Buck Showalter sounded confused and helpless as he talked about the status of his striking players, two emotions that are rarely associated with the control-crazed, detail-oriented Yankee manager.
Whether he is watching another minor league game or scampering through another airport, Showalter's thoughts for almost two weeks now have frequently drifted to what his players are doing.
He wishes he knew.
Showalter says that he has not spoken to any players since the strike began on Aug. 12 because he has been inundated with scouting trips.
After spending a few days at home in Pace, Fla., he went to Fort Mill, S.C., and then to Columbus, Ohio, to scout the Yankees' Class AAA Clippers.
He is now in Albany, with the Class AA club.


Pupils of Burned School in Alabama Start Classes Hoping for Harmony
Under a lowering gray sky, the 600-odd students of Randolph County High trooped into the charred remnants of their school today for the first day of classes and, many hoped, a fresh attempt at racial peace in Wedowee, a troubled rural hamlet in the Appalachian foothills.
Indeed, there were plenty of assertions of new-found harmony from local school officials, before and after the shortened first day.
"It was like a family," said the new assistant principal, Lucille Burns, who is black, after the school day ended at midmorning.
"We're healing."


21-Year-Old Death Solved
The police yesterday said they had solved a 21-year-old murder case with the arrest of Juan Erias of Long Island City, Queens.
Mr.
Erias, 53, an alcohol treatment counselor, was charged with the stabbing death of his neighbor, Victor Vasquez, in Harlem on Aug. 5, 1973.
The police said Mr.
Erias became a suspect shortly after the killing, but fled to Puerto Rico.
He returned to New York less than a year later, they said, and had since led a quiet, law-abiding life under his own name.
Investigators said they found him with the help of an informant.


Grove Bank
Shares of Grove Bank of Massachusetts rose almost $13 in June, to $31.875, when it confirmed rumors that it had received several buyout offers and had hired an investment bank to evaluate them.
The shares held to that range as long as investors thought Grove might accept an offer.
But yesterday Grove said it had turned them all down.
Its stock price fell sharply.


Stopping Blight at the Border; Two Paths for Ridgewood, Queens, and Bushwick, Brooklyn
For the residents of Ridgewood, Queens, the invisible jagged line separating them from Bushwick, Brooklyn, has long been an object of both anxiety and opportunity.
A small but sturdy community on the southwest edge of Queens, across the street from Brooklyn, Ridgewood watched in fear as Bushwick set itself aflame in the 1960's and 70's, culminating in the July 1977 blackout that produced a night of smoke and looting.
"Ridgewood has only five years left to go" was the popular phrase 25, 20 and 15 years ago among doomsaying residents, convinced that Bushwick's blight would spread.


Joan Harrison, a Screenwriter And Producer, Is Dead at 83
Joan Harrison, a producer and screenwriter who helped write the scripts for "Rebecca," "Foreign Correspondent" and other films directed by Alfred Hitchcock, died on Aug. 14 in London.
She was 83.
Miss Harrison was born in Guildford, Surrey, England, where her father published two local newspapers.
After attending boarding school in Kent, she received an honor's degree in philosophy, politics and economics at St.
Hugh's College, Oxford, where she occasionally reviewed films for the student newspaper.
She later studied at the Sorbonne.


Corrections
An obituary on Friday of Catholicos Vazgen I, Supreme Patriarch and head of the Armenian Apostolic Church, referred imprecisely to the structure of the church.
Since 1933, the church has been divided in two.
The larger body is made up of the Eastern and Western Dioceses of the Armenian Church, which are under the administrative jurisdiction of the Catholicos at Echmiadzin in Armenia.
That was Vazgen I. The other part of the church, the Eastern and Western Armenian Prelacies, recognizes the Catholicos at Echmiadzin as Supreme Patriarch of the church but is under the administrative jurisdiction of the Catholicos of Cilicia, in Antelias, Lebanon.


RESULTS PLUS
SWIMMING  Perkins Sets World Record  The Australian swimmer Kieren Perkins broke his own world record last night in the 1,500-meter freestyle at the Commonwealth Games in Victoria, British Columbia.
Perkins was timed in 14 minutes 41.66 seconds to take 1.82 seconds off the mark he set at the 1992 Barcelona Olympics, where he won the gold medal.
In setting his record, Perkins covered 800 meters in 7:46.00.
That's 0.60 seconds better than the record time he set at Sydney in February 1992.
On Monday, Perkins missed breaking the 400 mark by Russia's Evgeny Sadovy by 0.77 seconds.


Echoing Compaq, I.B.M. Sets Sizable Price Cuts
I.B.M. announced sharp price cuts yesterday, but analysts were uncertain whether the move would revive the brutal price wars that swept the personal computer industry two years ago.
I.B.M., struggling to keep pace in the business personal computer market it once dominated, announced yesterday that it would cut prices of selected models by an average of 22 percent.
The pricing move follows similarly steep price cuts announced a week earlier by the Compaq Computer Corporation.


Bridge
Learning bridge, or learning to play the game better, is a popular activity for the elderly.
There are many such classes at the 92d Street Y.M.H.A. on Lexington Avenue, and an advanced group is taught by William Strasser, a volunteer.
Many of the elements in play that he teaches were featured in the diagramed deal, on which he sat South.
It was played at the Town Club, 9 East 86th Street, where there is a group of players who once played at the old Cavendish Club.
He and his partner, Arnold Oberlander, climbed to six clubs by a sensible sequence.


Scene Surrounding American Pastime Takes On an International Flair
It was probably as appropriate as it was inevitable that the talks aimed at resolving a parochial dispute between multimillionaires involving the American national pastime would be held in a distinctly cosmopolitan setting in a moneyed New York neighborhood at a Japanese-owned hotel flying the American and Swedish flags.
"The Swedish ambassador stays here," explained John Crowley, the 68-year-old Irish-born doorman on duty at the East 48th Street entrance to the Hotel Inter-Continental, site of yesterday's resumed baseball talks.


Israel Yielding Some Authority For West Bank
Israel will begin handing over to Palestinians the running of schools, health and welfare services and tax collection in the West Bank on Monday as a result of an agreement that was initialed today in Cairo.
The newly initialed agreement, known as the Palestinian "early empowerment" accord, was originally envisioned by the 1993 settlement that created the Palestinian self-rule enclaves in Gaza and the West Bank town of Jericho.


New From Orson Welles: Updated 'Quixote'
With a soundtrack featuring Orson Welles's own booming narration, a roughly cut version of the director's unfinished film "Don Quixote" made its public debut at the Edinburgh Film Festival this week, nine years after his death.
Critics and sponsors said audiences who filled a screening hall over the weekend reacted with a mixture of enthusiasm and bewilderment to their first glimpse of the scratchy, sometimes grainy black-and-white film, which Welles began in 1954.


Video-Game Maker Making the Switch to PC Hardware
In a move underscoring the convergent paths of personal computers and video-game technology, the 3DO Company said today that it would adopt the Motorola-I.B.M.
Power PC chip for its next generation of video players.
3DO, an American company with powerful backers like AT&amp; T, Time Warner Inc. and Matsushita, but with slower-than-expected sales of its video-game machines, is seeking to develop a new machine that would sell for less than $500 but surpass the speed and power of the fastest personal computers.
It intends to have that product ready by Christmas 1995 -- in time to meet similarly ambitious new machines from 3D0's bigger Japanese competitors, the Nintendo Company, Sega Enterprises Ltd. and the Sony Corporation.


In Debate, Change and Record Are Cited
In the first debate between the two Democratic candidates for governor, John B. Larson proudly embraced his eight-year tenure as president of the State Senate and said he should not be blamed for the state's fiscal troubles.
Although his opponent, State Comptroller William E. Curry Jr., branded Mr.
Larson part of the old guard that left the state with a deep deficit at the end of the 1980's and raised taxes, Mr.
Larson spent much of the hourlong debate citing his legislative accomplishments as evidence that he was the experienced hand that the government needed.


South African Wildcat Truck Strike Worries Business Leaders
A wildcat trucking strike that turned many miles of Africa's most modern highway system into a fuming gridlock ended tonight, but not before creating new fears of anarchy to bedevil President Nelson Mandela in his courtship of foreign investors.
The protest began on Monday when hundreds of truckers demanding better pay parked across a tollgate on the country's busiest freight highway, near the Indian Ocean port of Durban.
It spread quickly to three other major routes, as the truckers rallied one another to choke points on citizens' band radios.


Donna K. Price, 59; Advanced Services For Blind People
Donna Kay Price, a Westchester County real estate executive and former director of the Lighthouse for the Blind of New York and Westchester, died on Saturday at Westchester County Medical Center in Valhalla, N.Y.
She was 59 and lived in Waccabuc, N.Y.
Mrs. Price died of head injuries suffered in a fall at her home, her family said.


Essay; The En-En Document
The Clinton Administration's most revealing policy document laying out "the national security strategy of the United States," no less -- has been kept secret by the fiendishly clever device of making it public.
Issued a month ago in the dead of night, the blue-covered "National Security Strategy of Engagement and Enlargement" was dubbed "the En-En Document" by engaging reporters and enlarged pundits.


Professor Challenges Ellis Island Health Exhibit
One Sunday last month, Dr.
Victor Herbert went to Ellis Island in search of his namesake, his father's famous first cousin, the composer of period-piece operettas like "Naughty Marietta." That Victor Herbert arrived at Ellis Island in the days when it was the immigrant's gateway to a new country and a new life.
Dr.
Herbert did not find his relative's name among the thousands on the Wall of Honor.
But he found something else that set off a volley of letters, faxes and Freedom of Information requests.


Waiting Anxiously For Rules On Cuba
As the Clinton Administration delayed announcing new rules on trade with Cuba today, small businesses here that depend on sending visitors and goods to Cuba waited anxiously to find out whether the escalating United States crackdown would put them out of business.
New regulations reflecting President Clinton's order restricting money transfers and charter flights to Cuba were supposed to be published today by the Treasury Department's Foreign Assets Control Office.
But Administration officials said this evening that the publication of the rules would be delayed.


COMPANY BRIEFS
KELLWOOD CO., St.
Louis, a men's, women's and children's clothing concern, agreed to acquire privately held Halmode Apparel Inc., New York, a maker of women's clothes, uniforms and maternity clothes.
Terms were not announced.
PASS-PORT LTD., Tel Aviv, agreed to purchase the Regina Company, Atlanta, a manufacturer of vacuum cleaners and floor care products, from a group of private investors.
Terms were not disclosed.


WLR Foods Inc.(WLRF,NNM) reports earnings for Year to July 2


Go for Gin A Dull 3d; Title Bid Fades, Too
Go for Gin, the winner of the Kentucky Derby and one of the stars of the Triple Crown series, may have lost two races at the same time today.
He was outrun in the Forego Handicap by long shots American Chance, the winner, and Evil Bear.
And he fell farther behind Holy Bull in the long-range race for champion 3-year-old.
His trainer, Nick Zito, who has been pronouncing the horse fresh and primed after a two-month rest, watched his prize colt miss by less than two lengths and promptly went to his defense.
At least, he blamed the jockey more than the horse.


Suzy Shier reports earnings for Qtr to July 30


A Yellowstone Mine Means Double Trouble
To the Editor:
The Canadian-based Noranda Inc.'s proposed mine adjacent to Yellowstone National Park would be more than just a ripoff of the United States Treasury.


O'Sullivan Industries Holdings Inc.(OSU,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


No Betting on Cane Favorite
Cam's Card Shark, seeking to become the richest single-season horse in harness racing history, drew post position No. 5 yesterday for Saturday night's $391,780 Cane Pace at Yonkers Raceway.
Only five rivals dared to enter the race against Cam's Card Shark, who is such an overwhelming favorite that Yonkers received permission from the New York State Racing and Wagering Board to exclude him from parimutuel wagering.
For wagering purposes, Cam's Card Shark will in effect be invisible; bets will be taken on the race's other horses.


Dell Rebound Continues as It Posts Profit
The Dell Computer Corporation, continuing to rebound from losses last year, said today that it earned $28.6 million, or 65 cents a share, in the second quarter on a 13 percent increase in sales.
Dell, the nation's sixth-largest seller of personal computers, had reported a loss of $75.7 million, or $2.03 a share, for the corresponding period last year.
Sales for the quarter, which ended on July 31, rose to $791.5 million from $700.6 million for the corresponding period last year.


Justice Cracks Down on Redlining
The Justice Department dramatically sharpened its attack on discriminatory lending practices this week when it got Chevy Chase Federal Savings Bank, the largest in the Washington D.C. area, to agree to set up branches in black neighborhoods.
Justice has gone after banks that discriminated against black loan applicants, but until the Chevy Case case it had never used anti-discrimination laws to challenge where banks provided services or placed branches.
The new tactic deserves praise.
As Attorney General Janet Reno observed, blacks are no better off if a bank shuns their neighborhood than if it rejects their loan applications.
The purpose of anti-discrimination laws is to guarantee that qualified blacks have an equal shot at loans.
At Chevy Chase they did not.
According to Justice, the bank made 97 percent of its loans between 1976 and 1992 in white neighborhoods.
It opened no branches where 90 percent of blacks in Washington D.C. live, nor did it open branches where 75 percent of the blacks in Prince George's County, Maryland, live.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
7.75
7.75
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
4.00
4.00
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
4.75
4.64
3.06
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.52
4.52
2.99
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.86
4.86
3.08
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.26
7.20
5.41
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.53
7.46
6.09
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.38
8.31
6.99
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.40
6.39
5.61
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Too Many Nuclear Labs
Now that the U.S. and Russia have begun to dispose of their overstocked nuclear arsenals and are seeking to ban nuclear tests, Washington needs to decide what to do with the renowned weapons laboratories that designed all its warheads.
Although the Federal Government is shrinking its nuclear production facilities, it has yet to impose a similar reduction on its three design facilities.
The laboratories clearly have a legitimate, continuing role in "stewardship" -- insuring that warheads remaining in the stockpile are safe and reliable, and retaining the expertise to replace old warheads when they eventually decay.
But some officials in the laboratories and the Pentagon want to expand that mission and stay in the business of designing better bombs, even for missions that have not been defined.


Executive Changes
OLSTEN CORP., Westbury, L.I., named Stuart Olsten vice chairman.
REEBOK INTERNATIONAL LTD., Stoughton, Mass., named Angel Martinez president and chief executive of its Rockport Co. unit.
Mr.
Martinez, who was previously executive vice president of global marketing for the Reebok division, succeeds Bob Slattery, who previously announced he would retire.
David Ropes was named to succeed Mr.
Martinez in his former position.


Departure by Studio's Head Raises a Big Risk at Disney
By refusing to promote Jeffrey Katzenberg to the No. 2 job at the Walt Disney Company, Michael D. Eisner, the chairman and chief executive, has taken a major risk that leaves not only the successful film studio in turmoil but also the entire company, movie industry executives and agents said today.
Mr.
Katzenberg's decision on Wednesday to quit the company he helped build during the last decade after the rebuff by Mr.
Eisner comes at an especially troubled time at Disney.
Once one of the most stable and successful entertainment-industry giants, Disney had been engulfed by strains this year in its management and businesses that have been compounded by the turbulence surrounding Mr.
Katzenberg's departure.


Starter's Account Goes to Chiat/Day
The Starter Corporation, the marketer of licensed sports apparel and sportswear based in New Haven, said yesterday that it had selected Chiat/ Day in New York to handle its account, which had been at Hill, Holliday, Connors, Cosmopulos in Boston for two months.
Last week, Hill, Holliday resigned the account over what it called irreconcilable differences.
Billings, previously estimated at $7 million, were estimated yesterday at $10 million to $15 million.


U.S. Rejects Castro's Proposal for Talks
A day after President Fidel Castro of Cuba proposed broad talks as a step toward ending the refugee crisis, the Clinton Administration rejected his overture, insisting that such talks would prove fruitless because Mr.
Castro appears resolutely opposed to the reforms sought by Washington.
Even as many members of Congress urged President Clinton to agree to a high-level dialogue on the trade embargo, political reform and other points of contention, Administration officials insisted that such talks were unnecessary on the ground that Mr.
Castro persists in blocking the changes he knows are needed to satisfy his people.


A Back-to-Basics U-Turn in Japan
As part of its quality testing, the Toyota Motor Corporation used to require that sunroofs on its automobiles be opened and closed 1,500 times in a room cooled to 22 degrees below zero Fahrenheit.
Then it occurred to the company that few people opened their sunroofs even once when it was that cold outside.
To cut costs, the required testing has been reduced to 500 times at a temperature of only 4 degrees below zero.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; An argument over magazine research is causing concern among marketers and agencies.
A DISPUTE over magazine research methodology is roiling agencies, advertisers, media executives and researchers.
They are becoming increasingly concerned that the quarrel could call into question the validity of data used to buy billions of dollars worth of print advertisements annually.
The dispute involves a once-confidential draft report by members of a committee of the Magazine Publishers of America, the trade organization representing the nation's magazine industry.
The draft report questioned the way some data are compiled by the Simmons Market Research Bureau, one of the two companies that conduct research among consumers to determine which magazines and newspapers they read, how often they read those publications and how much time they spend reading each issue.


Boys Find Student's Tuition
Two brothers, ages 5 and 7, were riding bicycles near their home in South Hempstead on Tuesday when they found an envelope containing $2,200 in cash and college registration forms.
Meanwhile, in Island Park, Jose Rodriguez was beside himself.
He was headed to Molloy College in Rockville Centre to pay his tuition for next semester when he lost the envelope, said a Nassau County police officer, Robert Totans.


Deutsch Receives A Kohler Account
The Kohler Company, the maker of kitchen and bathroom fixtures in Kohler, Wis., said yesterday that it had selected Deutsch Inc. in New York as the first agency to handle its broadcast account, with billings estimated at $8 million to $10 million.
Grey Advertising in New York continues to handle the print portion.


Stocks Mixed and Dow Falls After 2-Day Rally
Almost as fast as the stock market's rally appeared, it disappeared.
The leading stock indexes closed mixed yesterday, as a two-day surge of nearly 100 points on the Dow Jones industrial average failed to gather more steam.
The Dow, which had climbed on Tuesday and Wednesday, fell 16.84 points, to 3,829.89, yesterday.
Some analysts said that rather than breaking out into a substantial rally, the market was simply establishing a new -- but higher -- trading range of 3,725 to 3,900 on the Dow.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-13  A DOGGED CUBAN EXODUS  Not even rainstorms or President Clinton's stern new policy are deterring Cubans from taking to the sea in vast numbers.
Thousands are in fact speeding their departure in search of a new future in the United States.
A1  FOR CLINTON, STICKY CHOICES  News analysis: Fidel Castro has changed American immigration policy into something that will be difficult to sustain.
And President Clinton cannot consider talking with Mr.
Castro, for fear of alienating Florida's Cuban-American colony.
A1


Young People Adrift In Beautiful Hong Kong
"Autumn Moon" was shown as part of the 1992 New York Film Festival.
Following are excerpts from Stephen Holden's review, which appeared in The New York Times on Sept. 26, 1992.
The film -- in English, Cantonese and Japanese with English subtitles -- opens today at the Papp Public Theater, 425 Lafayette Street, East Village.
Hong Kong, with its modern skyscrapers soaring over a misty harbor framed by a spectacular mountain backdrop, is one of the most photogenic cities in the world.
And it has never looked more imposingly spiffy than in Clara Law's gorgeous "Autumn Moon."


Mexico Agains Calls U.S. Investors
The Mexicans have voted. Now it's the Americans' turn.
United States corporations and investors are poised for a new round of ventures in Mexico after the ruling party's recent victory in an election they regard as clean enough, at least, to be valid.


For Cubans Facing Sea: Last Chance
Neither the fierce rains whipping the palm trees today nor the harsh new measures by President Clinton were going to keep Juan Carlos Gonzalez from making another attempt to take to the sea in search of a new future in the United States.
In fact, thousands of people like Mr.
Gonzalez, fearing this may be their last chance to leave the country, are speeding up their exodus, rather than hesitating over the uncertainty of the voyage.


Home Video
What to Rent?
It happens all the time in video stores.
Movie seekers don't find what they want and leave empty-handed or with consolation choices that don't live up to cassette-box blurbs, critics' assessments or clerks' recommendations.





2 No. 1's, Both Hurt, Find Tonic In Draw
The ailing defending champions may be on shaky perches atop the seeding lists, but Steffi Graf and Pete Sampras got breaks yesterday in the draw for the United States Open.
Sampras, who has been sidelined for a month with a sore foot, drew a qualifier as his first-round opponent, and Graf, who played her last tournament in a back brace, was matched against Anne Mall, a lowly ranked California wild card.


A Folk Duo Oblivious To Fashion
Everything but the Girl, an English folk duo that took its name from a furniture store, has prospered for more than a decade in spite of the fact that its quiet folk-pop music remains stubbornly oblivious to pop fashion.
What the pair offers is a consistency that is as impressive as its music is low-key.
Tracey Thorne and Ben Watt, who met at the University of Hull in 1981, both compose, sing and play the guitar.
Their tuneful, thoughtful, deeply personal songs have found a loyal cult audience
As Mr.
Watt said early in the duo's performance at the Fez Lounge of Time Cafe (380 Lafayette Street, East Village) on Wednesday evening, his songs deal with such things as the fact that just when you least expect it, things come along from your past to complicate your present.
One number, "25th December," from the duo's newest album, "Amplified Heart" (Atlantic), illustrates what he described as "the new theory of relativity." It states: "If you spend too much time with your relatives, time just seems to expand."


Suppose We Rent Some Cabins and Run Our Own Camp?
What's more alone than "Home Alone"?
It's "Camp Nowhere," in which a band of pre-teen-agers have the bright idea of escaping their pushy parents for the summer.
While the parents contemplate various educational camps for their children ("Camp Microchippewa" is an option for the computer-conscious), the campers scrounge up enough money to rent some empty cabins and hire Dennis Van Welker (Christopher Lloyd) to pretend to be an adult.
For Dennis, a good-natured, down-and-out casualty of the 60's, this is not an easy assignment.
If "Camp Nowhere" stuck to the predictable high jinks -- buying toys, having pie fights, jumping off the roof onto mattresses -- it would be about as welcome as poison ivy.
Fortunately, there's a funny screenplay (by Andrew Kurtzman and Eliot Wald, two "Saturday Night Live" writers), good-humored direction by Jonathan Prince, and a nice young cast.
Most of the actors have television experience, and they bring a sturdy, no-frills professionalism to their roles.


Yonkers Budget to Albany
The Yonkers City Council sent a $414.8 million budget plan to State Comptroller H. Carl McCall in Albany for certification today after overriding Mayor Terence A. Zaleski's veto of the spending plan late Wednesday night.
The Comptroller's certification would end a bitter summerlong stalemate between the Council and the Mayor and avert spending cuts of 30 percent the State Financial Control Board had ordered if the impasse was not broken by the end of the month.


U.S.-Cuba Strain Cools Haiti's Invasion Fever
The red-and-blue banners that stretch across main streets in Port-au-Prince read, "No to the U.S. invasion." But the colors are beginning to fade after being up for more than a month, because the likelihood of such an invasion to reinstate the deposed President, the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide, seems to have grown dimmer for many Haitians.
The State Department's attention in the region seems to be focused on Cuba, and what Haitians once called invasion fever seems to have broken.


Long-Distance Aim by Nynex
The Nynex Corporation asked the Justice Department today for permission to offer long-distance telephone service in New York.
Nynex, which provides local telephone service in New York and New England, and the other regional Bell companies are currently barred from offering long-distance service under the antitrust consent decree that broke up the old Bell System.


Trap Is Baited for Fugitives, And They Come Running
Elvis Davis was the first to be stung.
When he applied for money from Ohio's victims' compensation program in 1991, a computer check found an outstanding warrant for the 34-year-old factory worker, who had been indicted 10 years earlier for breaking and entering.
So investigators at the Attorney General's Office told him to stop by for his money.
He did and was arrested.
The case of Mr.
Davis convinced the law-enforcement powers of Cleveland that there is a cheap, easy way to catch fugitives: Lie.
Tell them a check is waiting, and they will come.


When the Old Order in China at Last Changes; The Bachelor Surplus
To the Editor:
"A Chinese Bias Against Girls Creates Surplus of Bachelors" (front page, Aug. 16) says there is a 3-to-2 male-to-female ratio among the 205 million single Chinese older than 15; and a 10-to-1 ratio among the 8 million single Chinese in their 30's.


Russia's Spilt Milk
To the Editor:
"We have spent too much money making this material to just mix it with radioactive wastes and bury it," says Viktor N. Mikhailov, Russia's Minister of Atomic Energy, of his country's bomb-grade plutonium (front page, Aug. 19).
Mr.
Mikhailov should learn one of the basic tenets of Western economics: In making decisions, one should ignore sunk costs; only future costs and benefits matter.
EDWARD STEINBERG  Teaneck, N.J., Aug. 19, 1994


The Teacher Has a Question


Dana Adams Schmidt, Reporter Based in Europe and Mideast, 78
Dana Adams Schmidt, a correspondent for The New York Times for three decades who covered Europe, North Africa and the Middle East, died yesterday at his home in Bethesda, Md.
He was 78.
The cause was a heart attack, his sister, Elizabeth Schmidt Crahan, said.
He had been in poor health and broke some ribs in an accident on Tuesday, she said.


A Late Run Brings Woods Back From the Brink
The kid looked across the water at the island green and took a deep breath.
Then he took a couple of practice swings.
One.
Two.
He was nervous, but he wasn't choking.
The wind was blowing hard, right to left, and he was on the tee at the 17th hole at the Stadium Course at the TPC Sawgrass, his match all square and the honor all his.
Tiger Woods might not win the United States Amateur Championship this week.
He is in the quarterfinals, and significant hurdles remain.
But he did not lose it today, when the opportunity was right there to fold up, when he was four down after eight holes to Buddy Alexander, 41, a player who had won this championship in 1986 and who looked like he was about to take the kid to school.


Hugh Culverhouse, 75, Owner of the Buccaneers
Hugh W. Culverhouse, who owned the Tampa Bay Buccaneers since they were awarded a National Football League franchise in 1974, died yesterday at the Louisiana Regional Medical Center in New Orleans.
He was 75 years old.
The team said he died of heart failure after a recurrence of lung cancer 20 months ago.
He had been undergoing experimental treatment for a week at the New Orleans hospital.


Strike at G.M. Parts Plant Ends After Idling 46,000
The General Motors Corporation and the United Automobile Workers union reached a settlement tonight to end a small but crippling three-day-old strike at a parts-making complex in Anderson, Ind.
For want of parts made by Anderson's 3,300 workers -- tail lights, brake lights and bumpers -- 13 G.M. assembly plants throughout North America shut down today, idling 42,850 hourly and salaried workers elsewhere and cutting off deliveries to dealers of Corvettes, Camaros, full-size pickup trucks and at least 20 other models.


State Official Is Suspended For Remarks
Attorney General G. Oliver Koppell suspended the head of his office's criminal bureau in Albany today after a woman said that her answering machine had taped him saying that homosexuals "shouldn't have kids."
Calling the statement "personally repugnant," Mr.
Koppell ordered an investigation and suspended Thomas J. Neidl, 45, head of the Albany criminal prosecutions bureau since 1987, from his supervisory duties.
The investigation, coming as the race for Attorney General heats up, will also focus on a second accusation by the woman, that a top aide to Mr.
Koppell tried to persuade her not to pursue a complaint about the message.


The Washingtons Would Both Love a Breakthrough
MaliVai Washington has been to the doorstep of the top 10 in the world of tennis.
Two years ago, he rose as high as 11th in the rankings, perhaps a shot here or a serve there from establishing himself as one of the game's premier players.


CHRONICLE
"It may just be the most glamorous evening in the history of women's professional tennis," said GABRIELA SABATINI, the tennis superstar and, more to the point, a host of the 18th annual Women's Tennis Association Tour Players Awards Gala on Monday.
The awards program will benefit the New York Special Olympics, the organization for sports training and athletic competition for mentally retarded children and adults.
Among the players expected to receive or present awards are Steffi Graf, Mary Pierce, Martina Navratilova, Chris Evert, Billie Jean King, Arantxa Sanchez Vicario, Conchita Martinez, Mary Joe Fernandez, Gigi Fernandez and Natalya Zvereva.


Deconstructionist Turns to Building
Pretty Boy Floyd
A Novel
By Larry McMurtry and Diana Ossana
444 pages. Simon &amp; Schuster. $24.
Written by Larry McMurtry and the screenwriter Diana Ossana, the novel "Pretty Boy Floyd" possesses many of the hallmarks of Mr.
McMurtry's own fiction: a western backdrop where myth and grubby reality overlap; a boyish hero beloved by women and given to recurrent bouts of melancholy and sadness, and a Dickensian supporting cast of cowboys, whores, farmers and petty criminals.


The Spoken Word
ART AT THE MET, Metropolitan Museum of Art, Fifth Avenue and 82d Street.
Today: "Renoir's 'Madame Georges Charpentier and Her Children Georgette and Paul,' " by Patricia Sands, 11 A.M.; "A Closer Look: An American Rococo Revival Room," by Alice Schwarz, 12:30 P.M; "Batak: Art of North Sumatra," by Wendy Schoenfeld, 3 P.M.; "The Sacred Tree in Assyrian Art" by Eva von Dassow, 5 P.M.; "Thomas Eakins," by Diana Linden, 6 P.M.; "Dali: The Early Years," by Deborah L. Roldan, 7 P.M.
Tomorrow: "The Art of the Spanish Netherlands," by Gracia Lafuente, 11 A.M.; "Picasso and the Weeping Women: The Years of Marie-Therese Walter and Dora Maar," by Richard Meyer, 11 A.M.; "American Architecture at the Metropolitan Museum of Art," by Matthew Kennedy, 7 P.M.
Sunday: "El Greco: Techniques of the Painter," by Lisa Rotmil, 11 A.M.; "Dali: The Early Years," by Mr.
Meyer, 11 A.M.
Free with museum admission: $7; $3.50 for students and the elderly.
Information: (212) 535-7710.


Lovelorn Cousins Commiserate
The Whisper Cafe, the setting of Robert W. Cabell's musical, "Two Hearts Over Easy," is a tiny Manhattan boite of the sort frequented by aspiring show-business types who like to stand around the piano and sing show tunes.
Here is where Maggie (Melanie Demitri) and Jimmy (Bill Ebbesmeyer), two cousins who are pushing 40, meet regularly to commiserate about their empty love lives.
Maggie, who is well heeled and chic, has recently divorced her philandering husband.
Jimmy has lost one lover to AIDS and another to fear of AIDS.
Attending them are Rusty (Randy Weiss), a hunky bartender whom both Maggie and Jimmy fancy, and Gina (Maggie Wirth), a self-hating, overweight waitress and aspiring actress who has a role in an "Off-Off-Off-Off Broadway" space-age adaptation of "Hamlet." Mr.
Weiss and Ms.
Wirth also portray assorted friends, relatives and fantasy figures who enter the couple's conversation.


Crackdown On Crime Strains Jails
The Giuliani administration's aggressive effort to crack down on street crime is placing new strains on New York City's courts and jails, forcing the city to scramble to handle the overload without hiring more workers.
Correction Department officials requested an emergency procedure this week to speed up the building of temporary prison quarters with 600 new beds at Rikers Island, to be completed by next spring at a cost of $30 million.


Market Place; One Manager's Little Gamble Prompted Big Shift in Stocks
A strategy designed to earn the smallest of profits -- about an extra 1 percent a year -- backfired late Wednesday and played a major role in sending the Dow Jones industrial average up more than 70 points.
That surge, which was followed by a slump in stock prices yesterday, shows how the stock market can be roiled by little-known strategies using sophisticated securities.


Election-Season Concerns Help Carry Crime Bill
In the end, the days of Congressional rancor over whether the crime bill had too much pork did not matter.
The overriding concern for Democrats and some Republicans was simpler: returning home with something to show on what voters consider the nation's most pressing issue.
"The telephones in the state of Delaware are ringing off the hook," Senator Joseph R. Biden Jr., a Democrat from that state who is chairman of the Judiciary Committee, told his colleagues on the floor this week.
"They are not talking about pork or pork chops or anything else. They are saying: 'Pass the crime bill. Give me 100,000 cops, build more prisons, and get on with it.' "


No Headline
"Time is the 101st Senator. He is the ally of the people who want to do nothing." SENATOR CHRISTOPHER DODD,  [ A19:3. ]


U.S. to Pay Off Its U.N. Debt For Peacekeeping Operations
The Clinton Administration has won a $1.2 billion appropriation for United Nations peacekeeping operations from the Congress, which will be sufficient to pay off its $950 million peacekeeping arrears by the end of this year and still leave some money for next year's bills.
But unless there is a dramatic decline in future peacekeeping costs, the Administration will probably need to ask Congress for additional money next year, or find itself falling into arrears again, since it is using funds voted for its 1995 budget to pay off past debts.


Plant Assembling Electric Vehicles to Open in Syracuse Area
Giving New York State a foothold in a new high-tech industry, a plant assembling battery-powered vehicles is to open early next year in the Syracuse area, state officials said yesterday.
The plant is a joint venture between the Niagara Mohawk Power Corporation, the Syracuse utility, and an electric car company, U.S.
Electricar of Santa Rosa, Calif.


Art in Review
New Acquisitions
Brooklyn Museum  200 Eastern Parkway (at Prospect Park)
Bill Jensen's "Untitled (With Yellow)" (1990-1992), one of the better paintings in his most recent show, at the Mary Boone Gallery in SoHo, has been acquired by the Brooklyn Museum.
Although it's small (2 by 3 feet), it holds its own among much larger works jammed into the museum's gallery for contemporary art.
Bright shots of yellow stand out against a moody backdrop that may suggest lush Andean hills or the sharp mountain peaks in Chinese scroll paintings.
The work's punch also comes from its elaborated surface -- typical of Mr.
Jensen -- the paint clotted, loosely laid down, slathered on and dripped. (Pat Steir's dripped "Everlasting Waterfall" hangs beside it, and the two pictures play off each other.)


CHRONICLE
ELIZABETH TAYLOR is seeking a preliminary injunction to stop NBC from making a mini-series based on her life, The Associated Press reported earlier this week.
She will have her day in court on Sept. 22, but before then, on Sept. 9, Judge Diane Wayne of Los Angeles Superior Court will hear lawyers for NBC on their motion to dismiss Miss Taylor's complaint as unfounded.
Miss Taylor's allegations include invasion of privacy and unauthorized use of her name among other contentions.
Neil Papiano, Miss Taylor's lawyer, said that material for the mini-series, to be based on a forthcoming biography of the actress by C. David Heymann (the author of "A Woman Named Jackie," a best-selling biography of Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis), contained "deliberate falsehoods." Douglas Mirell, a lawyer for NBC, said that no one who is as much in the public eye as Miss Taylor is "can skirt the First Amendment."


A Proud Day for 287 New Transit Officers


As Florida Center Is Filled, Cubans Are Taken to Texas
With a growing number of Cubans making it past the Coast Guard and Navy armada in the Florida Straits, the Immigration and Naturalization Service today started flying new arrivals to a detention center in Texas because the one near Miami was nearly full.
This afternoon, 49 Cubans were flown from Key West to the Port Isabel Service Processing Center in Port Isabel, Tex., near Brownsville in south Texas, said Amy Otten, an agency spokeswoman.


Cuba: Time to Talk
Well, why not open broad negotiations with the Castro regime?
The Clinton Administration was quick to rebuff Fidel Castro's proposal of multi-issue talks yesterday.
Washington anticipated a propaganda session where Havana would offer to keep its unhappy citizens from leaving only if the U.S. promised to ease its economic embargo, halt anti-Castro radio broadcasts and maybe throw in the return of the Guantanamo Bay Naval Base to Cuba as well.


New Assignments From G. Heileman
The G. Heileman Brewing Company has reassigned the creative and strategic planning portions of several beer and malt liquor accounts, with billings estimated at $16 million, and shuffled the agencies on its roster.
The Richards Group in Dallas, which handles the Lone Star, Henry Weinhard's and Rainier beer brands, was awarded the Old Style beer account from Eisaman, Johns &amp; Laws in Chicago.
At the same time, two malt liquor brands handled by Richards -- Colt 45 and Mickey's -- were moved to W. B. Doner &amp; Company in Baltimore, a former Heileman shop.


A Core Meltdown?; Giuliani Alienates Diehard Supporters in 'Molinari Country'
Just a few short weeks ago, the very idea would have been unthinkable.
On Monday Rudolph W. Giuliani, the first Republican Mayor in a generation, called his close friend and diehard political supporter, Guy V. Molinari, the Republican Borough President of Staten Island.


Piper Jaffray
Shares of Piper Jaffray plummeted after a report that the Minneapolis brokerage firm could lose more than $700 million because of investments in derivatives.
Piper Jaffray's management denied speculation that the loss, first reported in The Wall Street Journal yesterday, could threaten the firm's survival.


Cuban Gets Scholarship
AUGUSTO DUQUESNE, who left the Cuban team and requested refugee status in Canada during the world championship of basketball earlier this month, will accept a scholarship from Durham College in Oshawa, Ontario, near Toronto.
Duquesne, 26, is a 6-foot-6-inch forward. (AP)


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  *
Black Hills Corp., Rapid City, S.D., is selling $45 million of 8.30 percent first-mortgage bonds due in 2024 at 99.78 to yield 8.32 percent through Merrill Lynch &amp; Co.
Callable in 10 years, the issue is rated A1 by Moody's Investors Service and A by the Standard &amp; Poor's Corp.


At the Bar; A law review article on abortion comes face to face with real life -- and death.
Douglas Cook, a professor at Regent University Law School in Virginia Beach, Va., was counting on a peaceful day of fishing on Saturday, July 30, until he glanced at a newspaper headline in the bait shop.
The newspaper reported that Dr.
John B. Britton, who performed abortions at a clinic in Pensacola, Fla., had been shot to death along with his security escort, James H. Barrett, a retired Air Force colonel.


Looking Back on a Life Of Divided Loyalties
"Long Shadows" is the kind of formulaic, sentimental film biography that tells its story in flashbacks and begins with the subject in old age, looking over a desk full of well-worn, memory-inducing photographs.
In this case, the subject is Haru Reischauer, an Asian-born, Western-educated woman whose interesting bi-cultural life earned her some fame and historical import when her husband, Edwin O. Reischauer, was named American Ambassador to Japan by President John F. Kennedy.
The film begins in 1990, just after her husband's death, the day his ashes are to be ceremonially scattered over the Pacific.
In her home in La Jolla, Calif., Mrs.
Reischauer (played by Fumi Dan, a lovely 37-year-old Japanese actress, who, in the late-in-life sequences, is caked in truly unpersuasive makeup), is indulging in grief-stricken nostalgia.
As quick as you can say Land of the Rising Sun, the film returns to prewar Japan, where Mrs.
Reischauer, then known as Haru Matsukata, grew up in a privileged household with a healthy respect for Occidental culture that ran counter to Japan's prevailing nationalism.
Sent to college in the United States, somewhat against her will, Haru didn't feel quite at home there, either.
And indeed, the film takes as its theme the notion that Haru's life, straddling the Pacific, leaves her feeling like a fish out of water wherever she is.
The feeling is naturally exacerbated by World War II and its aftermath.


Mashona Looks for an Opening in the Open
In a week in which her family is spread out on tennis courts from Queens to Suffolk County, 18-year-old Mashona was the only Washington in action yesterday.
She made the most of the spotlight by winning her match against Federica Fortuni of Italy, 6-1, 6-3, in the first round of qualifying for the United States Open in Flushing Meadows.
Mashona, a nationally ranked junior, hit with her more famous brother, MaliVai, on Wednesday; later that night, he upset Stefan Edberg in the second round of the Waldbaum's Hamlet Cup in Commack, L.I.


On Stage, and Off
New to the Circle
"I've been aware I had to find a successor for some time," Theodore Mann said yesterday, telling why he recently named Josephine R. Abady co-artistic director of Circle in the Square.
Mr.
Mann, himself the artistic director of the organization he helped found in 1951, is 70 years old, and for the last 18 months he has been desperately trying to keep the Circle, which hasn't put on a show since May 1993, from drowning in debt.


Different Philosophies On Preseason Games
Quarterback Dave Brown walked through the locker room with his throwing arm wrapped in ice.
He looked like Robocop.
When someone asked what was wrong, he smiled and replied: "No story here."
True, there was no story.
Brown is fine, just sore from a long preseason.
Kent Graham took most of the snaps today to help preserve Brown's arm, and so the story isn't Brown, but the preseason itself.
Some think that it has become too long and grueling and five games are far too many.


Gore Wants U.N. to Leave Abortion Up to Each Nation
Vice President Al Gore said today that although the United States will insist at a United Nations conference next month that every nation should decide for itself whether to permit abortions, the United States would never assert that a woman's right to choose an abortion should be internationally guaranteed.
Mr.
Gore, who will head the American delegation to the International Conference on Population and Development in Cairo in two weeks, defended the Clinton Administration's policies on issues to be discussed there.


Crime Bill Coverage Distorts the Debate
To the Editor:
Here follows a small yet insidious example of how journalism is acting to distort and destroy public discourse today:


Leslie Fay's Law Firm Is Rebuked
A court-appointed examiner has rebuked one of the country's largest and richest law firms, asserting that it had numerous potential conflicts of interest in its handling of the bankruptcy case of the Leslie Fay Companies and did not properly disclose them as required by law.
But the examiner, Charles A. Stillman, stopped short of recommending that the law firm, Weil, Gotshal &amp; Manges, be forced to return more than $10 million in fees earned so far from its work for Leslie Fay in the Chapter 11 bankruptcy case and be barred from continuing to represent the company.
Board Members Represented
The issue arose because the law firm also represented a committee of Leslie Fay's board that was set up to investigate an accounting scandal that ultimately forced the company into bankruptcy last year.
And it represented several prominent independent members of the board in other matters.


Simpson Defense Team Attacks New Grand Jury Investigation
A Los Angeles County grand jury that was convened to investigate the circumstances of O. J. Simpson's flight from the police two months ago is under attack from his defense team, which accuses prosecutors of using the grand jurors to engage in a fishing expedition involving the broader murder case against him.
In a departure from the custom of maintaining secrecy on grand jury proceedings, the current inquiry was made public on Wednesday by District Attorney Gil Garcetti.


Treasury Issues Give Up Most of Their Gains
Prices of Treasury securities fell yesterday, giving back nearly all of the previous day's gains, as traders were concerned that an economic report today would show that the economy has not slowed that much.
Chris Moore, a senior fixed-income analyst for Technical Data in Boston, said it was obvious that the market was worried about today's revised report on the second-quarter gross domestic product, which is likely to show a growth rate stronger than the previously released 3.7 percent.
He expects the number will be about 4 percent.
Many analysts fear that the report will suggest that inflation pressures are still building.


In Wake of Shooting, Bratton Appoints a Panel to Study Racial Attitudes
Acknowledging that black plainclothes police officers face special dangers, Police Commissioner William J. Bratton said yesterday that a special department panel would study the racial attitudes of police officers to try to avert a repeat of the shooting of a black transit officer by a white police officer earlier this week.
Through the use of focus groups, the committee will try to find out whether officers consider the race of a suspect before taking potentially lethal action.
The goal is to increase the sensitivity of officers so they do not automatically think that a black or Hispanic man with a gun is a threat, and remember that dozens of black members of the department are working undercover every day.


Medical Malpractice Is Hardly an Epidemic
To the Editor:
Sidney Zion asserts that more people die of medical malpractice than are victims of guns and rifles in the United States (letter, Aug. 19).
A recent article in the Journal of the American Medical Association suggests his figure underestimates the number of deaths from firearms (15,377 versus 36,000), since it apparently includes only homicides, but not suicides or unintentional deaths.


2 Men Are Charged in Luring And Abusing Teen-Age Girls
Two men have been accused of luring two 13-year-old girls to a house here, serving them alcohol and showing them pornographic videos before sexually abusing them, the Nassau County police said today.
The suspects, Greg Poelker 33, an employee of Lufthansa Airlines, and Victor Nagy, 19, who is unemployed, were arrested late Wednesday after the parents of two teen-age girls told the police their daughters had complained of being sexually abused by the two men in their home at 18 Lantern Road.


Young Lovers With a Flaw That Proves Fatal
MEET Mickey (Woody Harrelson) and Mallory (Juliette Lewis), two renegades living out the oldest story in the teen-age wasteland.
They're young, they're in love and they kill people, in thrill-crazy, rock-video style.
"If I don't kill you," Mickey says to one soon-to-be victim, "what is there to talk about?" For Mickey, it's more than just a rhetorical question.
With more sophistry than poetry, Oliver Stone apotheosizes these trash archetypes in "Natural Born Killers," his supposed satire about an America despoiled by violence and exploitation.
Satire?
In his skill as a manipulator of thoughts and images, in his short-circuiting ordinary narrative, and in his intuitive visual brilliance, Mr.
Stone could well turn out to be the most influential American film maker of his generation.
But as a satirist, he's an elephant ballerina.


Last 80 Americans in Somalia To Pull Out, U.S. Aides Say
With violence rising in Mogadishu and prospects bleak for brokering peace with rival Somali clans, the Clinton Administration plans to withdraw the last 80 American diplomats and marines from Somalia by mid-September, State Department officials said today.
The decision to move the two dozen American diplomats and their Marine security detail from Mogadishu to Nairobi writes the final chapter in what began as a mission of mercy for the United States in December 1992 and at its peak involved 26,000 American troops.
The last American combat forces left Somalia in March.


MUSIC REVIEW
Implied in most of the music we come across are the four walls and ceiling off which it is meant to bounce.
At Lincoln Center Out of Doors on Wednesday night, the sounds of "Earth Vibration" rose from the stage of Damrosch Park and simply kept on going into the night air.
"C.A.G.E. II," the first part of this amalgam of music, vocalizing and dance, must have begun with such a process in mind.
Tan Dun's music was commissioned for the series and for the place, making it, to a degree, site-specific.
Acknowledged, in other words, is the built-in chaos generated by a Manhattan summer evening, also a helplessness to do anything about it.


Sculpture Under the Sky: Free, Daring and Soon Departed
A CENTURY ago, there were two kinds of outdoor sculpture in New York City: sculpture that commemorated and sculpture that decorated.
American Presidents, Arctic explorers, even heroic huskies found themselves cast in bronze in Central Park.
Nymphs and angels and animals of stone were de rigueur on fountains and facades across the city.
Things have changed with time.
Heroism counts for less in our uncommemorative age and modernist architecture of glass and steel has little use for ornament.
Yet, as even a glancing look at recent outdoor sculpture reveals, the form still flourishes.
Detached from old uses, it is perhaps more marginal than of yore, but it is also more adventurous: as often abstract as figurative, politically critical rather than celebratory, confrontational rather than seductive, perfectly willing to trade permanence for ephemerality.


Sounds Around Town
Cobra Verde
Cobra Verde, Sideshows by the Seashore, Coney Island Boardwalk, at West 12th Street, Brooklyn, (718) 372-5159.
If Cobra Verde had been recording in the 1970's, it would have been one of the biggest, darkest heavy-metal bands of the era.
But Cobra Verde, made up of former members of the rock group Death of Samantha, didn't start recording until recently, so its growling, riff-heavy approximations of arena rock ring with a certain amount of sarcasm.
In concert, the band is loud, funny, occasionally sloppy and able to follow a monstrous rock song like "Cease to Exist" with a song like "Montenegro," a ballad as beautiful as the televised travel advertisements it evokes.
The show is tonight at 10.
Admission: $6.
NEIL STRAUSS Rain Forest Tribute
Brazilfest '94: A Rain Forest Tribute, Damrosch Park, Lincoln Center, (212) 875-5938.
If sinuous melodies and insinuating rhythms could save rain forests, Brazil's music would easily restore the country's ecosystem.
Vinicius Cantuaria, a Brazilian guitarist and songwriter, is to headline a concert of Brazilian music, performing with Dandara, a bossa-nova singer.
The concert is also to include jazz from the singer Leny Andrade and the trumpeter Claudio Roditi, and folk music by Lygya Barreto.
Tonight at 8:15.
Free.
J.
P.
Toasters and Skunks
Toasters and Skunks, Wetlands, 161 Hudson Street, at Laight Street, West Village, (212) 966-4225 or (212) 307-7171.
The Toasters are the prime movers behind New York City's revival of ska music, a punk update of the horn-heavy Jamaican precursor to reggae.
The Toasters have weathered several lineup changes, but continue to make vibrant dance music predicated on an irresistible, shuffling beat and vocals that range from the sweet to the funky.
The Skunks play fast, blaring ska filled with much more personality than one would expect from a band that looks like an East Coast fraternity dressed up for a homecoming dance.
The concert is tonight at 9:30.
Admission: $12.
N.
S.


Last Chance
Here is a sampling of shows and exhibitions in New York City that are to close soon: Closing This Weekend  "LAUGHTER ON THE 23D FLOOR," Richard Rodgers Theater, 226 West 48th Street, Manhattan.
Neil Simon's play about New York comedy writers in the early days of live television.
Through tomorrow.
Performances: Tonight at 8; tomorrow at 2 and 8 P.M.
Tickets: $35 to $50.
Information: (212) 307-4100.


PHILIPS ELECTRONICS N.V., Eindhoven, the Netherlands, said it would close its resistor manufacturing plant in Mineral Wells, Tex., by mid-1995. The closing will affect 265 employees. TEXAS INSTRUMENTS INC., Dallas, received a $164.9 million contract from the Navy for 987 modification kits for high-speed anti-radiation missiles.


The Baseball Network Says the Players' Analyst Struck Out
As if The Baseball Network did not have enough problems -- besides the players' strike, which has placed the embryonic baseball-ABC-NBC joint venture in limbo after only five games -- now it has been ripped by a players' union economist hired to poke through the owners' finances with a fine-toothed bulldozer.
While Stanford University's Roger Noll makes compelling arguments in many other non-TV elements of his analysis, his view of TBN is, at the very least, not buttressed by enough information.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article on Wednesday about the winner of Mexico's presidential election, Ernesto Zedillo Ponce de Leon, incorrectly characterized his remarks about naming members of the opposition to his Cabinet.
Mr.
Zedillo said he would not choose members expressly to represent opposition parties, but he did not rule out the possibility that he might name individuals who happen to belong to opposition parties.


Ralph E. Becker, 87, Lawyer And Ex-Ambassador, Is Dead
Ralph E. Becker, a Washington lawyer and former ambassador long active in Republican politics, died on Wednesday at George Washington University Hospital.
He was 87 and a Washington resident.
The cause was congestive heart failure, his family said.


Shadows Blur Mexico Right's Gains
Losing elections is something the National Action Party has always done well.
For more than half a century, it has fought decently against a far more powerful governing-party machine, succumbed to disadvantage and fraud, and sworn each time to do better the next.
But as Diego Fernandez de Cevallos buried his hopes of becoming the first opposition President in Mexico's modern history, even other leaders of his right-of-center party thought he might have outdone himself in his quick, gracious acceptance of defeat.


2 Young Defensemen Sign With the Rangers
The Rangers signed two players to their first professional contracts yesterday, defensemen SCOTT MALONE and ANDY SILVERMAN.
Malone played three seasons at the University of New Hampshire.
He scored 14 goals and led Hockey East with 162 penalty minutes.
Silverman played for Maine for three seasons and was voted its top defenseman in 1994. (AP)


Corrections
A brief report in the Company News column of Business Day yesterday about the sale of part of a subsidiary by the Triarc Companies misstated the company's headquarters city.
Triarc's headquarters is in New York; the company is no longer based in Miami Beach.


When the Old Order in China at Last Changes; Shifting Power Bases
To the Editor:
Your Aug. 21 news article says that if Prime Minister Li Peng were to lead a grab for power, he would need the backing of "aged revolutionary heroes" like Chen Yun.
But Mr.
Chen has long lost his influence, since his reluctance to support Deng Xiaoping's economic reforms, and a retrenchment will only backfire.


Midtown Traffic Horrors Would Worsen With Airport Rail Link; Why Duplicate Tunnel?
To the Editor:
No one knows better than we residents and business people of the East Side that more than $1 billion has already been invested in the 63d Street Long Island Rail Road tunnel.
In the next decade the L.I.R.R. intends to complete this tunnel, making direct access to Grand Central Terminal from Long Island a reality.


Mystery Plot: Whodunit in Newark?
The sky hung low and opaque, cut by rows of dull wire towers.
Market Street was teeming with sweaty bodies and vendor carts.
Inching down the sidewalk, Valerie Wilson Wesley absorbed the complex rhythms of Newark, committing each detail to memory.
In the city's disorder and decay, Ms.
Wilson Wesley sees rich material for murder mysteries.
Her first, "When Death Comes Stealing," unfolds against the backdrop of the city's brooding neighborhoods, which Ms.
Wilson Wesley hopes to harvest for a series of whodunits.


Obstacle Is Cleared For AT&amp;T
A Federal judge today approved the AT&amp;T Corporation's $12.6 billion deal to buy McCaw Cellular Communications Inc., the nation's biggest cellular telephone company.
The decision removes the main legal obstacle to the transaction and sets the stage for a battle between AT&amp;T and the regional Bell companies.
The ruling, handed down by United States Judge Harold H. Greene, means that AT&amp;T will probably be able to complete the deal by the end of September and proceed with its effort to build a nationwide wireless communications network.


Cuban Group Forges Link to Clinton
For the moment at least, the refugee exodus from Cuba has given Jorge Mas Canosa, a longtime supporter of Republican Presidents, access to the inner circles of a Democratic White House.
Mr.
Mas, president of the Cuban American National Foundation and an enthusiastic supporter of Presidents Ronald Reagan and George Bush, today praised President Clinton's revised policies on Cuba, policies Mr.
Mas had a hand in shaping in a meeting with Mr.
Clinton last Friday.


Castro vs. Clinton
To a limited but important degree, Fidel Castro has done what President Clinton vowed to keep him from doing.
Mr.
Castro's actions -- chiefly his decision to permit an unlimited number of disgruntled Cubans to set sail into the perilous Florida Straits on rickety rafts -- have prompted Mr.
Clinton to change United States immigration policy, and to change it into something difficult to sustain.


Toyota Profit Declines for A 4th Year
The Toyota Motor Corporation, hurt by the strong yen and a weak Japanese car market, today reported its fourth consecutive annual decline in profits, with net income falling to the lowest level in at least a decade.
But Japan's largest and richest automobile company also said it thought the worst was over, and predicted that sales and profits would rise in the coming year.


Judge Disqualifies Kunstler Firm From Role in Bombing-Plot Trial
A Federal judge yesterday disqualified two of New York City's best-known and most aggressive lawyers from defending their last remaining client in the bombing conspiracy trial of a blind Egyptian cleric, Sheik Omar Abdel Rahman, and 12 other defendants.
The ruling will almost certainly delay by at least two or three months what promises to be the stormy and complicated trial of a group of men, most of them followers of Mr.
Abdel Rahman, accused of plotting what the indictment calls "a war of urban terrorism against the United States," specifically the bombing of several New York City landmarks.


Montreal Red Chasing Dehere's Saratoga Sweep
Only one horse in the last 78 years has swept all three stakes races for 2-year-old colts at Saratoga and thereby become the instant favorite for the next Kentucky Derby.
That was Dehere, who did it last year but broke down with a leg injury and never got to the Derby.
Now, there is another possibility: a young chestnut colt in Barn 27 at Saratoga Race Course who has run only three times in his career but who stands at the edge of some racing history.
Montreal Red is undefeated, has won the first two stakes in the series at Saratoga and he will shoot for a sweep on Sunday in the 90th running of the Hopeful Stakes.


Restaurants
Campagna is not an Italian restaurant.
That is the secret of its success.
Look around the big, boisterous rooms: this is a typical New York restaurant.
Women who seem to have spent their days bouncing between the gym and the hairdresser move self-consciously from table to table, kissing the air above each other's cheeks and pulling up chairs to sit with friends.
Men in casually expensive clothes shout happily to one another.
Enormous plates of food are delivered and devoured in a cacophony of clatter and conversation.
After-shave, perfume and garlic mingle, creating an aroma that gets headier as the night wears on.
Is everybody happy?
Sure looks like it.


Atom Arrests Are Vote Issue In Germany
With public fears over the smuggling of atomic material rising in Germany, opposition leaders today accused Chancellor Helmut Kohl of staging several highly publicized seizures of plutonium and uranium to improve his image before the national election in October.
"There is serious suspicion that these most poisonous of poisons were brought to Germany with the help of the German authorities," Gunter Verheugen, a senior official of the opposition Social Democratic Party, told reporters today in Bonn.
"This smacks of a stunt."


Sports of The Times; They Found 256 Players For the Open
"PSSST, hey, bud."
He was shoving a handbill at me.
I thought I'd seen him on 42d Street outside a certain magazine shop.
"No, thanks," I said, trying to get rid of him. "I'm not into that kind of stuff."


After Inferno, a White Plains Neighborhood Battles Back
Some are finally able to sleep through the night, no longer haunted by memories of the devastation.
Others have begun replacing the charred shingles, melted blinds and singed shrubbery.
But many residents in the northwest section of this city say they are still struggling to recapture a sense of order and security in the weeks since the neighborhood erupted in flames on July 27 after a propane tanker truck slammed into an overpass along Interstate 287 and exploded.


William Jackson, Lawyer, 82, Is Dead
William Whitney Jackson, a lawyer and a former trustee for St.
John's Riverside Hospital in Yonkers, died there on Tuesday.
He was 82 and lived in Bronxville, N.Y.
The cause was prostate cancer, said Lee Jackson, his wife of 43 years.


Starring John Candy and Various Crude Jokes
What if the citizens of Prosperity, a frontier town in the Old West, got fed up with their pioneer existence and decided to head back East?
And what if they chose for the leader of their wagon train a drunken tub of a man who can barely tell left from right?
That is the less-than-scintillating premise of "Wagons East!," a dimwitted comedy that like the addled wagonmaster John Harlow (John Candy), who tries to lead them home, takes all the wrong turns.
"Wagons East!" has the distinction of being Candy's final film, and it is dedicated to his memory.
That, unfortunately, is its only distinction.
Directed by Peter Markle, from a screenplay by Matthew Carlson, this series of loosely strung-together gags is so desperate for humor that it falls back on jokes about flatulence and penis size.
Candy, who was a gifted comic actor, has little to do but lumber around and act endearingly dumb.


Serbs of Sarajevo Stay Loyal to Bosnia
Tarsa Petkovic, a 71-year-old Serbian grandmother, lit a pair of cigarettes and stuck them, filters downward, into the soft dirt of her son's grave in Sarajevo's Orthodox cemetery.
She and her daughter then lit two more for themselves.
"He loved to smoke," Mrs.
Petkovic said of her son Stanislav, as wisps of smoke curled into nothingness above the grave she says will keep her in this city as long as she lives.


INSIDE
AT&amp; T Deal Is Approved
A Federal judge approved AT&amp; T's $12.6 billion deal to buy McCaw Cellular Communications, effectively removing the main obstacle.
Page D1.
Home Health Care Probe
A lawsuit brought by an AIDS patient may offer insight into a Federal investigation of the country's largest home health care provider.
Page A20.
Timeout Called in Baseball
As the strike reached the two-week mark and the talks reached a boiling point, Federal mediators declared an indefinite recess.
Page B7.


Ruling for Lilco Could Raise Suffolk Taxes
Already paying among the highest utility rates and property taxes in the nation, Suffolk County residents face still higher taxes to refund $60 million to the Long Island Lighting Company for overassessment of the defunct Shoreham nuclear power plant.
In a unanimous ruling, the Appellate Division of State Supreme Court agreed this week that, from 1976 to 1983, assessors in the Town of Brookhaven overcharged Lilco by $34 million.
The company can also recover about $26 million in interest, the court said.
County tax law requires Suffolk to make good on any refund for property taxes.


Clinton's Smiles on the Crime Bill Mask the Pain Over Health Care
As the Senate tottered toward a two-week recess tonight, even a big victory on the crime bill did relatively little to lift flagging spirits in the White House about health care legislation, which President Clinton has made the centerpiece of his Administration.
Mr.
Clinton said this afternoon that he did not consider the legislation dead, and added that he did not think the recess would kill it.


CHRONICLE
ELIZABETH TAYLOR is seeking a preliminary injunction to stop NBC from making a mini-series based on her life, The Associated Press reported earlier this week.
She will have her day in court on Sept. 22, but before then, on Sept. 9, Judge Diane Wayne of Los Angeles Superior Court will hear lawyers for NBC on their motion to dismiss Miss Taylor's complaint as unfounded.
Miss Taylor's allegations include invasion of privacy and unauthorized use of her name among other contentions.
Neil Papiano, Miss Taylor's lawyer, said that material for the mini-series, to be based on a forthcoming biography of the actress by C. David Heymann (the author of "A Woman Named Jackie," a best-selling biography of Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis), contained "deliberate falsehoods." Douglas Mirell, a lawyer for NBC, said that no one who is as much in the public eye as Miss Taylor is "can skirt the First Amendment."


Sale Set Of Channel And Rickel
An investment partnership said yesterday that it had agreed to buy Rickel Home Centers and Channel Home Centers and combine the two Northeast home-remodeling retail chains.
The partnership, Eos Partners L.P., plans to buy Rickel from a division of Plainbridge Inc., a subsidiary of the Supermarkets General Holdings Corporation.
It also said that it would buy a 45 percent stake in Channel from the GE Capital Corporation.
The terms of the transactions were not disclosed.


METRO DIGEST
TEARS BUT NO ANGER AS OFFICERS MEET
Waking in his hospital room, Transit Police Officer Desmond Robinson asked to see Peter Del-Debbio, the police officer who shot him in the subway on Monday.
In the meeting that followed, both men cried and hugged, between the tangle of tubes attached to Officer Robinson and the cast on Officer Del-Debbio's arm, while Officer Del-Debbio repeated, "I'm sorry," over and over.
A1.
In response to the shooting, a panel will study the racial attitudes of police officers.
B3.


How the Battle Was Won: Dole Fails to Halt Defections
"You win some, you lose some," Senator Bob Dole said just moments before the Senate cleared a chief procedural hurdle today toward passage of the $30 billion crime bill.
But if the Republican leader's remark seemed lighthearted, it belied deep disapointment.
"I regret," he added, "that I failed as a leader to keep our people together on this side of the aisle."


Former Goldman Official To Be Blackstone Partner
Mikael Salovaara, the former head of Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company's Water Street Corporate Recovery Fund, will join the Blackstone Group as a limited partner, Blackstone announced yesterday.
Mr.
Salovaara, 40, will be looking for investments for Blackstone's $1.3 billion merchant banking fund.


Art in Review
Xu Bing
Bronx Museum of the Arts  1040 Grand Concourse (at 165th Street)  Morrisania  Through Sept. 11
Although still in his 30's, the Chinese-born artist Xu Bing has already gone through a few artistic lifetimes.
He earned a degree in traditional printmaking techniques at the Central Academy of Fine Arts in Beijing, then gained favorable critical attention as an installation artist in the Chinese avant-garde.
In the repressive aftermath of Tiananmen Square in 1989, his work came under Government censure and a year later he immigrated to America.


On My Mind; Why Two Cops Were Shot in the Subway
Two cops are wounded by police bullets in frenzied crossfire on a New York subway platform.
The people and the press demand to know why such a thing happened, and who was responsible.
Why?
Two young thugs strolled into the subway, one with a handgun and the other with a shotgun.
That is why.
The rest is the consequence of cops risking their lives to do their duty.


RESULTS PLUS
GOLF  Nause 65 Ties Record  Martha Nause birdied the last three holes yesterday to match the course record with a 7-under-par 65 and take a one-stroke lead after the opening round of the du Maurier Classic in Ottawa.
Nause had eight birdies and one bogey in equaling the record set by the former club pro Ken Clark and matched by Jack Nicklaus in 1960.
Leigh Ann Mills, Kelly Robins, Debbie Massey and Michelle McGann were all at 66 on the rain-soaked course.
Nancy Lopez, Kim Williams, Dottie Mochrie and Betsy King were another shot back. (AP) Birdies Lift Stadler: Craig Stadler birdied the last four holes yesterday in Akron, Ohio, to complete a five-under-par 65 that gave him a share of the first-round lead in the NEC World Series of Golf with Loren Roberts.
Jose Maria Olazabal of Spain, Mark McCumber and Jeff Maggert were a stroke back.
The PGA and British Open champion, Nick Price, put his tee shot into the water on No. 17 and made a bogey 4 to finish at 68, tied with the United States Open champion, Ernie Els of South Africa. (AP)
TENNIS  Schultz Wins Twice  Brenda Schultz won over two separate galleries yesterday at the inaugural SNET Classic in New Haven with her big service, her vastly improved all-round game, her grit and never-say-die determination and, above all, her joyous court demeanor.
In the process, the 23-year-old Schultz, who is from the Netherlands, upset Zina Garrison-Jackson, 6-1, 7-5, in the afternoon and Lindsay Davenport, 6-4, 0-6, 7-5, at night to earn a berth against her longtime idol, Martina Navratilova, in tonight's semifinals of this eight-player exhibition event.
Another promising young player, 18-year-old Chanda Rubin, upset Fernandez, who is ranked 11th, 1-6, 7-6, (7-4), 7-6 (7-4) in a match that began late this afternoon and ended this evening.
But tonight, in her second match of the day, Rubin fell to eighth-ranked Jana Novotna, 6-3, 6-1.
Lendl, Bruguera Join Upset Victims: The top-seeded Sergi Bruguera and No. 6 Ivan Lendl were ousted from the OTB International in Schenectady, N.Y., yesterday.
Bruguera, ranked third in the world, fell at night to Jonas Bjorkman, 2-6, 6-4, 6-2.
Lendl, 34, lost by 7-6 (7-5), 6-4 to Chuck Adams, ranked 70th in the world. (AP)


Moses Malone to Spurs
MOSES MALONE, a three-time National Basketball Association most valuable player and the only former American Basketball Association player still active in the league, signed yesterday with the San Antonio Spurs.
Terms were not announced.
Malone, 39, played for the Philadelphia 76ers last season. (AP)


Waiting for Selig: Is Milwaukee Next On Fehr's Itinerary?
At some point near the nadir of most every baseball work stoppage, Donald Fehr, the head of the players' union, usually takes a road trip.
He will travel across the country to rally the troops and, no less important, send a signal to owners that if they continue on the same bent, there's no reason to stay around to participate in vacuous negotiating sessions.


Corrections
A front-page picture caption yesterday about baseball players at the bargaining table misidentified the player at right in some copies.
He is B. J. Surhoff of Milwaukee, not Jay Bell of Pittsburgh.


Admirers Debate Plan For Statue Of Einstein
For decades, scientists have interpreted the theories of Albert Einstein.
Now the borough of Princeton, where the prominent physicist spent his final years, is trying to interpret his wishes -- specifically, what he would think about a proposal to erect a statue of him here.
It's an idea that started this year when two French tourists asked Melvin A. Benarde for directions to Einstein's house.


Art in Review
Flor Garduno
Lowinsky Gallery  578 Broadway (near Prince Street)  SoHo  Through Sept. 30
Like the images of Manuel Alvarez Bravo, the Mexican master for whom she worked as a printer, Flor Garduno's black-and-white photographs emphasize the fantastic qualities of Latin American folk customs, and are made in a style that suggests a photographic version of magical realism.
This survey presents a wide-ranging selection of Ms.
Garduno's work over the last decade, including both well-known and unfamiliar images.


Ireland's Premier Meets U.S. Irish on Ulster
Prime Minister Albert Reynolds conferred today with a group of prominent Irish-Americans who are to meet with the political leaders of the outlawed Irish Republican Army on Friday in Northern Ireland.
Mr.
Reynolds's office said after the one-hour meeting that the delegation, headed by Bruce Morrison, a former Congressman from Connecticut, agreed with the Irish Government that only "a permanent end to violence," would gain the I.R.A. a place at a peace table through its political wing, Sinn Fein.
No other details were disclosed by those at the meeting, who included Foreign Minister Dick Spring and six Irish-Americans.


In Tears, Not Anger, Wounded Officers Meet
Early yesterday, a childhood friend sitting at the bedside of Transit Police Officer Desmond Robinson finally broke the news to him that the man who had shot him down in the subway on Monday was a fellow officer.
Officer Robinson's first words, the friend said, were, "Is he all right?"
Later, at 4 A.M., waking again from the strong pain medication that causes him to doze periodically, he asked to see the officer, Peter Del-Debbio, to reassure him that he was all right, that there were no hard feelings.


Northridge, Calif., Gains the Little League Final
The no-hit bid was over and now the game was on the line.
Top of the sixth inning, runners on first and second base with two out, the Springfield, Va., star, Ethan Lare at bat, and the Northridge, Calif., ace, Nathaniel Dunlap, on the mound with a three-run lead.
Lare had struck out in his first two at-bats on curveballs.
His father, a coach, told him to look curveball again.
Larry Baca, Dunlap's coach, told him to throw fastballs.


A Recovering Alcoholic Sues, Asserting Job Bias
As a candidate for a high school basketball coaching job, David White seemed to have top-notch credentials.
He has taught physical education for 14 years and served as an assistant coach at several Wisconsin schools.
Plenty of basketball fans around here still remember him as a star player at Madison Edgewood in the 1970's.
But some people recall something else about Mr.
White's past: his drinking.
And after he was rejected for a coaching job three times here last year, he said a school official had told him he could not be hired because it would bring "negative attention" to the team.
He said he was told that he could not even serve as a volunteer assistant.
The official, he said, cited his personal "baggage."


Paris Journal; 50 Years After the Liberation, France Toasts Itself
As a military victory, the liberation of Paris was not significant.
By the time Parisians took up arms against their German occupiers on Aug. 22, 1944, Allied forces were encircling the city.
And by the time French troops arrived here three days later, most Germans had fled.
Yet as Parisians celebrated the 50th anniversary of the end of four years of German occupation tonight, with World War II tanks and jeeps re-enacting the entry of the Second Armored Division of Gen.
Philippe Leclerc, the extraordinary political significance of the occasion again became apparent.


Midtown Traffic Horrors Would Worsen With Airport Rail Link
To the Editor:
The Port Authority of New York and New Jersey wants to spend $2.5 billion on a rail system that would fail to deliver passengers to their airline terminals on the Queens side and would force passengers to travel through midtown traffic on the Manhattan side.


No Haircut for Now


A Dome for All Seasons, But Not for All Time
Over time, every stadium seems to take on some of the characteristics of the city it represents.
Like dog owners and their pets, they even start to look like each other.
So it is in Seattle, a city famous for rain and slightly goofy public structures, that the Kingdome has become a grunge incarnation of every homeowner's worst nightmare.
The roof leaks.
The ceiling is falling.
And what was once merely ugly is now unsightly to the point of revulsion.


Lodz Survivors Meet and Remember
For three days this week, Lodz was once more filled with the wailing sounds of klezmer music and Yiddish songs.
Men with beards and hats once again strolled down Piotrkowska Street.
Cries of "mazel tov!" filled the air as a rabbi hammered a shiny new mezuza into a doorway at Revolution of 1905 Street.
And Jews again lined Lutomierska Street, though this time, unrestrained by ghetto walls.
Fifty years ago this month, the Nazis cleared out all but about 800 of the Lodz ghetto's 220,000 Jews, deporting to Auschwitz the 80,000 or so who had not already been gassed or died of starvation or disease.
By war's end, all but 10,000 of them, remnants of what had been, after Warsaw, the second-largest Jewish site in Europe, had perished.


7 Chiefs Retire From Housing Force as Police Merger Nears
At a time of major transition for their department, seven high-ranking members of the New York City Housing Authority police force have filed for retirement.
On Oct. 1, the housing police force is to be put under the command of the Police Department.
On Jan. 1, the transit police force also is to merge with the department.


For Children
'All Over the Map'
52d Street Project  Ensemble Studio Theater  549 West 52d Street  Clinton  (212) 969-0252  Recommended ages: 6 and up  Tonight through Sunday
Willie Reale received his first check from the MacArthur Foundation -- for $11,000 -- on July 1, but so far he has been too busy even to buy new shoes.
Mr.
Reale, who is in his late 30's, founded the 52d Street Project in 1981 to enhance the lives of children in the Clinton neighborhood of Manhattan by providing theater workshops for them, as well as summer vacations far from the city.


Corrections
An entry in the Addenda listing on the Media Business page on Aug. 18, about the awarding of Carnival Air Lines' advertising account to Harris Drury Cohen of Fort Lauderdale, Fla., misidentified the ad agency handling the account of Carnival Cruise Line.
The cruise line's account is handled by McFarland &amp; Drier of Miami, not Harris Drury.


When the Old Order in China at Last Changes; Dog's Place in History
To the Editor:
Your Aug. 17 Shanghai Journal emphasizes spreads false information by saying dogs were "once seen here only as a source of food."


TRANSACTIONS
Basketball  National Basketball Association
CLEVELAND CAVALIERS -- Named Rich Dalatri strength and conditioning coordinator.


CHRONICLE
Dr.
LORRAINE HALE, who founded Hale House in Harlem with her mother, Clara McBride Hale, is preparing to return to Rwanda next month, where she recently visited children in refugee camps.
Hale House, established in 1969, is a nonprofit agency for children born addicted to drugs or alcohol or infected with H.I.V., the virus that causes AIDS.
On her first trip, earlier this month, Dr.
Hale had intended to bring a group of Rwandan children back to the United States.
But after visiting the camps, she said she found it impossible to choose six or seven children from the thousands who had been orphaned, abandoned or stranded without their parents.


Oh, Strike That: Talks Put Off Until Further Notice
With the temperature rising on the last day of the second week of the baseball strike, mediators recessed talks indefinitely yesterday, leaving the owners and players no less rigid in their positions than when they began face-to-face bargaining two days ago.
The heat came from each side in a give-and-take discussion of the owners' salary-cap proposal, according to participants in the second bargaining session, attended by 12 owners and club executives and a large group of players.


Esiason Says Jets Are Better For 1994
If this were the season's opener, the Jets would find themselves without an experienced receiver in their big-play spot, without a punt returner, with a 50-percent passer and with a propensity to lose the ball.
But the Jets will face Tampa Bay on Friday night and they are blessed with a powerful running game and a defense that has smothered runners -- in short, the basic ingredients for success.


HILLS STORES FIGHTS INVESTOR'S BID FOR CONTROL
The Hills Stores Company has asked a Federal court to block an investor's attempt to wrest control of the discount retailer.
The investor, Dickstein Partners L.P., an investment fund that owns about 9.5 percent of the Hills common and preferred shares, is seeking to replace four of the eight board members of Hills.
In papers filed with the Federal District Court in Boston, Hills contended that Dickstein omitted information it was required to include in filings with the Securities and Exchange Commission.
On Tuesday, the S.E.C. gave Dickstein permission to solicit the support of other Hills shareholders for replacing four directors.
Hills has asked the court to enjoin Dickstein from pursuing its shareholder solicitation.


Corrections
A front-page article on Aug. 15 about an increase in counterfeit checks made with personal computers misstated the role of a software program in the case of John S. Halleron, who was charged with passing nearly 100 fake checks.
Prosecutors in Franklin County, Ohio, say that the software, Create-a-Check, was found in Mr.
Halleron's possession but that they do not know whether he used the software to create any of the counterfeit checks.


E. P. McGrath, 64; Led Publicity Firm
Edward P. McGrath, a corporate communications specialist and former newspaper reporter, died on Tuesday at his home in Weston, Conn.
He was 64.
The cause was melanoma, said his wife, Phyllis Scher McGrath.


West Virginia's Nehlen Has Respect for Nebraska
Each autumn in the second decade of this century, The Chicago Tribune ran an article with the headline, "Stagg Fears Purdue."
The content concerned Amos Alonzo Stagg, the coach at the University of Chicago, and his attitude about the upcoming game against the Boilermakers.
It became a coaching posture as familiar as the laces on the football.


Nomi Mitty; Actress, 54
Nomi Mitty, an actress who appeared on stage and in films and television, died on Wednesday at her home in Los Angeles.
She was 54.
The cause was cancer, her family said.


Shirley Ehrenkranz, 73, Dean Of N.Y.U.'s Social Work School
Shirley M. Ehrenkranz, for nearly two decades the dean of New York University's School of Social Work, died yesterday at her home in South Orange, N.J.
She was 73.
The cause was cancer, said a university spokeswoman.


Girl Who Was Wounded in Traffic Dispute Leaves Hospital


Sounds Around Town
Charlie Parker
Charlie Parker Jazz Festival, Tompkins Square Park, Avenue A at Seventh Street, East Village, (no telephone).
Charlie Parker's home at 151 Avenue B, east of Tompkins Square Park, has just been added to the National Register of Historic Places.
At 2:15 on Sunday afternoon, there is to be a ceremony, speeches and music at the house.
To celebrate, mainstream and post-modern be-bop devotees are to present an afternoon of jazz in the park.
Butch Morris's "Conduction No. 44: Ornithology," a composition and guided improvisation featuring Arthur Blythe on alto saxophone, Christian Marclay on turntables and 15 flutists, is to have its premiere at 3:15 P.M.
The singer (and scat singer) Sheila Jordan is to perform at 4:15 P.M. with a quartet, which is to include Ben Riley on drums, followed at 5:30 P.M. by the Heath Brothers (Albert on drums, Percy on bass and Jimmy on saxophones) with the vibraphonist Milt Jackson of the Modern Jazz Quartet.
Sunday at 3 P.M.
Free.
JON PARELES Steve Ferguson
Steve Ferguson and the Midwest Creole Ensemble, Tramps, 51 West 21st Street, Chelsea, (212) 727-7788.
When NRBQ started a quintet in the late 1960's, Steve Ferguson was its guitarist.
He left the band in the mid-1970's, made a promising solo album and then largely dropped out of sight, though he turned up a few years ago playing bright, twangy guitar with Johnny Johnson, Chuck Berry's pianist.
Sharing the bill is to be the duo of Dan Zanes, the raspy-voiced former singer for the Del Fuegos, and Mitchell Froom, known as the producer for Richard Thompson, Los Lobos and various alternative-rock bands.
Shows are tonight at 8:30 and 11:30.
Cover charge, $8; there is also an $8 minimum at the tables.
J.
P.


When the Old Order in China at Last Changes
To the Editors:
"In the Twilight of Deng, China's Rising Stars Jostle" (news article, Aug. 21) states that as the health of China's leader, Deng Xiaoping, falters, speculation about a successor is intensifying and that President Jiang Zemin is consolidating power.


Future Yankee Too Good to Be True?
Uncle Joe has skin cancer and it has spread.
It is serious.
Those were the only words Derek Jeter needed to hear from Aunt Julie before he used his first scheduled day off in six weeks to transform himself from a star shortstop in Columbus, Ohio, to a concerned nephew in Kearny, N.J.
Aunt Julie gave Derek a gold New York Yankees necklace when he was in the sixth grade and the gift helped form a strong bond between them.
Necklace or not, Jeter did not need to be cajoled into spending Tuesday with Uncle Joe.


In Absentia, the President Runs Up a Vacation Tab
At last, President Clinton and his family are about to set off on the Martha's Vineyard vacation that they could only dream about while trapped in the capital.
But taxpayers have been footing the bill for several days.


Two Software Peers Combine Their Specialties
Babbage's Inc. and Software Etc.
Stores Inc., two of the nation's largest consumer software specialty retailers, said today that they had agreed to merge in an almost even exchange of stock.
The merger would create the nation's largest specialty retailer for video-game and home personal-computer software, analysts said, and it would better position the companies to take advantage of the booming market for CD-ROM personal-computer software and next-generation video games.
A combined operation would have greater buying power when dealing with vendors, giving it more pricing flexibility to compete against mass marketers, they said.


Fraud Inquiry Aims at a Home Health Care Giant
A lawsuit filed on behalf of an Atlanta AIDS patient offers details of the kinds of charges being looked into by a Federal investigation of the nation's largest home health care provider.
The company, Caremark Inc., was the subject of an indictment in Minnesota earlier this month.
At that time it was widely reported that a larger investigation into a broader range of the company's activities was under way.


CRIME BILL APPROVED, 61-38, BUT SENATE IS GOING HOME WITHOUT ACTING ON HEALTH
The Senate tonight passed a $30 billion crime bill that may cure a quarter-century of Democratic political problems with that issue, but it decided to take a vacation and leave national health insurance legislation behind, in continued peril.
The 61-to-38 vote to send the crime bill to President Clinton for his signature represented a major success for the President, who was widely dismissed as ineffective just two weeks ago today when the House voted not even to consider the bill.
The House reversed that action Sunday evening and moved the measure to the Senate, where Republicans began a stall that ended with the vote tonight.


Investigative Power Urged For Unit to Monitor Police
As the New York City Council opened public hearings yesterday on a bill to establish a permanent agency to monitor police corruption, Speaker Peter F. Vallone strongly urged that such a panel be authorized to conduct independent investigations and to subpoena witnesses.
Those positions put Mr.
Vallone firmly behind two core recommendations of the Mollen Commission, which released an exhaustive report in July on corruption in the city Police Department.
But the Speaker's position goes well beyond the ground staked out by Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani on the issue.


Man Shot to Death on Subway in Brooklyn
A man was shot to death last night aboard a Manhattan-bound IRT No. 4 train as it approached the Franklin Avenue Station in the Crown Heights section of Brooklyn and his assailant fled into the subway tunnel, the transit police said last night.
The victim, who was not immediately identified, was shot in the rear car of the train shortly after 11 P.M. after it left the Utica Avenue Station.
The transit police said they had not determined whether the shooting involved a robbery or a dispute.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Markets
One money manager's small gamble played a big role in the surge in stocks on Wednesday, when the Dow jumped 70.90 points.
Much of the impetus for buying on Wednesday came from the unraveling of a complex investment strategy involving the trading of less than $100 million.
The surprising surge that resulted shows how the market can be roiled by little-known strategies using sophisticated securities.
Floyd Norris: Market Place.  [ Page A1. ]


A Gambling Peasant Stumps Jesus and Satan
"Y se Armo la Mojiganga" ("And the Carnival Erupted") is an apt title for a new musical at the Gramercy Arts Theater, the most spectacular production ever by Repertorio Espanol.
Adapted by the Colombian director Jorge Ali Triana from a popular Colombian play that is itself derived from a classic 19th-century story, this "Carnival" starts on earth, falls into hell, ends in heaven, and makes all those places ring with laughter.
In 90 minutes throbbing with music that might be called rock salsa, it shows a miraculous cosmos: flights of gossiping angels and pits of lewd devils; cured cripples, wily bishops, jobless grave diggers, souls floating in the air; a fat, gartered king who is a real back-room politician; and Jesus, Peter and Satan all flummoxed by a peasant who gambles without pause and gives all his winnings to the poor.


Work by Unknown Scandinavians
For American audiences, Scandinavia has remained largely terra incognita as far as photography is concerned.
"Stranger Than Paradise: Contemporary Scandinavian Photography," at the midtown branch of the International Center of Photography, sets out to correct this ignorance and put the work of Nordic artists on the photographic map.
Organized by the American-Scandinavian Foundation with Steven Henry Madoff as curator, "Stranger Than Paradise" presents work by 20 photographers from Sweden, Norway, Denmark, Finland and Iceland.
The show's scope is narrow, limited to the self-conscious use of photography as an art medium; absent are documentary images, portraits and examples of other genres that aim beyond a gallery audience.


Apartheid's Arms-Maker Finds Respectability
Talk about political baggage: This company armed the police who terrorized black townships.
It helped white South Africa secretly make an atomic weapon.
Its biggest export customer in sub-Saharan Africa was the former regime in Rwanda.
It flouted international arms-trafficking sanctions.
For Armscor, the Armaments Corporation of South Africa, fitting into the gentler, democratic South Africa of Nelson Mandela would seem to require a tour de force of political dexterity.


Little Brothers to Suffer
To the Editor:
The New York City Department of Youth Services in its 1994-95 contract awards has eliminated funds for Big Brothers-Big Sisters of New York City, a 90-year-old agency with a history of success.
To allow this cut to stand would hurt disadvantaged kids who depend on their mentors for personal guidance.


Groups Pledge to Continue Fight, Despite Setbacks
The crusaders for universal health insurance coverage vowed today to continue the struggle, insisting that their dream had been deferred but would not die.
Susan Cowell, a vice president of the International Ladies' Garment Workers' Union, said: "Those of us who have been fighting for real health reform have been disappointed and shocked by the power over the last year of the propaganda campaigns of the special interests. On the other hand, the health care crisis won't go away. It's going to get worse.


Which Newt Gingrich?
To the Editor:
Representative Newt Gingrich (letter, Aug. 20) states: "Cobb County is an area that makes people from all walks of life feel welcome and where discrimination is not sanctioned."


India Fights Abortion of Female Fetuses
After years of debate, India is trying to curb the widespread practice of aborting pregnancies after tests have shown the fetus is female.
A new law passed recently by Parliament provides penalties of three years in prison and a fine of about $320 for those found guilty of administering or taking pre-natal tests solely to determine the sex of a fetus.
Under Indian law, ending a pregnancy only because the fetus is female is already outlawed, although the practice is common.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
7.75
7.75
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
4.00
4.00
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
4.69
4.75
2.99
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.54
4.52
3.02
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.85
4.86
3.11
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.22
7.26
5.49
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.48
7.53
6.14
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.33
8.38
7.00
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.38
6.40
5.61
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Temesvari's Game Taking Turn for Better
In terms of victories, Andrea Temesvari is not a winner anymore.
In January 1984, at the age of 18, she was No. 7 in ranking and the year before won the Italian Open.


An Enterprising Youth Works to Help Pay for College


No Telling When Sides Will Open Talks Again
A deafening silence descended on baseball yesterday as the players strike entered its third week.
Following two days of earnest but unproductive and sometimes heated conversation between club officials and players, the visitors to the bargaining table returned home and the principal negotiators retreated to their offices.
John Calhoun Wells, the director of the Federal Mediation and Conciliation Service, spoke briefly with members of each side but did not suggest a date for the resumption of talks.
Wells recessed negotiations Thursday before the owners and players could become too angry with each other and damage future efforts.


Treasury Bond Prices Rise Sharply
Prices of government securities moved sharply higher yesterday after a Government report showed the economy was growing at a pace that was slower than had been expected.
A strong performance by the dollar also bolstered Treasury prices.
The Commerce Department, revising its initial estimate of growth in the second quarter, reported that the economy grew at an annual rate of 3.8 percent, up from 3.7 percent.
Economists had expected the number to be about 4.1 percent.


Election Divides a Mexican Village
Dirt-poor and disheveled like so many parts of Mexico, this small village is split in two by the stream that splashes down from the mountains and gives the place its name.
Now the people in Rio Frio are also divided.
On one side are the people who voted last Sunday for Ernesto Zedillo Ponce de Leon and are confident that his six-year presidency will bring the village some of the things it needs, like more paved streets and perhaps even a small factory.


Technology Seen as Widening Income Gap
Alan Greenspan, the chairman of the Federal Reserve, said today that competitive pressures for the introduction of more high technology into the workplace appeared to produce wider differences between the rich and the poor in industrial societies.
Speaking at the Federal Reserve's annual conference here today, Mr.
Greenspan said that "where such market forces are allowed to play out more evidently, such as in the United States, the unemployment rate is lower and measured income inequality higher."


Montross Gets $20 Million Over 11 Years
The former North Carolina center ERIC MONTROSS, selected ninth over all in the National Basketball Association draft by the Boston Celtics, signed a long-term deal yesterday reportedly worth up to $20 million over 11 years.
"We are pleased to have Eric in the fold," said M. L. CARR, the team's director of basketball operations.
"We signed him to a lengthy pact because we feel he will be an integral part of the team's immediate future." (AP)


NEWS SUMMARY
Markets
Investors returned to the stock market in a big way this week, bidding up stocks for the largest one-week gain in 19 months.
Investors are encouraged by stabilizing bond prices, a rising dollar and, above all, a more optimistic picture of a sound, low-inflation economy.
The Dow gained 51.16 points yesterday.  [ Page 35. ]


Bourque Injured in Rock-Climbing Mishap
Ottawa Senators left wing PHIL BOURQUE will very likely be sidelined at least two months after suffering facial fractures and two fractured neck vertebrae in a rock-climbing accident near the Grand Canyon.
Bourque, 32, had climbed about 350 feet up a 500-foot cliff Saturday at Lone Rock Canyon off Lake Powell, north of the Grand Canyon, when he fell about 30 feet and landed on a rock-strewn terrace, authorities said. (AP)


SPORTS PEOPLE: FOOTBAll; Holmgren's Pact Extended Through 1999
MIKE HOLMGREN, the first man since Vince Lombardi to coach the Green Bay Packers to consecutive winning seasons, received a three-year contract extension yesterday.
The deal keeps Holmgren with the team at least through 1999.
"I believe I have the best job in football right now," Holmgren said.
Holmgren, 46, former offensive coordinator with the San Francisco 49ers, signed a five-year, $2.75 million deal when he came to town in 1992.


Piggy-Backing on the Economic Recovery
The winners among the balanced funds for the last three years piggybacked on the economic recovery by holding significant stakes in financial and cyclical stocks.
Some also owned long-term bonds, which helped their returns until recently.
Balanced funds own a combination of equities and bonds, often described as a 60-40 split, but in practice the stock portion is usually lower.


Friends Charge Police Staged Officers' Visits
A day after two tearful bedside meetings between a wounded transit police officer and the New York City officer who shot him, a lawyer for the wounded man's family, as well as his half-brother and a close friend, asserted yesterday that the transit officer had been manipulated and that the meetings had been set up by the Police Department.
The lawyer also said that it was not until noon yesterday that the undercover transit officer, Desmond Robinson, gave his first detailed account of what he remembers of the shooting in the 53d Street subway station on Monday night.


Observer; Oh, Shut Up!
What do you do about this guy?
He moves into the seat right beside you on the train, takes off his jacket.
He's wearing suspenders.
A bad omen, those suspenders.
Guys who fool around with money wear suspenders.
Stocks, bonds, arbitrage, international exchange rates, lines of credit, letters of marque, you name it.
If it's about money you can bet the guy fooling around with it is wearing suspenders.


Balkans Need More Talking, Not More Fighting
To the Editor:
I feel compelled to present my reasons for opposing the lifting of the arms embargo in Bosnia.


TRANSACTIONS
Basketball National Basketball Association  BOSTON CELTICS -- Signed Eric Montross, center, to a multiyear contract.
Football National Football League  ARIZONA CARDINALS -- Waived Chuckie Johnson, defensive lineman.
CINCINNATI BENGALS -- Announced Reggie Johnson, tight end, has failed the team physical.
DENVER BRONCOS -- Waived Frank Robinson and Sebastian Savage, defensive backs; Dwayne Carswell, tight end; Rod Smith, wide receiver; and Kenny Hall, offensive tackle.
GREEN BAY PACKERS -- Signed Mike Holmgren, coach, to a three-year contract extension through the 1999 season.


Becker Playing Power Game
According to Boris Becker, the top 10 in men's tennis may soon symbolize not only success on the court but also political power off it.
"We don't have a proper voice in the ATP," Becker said yesterday at a Manhattan news conference for Lotto, the sporting goods firm whose shoes and clothes he endorses.
"We need to be more dominant, more strong."


CLINTON'S ALLIES ON HEALTH CONCEDE THAT BROAD PLAN IS ALL BUT DEAD THIS YEAR
Democratic Congressional leaders and White House officials today all but conceded any chance of passing universal health insurance legislation this year.
But they vowed to press on for what they can get, and suggested they would take anything that did more good than harm.
As the Senate decamped for a two-week break, and the House extended its own vacation to match, the Senate majority leader, George J. Mitchell of Maine, and the White House chief of staff, Leon E. Panetta, both took sober stock of the remaining prospects for health insurance legislation and laid some groundwork for what might yet be won.


Kafelnikov's Advance Leaves Chang a Loser
Earlier this week, Yevgeny Kafelnikov said that his goal at the moment was to break into the top 10 by the end of this year.
He will probably not have to wait that long.


End Is Seen For Lord Day
Lord Day &amp; Lord, Barrett Smith, one of New York's most venerable law firms, may be on the verge of shutting down, a leading trade publication reported yesterday.
Citing several of the firm's lawyers, The New York Law Journal said Lord Day management was working toward a dissolution by the end of next month, a date which would coincide with the end of its fiscal year.


Lunchtime Of Tumbles And Leaps
Dancing in the Streets is devoted to the proposition that dance can and should take place just about anywhere.
Sometimes that leads to the experience of simply walking in on a dance as a bit of urban found art.
That was the case yesterday afternoon when the organization opened its 10th anniversary with "Out of Season," a piece created and performed by David Dorfman with professional and nonprofessional dancers and children of all ages who are participants in workshops sponsored by the Police Athletic League.
Scheduled before the baseball strike to be performed between games at Shea Stadium and then rained out, the 20-minute piece sprawled comfortably over the lawn at Bryant Park.
Mr.
Dorfman wove through "Out of Season" dressed in trunks and laden with battered protective sports equipment, speaking a text that probably sounded wittier and clearer on paper.
The performers introduced themselves and called out messages to the audience over microphones placed at the front, with a puzzling amount of autobiographical stuff on sexual identity working its way into the adults' comments.
Tired stuff, too.


Ex-Judge Wachtler to Move From Prison to Halfway House
Sol Wachtler, the former Chief Judge of New York State, is to be transferred on Monday from a Federal prison in Minnesota to a halfway house in Brooklyn, where he will spend the next 30 to 60 days, the United States Attorney's office in Newark announced yesterday.
Since last September, Mr.
Wachtler, 64, has been serving a 15-month sentence for his conviction in a campaign of harassment and threats against Joy Silverman, a Republican fund-raiser, after she broke off their affair.


Bystander Hit As Police Fire At a Suspect
A Transit Authority mechanic was wounded by a stray bullet early yesterday morning when two transit police officers opened fire on a man who the police said was charging at them with an iron pipe.
The mechanic, Thomas Cusanelli, 38, was shot while standing outside the garage where he worked, at Lexington Avenue and 98th Street in Manhattan.
The garage is across the street from where the confrontation took place.


Robin Tate, 40, Off Broadway Actor
Robin Tate, an actor who appeared Off Broadway and in many regional productions, died on Aug. 19 at his home.
He was 40 and lived in Manhattan.
The cause was lung cancer, said his companion, Jason Buzas.


Good Clean Fun


Erosion Mars Jersey Shore's Ideal Summer
It has been an ideal summer here on the Jersey Shore.
The days have been clear, the storms have been few and a steady southern breeze has kept the beaches pleasantly warm.
Yet in many places, the beaches have also been worn ominously thin by an unusual summertime erosion, leaving them extremely vulnerable to the next round of winter storms.


It's a Wonder More Circus Elephants Don't Go Over the Edge
To the Editor:
Every bit of exploitation that pushed King Kong over the edge is experienced by circus animals large and small.
What is more surprising is that more futile attempts to escape, such as the Aug. 21 break by Circus International's elephant Tyk in Honolulu, doesn't occur more often.


Hartford Whaler Official Sentenced
Hartford Whalers General Manager PAUL HOLMGREN was ordered yesterday in Enfield, Conn., to undergo alcohol counseling and perform 100 hours of community service for his drunken driving conviction.
Holmgren was also fined $500, had his driver's license suspended, and received a six-month suspended jail sentence for the March 31 incident.


Passarella Named Argentina's Coach
DANIEL PASSARELLA, coach of local club River Plate, was selected to direct Argentina's national soccer team yesterday, replacing ALFIO BASILE, who resigned after Argentina lost to Romania in the Round of 16 of this year's World Cup.
Passarella, 41, was a midfielder on World Cup champion teams of 1978 and 1986. (AP)


Under the Skyscrapers, a Family Finds a Home on a Raft
David Pearlman and his family pay no rent or taxes, and they don't worry about noisy or nosy neighbors.
They also benefit from offshore summer breezes.
In a novel solution to New York's housing problem, the Pearlman family and a few friends -- six adults and three children all told -- have been living for two years aboard two homemade wooden vessels, one a houseboat, one a raft.
They are anchored in a small cove on the Hudson River near the foot of Chambers Street, where Wall Street skyscrapers dominate the scenery.


3 Parties Seek Ballot Spots With No Signatures to Spare
Three more political groups including the Libertarians without Howard Stern and a new party formed by the Rev.
Al Sharpton -- have submitted petitions for a spot on the general election ballot in November.
But all three groups appeared vulnerable to challenge, because each submitted only a few thousand signatures over the 15,000 required by law.
Today the leader of the Liberal Party, whom Mr.
Sharpton had attacked personally as he announced the formation of his own Freedom Party, said he intended to challenge Mr.
Sharpton's petitions.


Quarter's Economic Growth Revised to 3.8%, Up Slightly
More signs of a slowing economy emerged today as the Commerce Department, revising its initial estimates of growth in the second quarter, reported a higher level of unsold goods and markedly less Federal spending..
The gross domestic product was revised upward slightly, to an annual rate of 3.8 percent from 3.7 percent, far less than most analysts had expected.
"Growth was not as ebullient" as the 4 percent or more that was widely anticipated, said Carol A. Stone, senior economist at Nomura Securities in New York.
"So the chances for an early further tightening by the Federal Reserve are reduced."


Jesse Jackson Starts Talking About a Race
After harshly criticizing the compromise crime bill that cleared Congress with President Clinton's blessing this week, Jesse Jackson strongly hinted today that he might challenge Mr.
Clinton in 1996 in the Democratic primaries or as an independent in November.
Mr.
Jackson, who was rebuffed by Mr.
Clinton more than once in the 1992 campaign, did not go so far as to say he would run.
But he encouraged such speculation at a breakfast with reporters.


Brokers' Hidden Charges On Bonds
HAVE rising interest rates piqued your interest in the bond market?
Not a bad idea for some portfolios, perhaps.
But don't jump in until you have a handle on the elusive costs of buying bonds.
A broker from New York's W. J. Nolan &amp; Company made the mistake of cold calling to pitch Ginnie Mae bonds to a reporter recently, and hidden charges were the last thing he wanted to discuss.


Quake-Torn Town Has Reason to Cheer
There is still debris in some of the streets of Northridge, Calif., that offers a daily reminder of the Jan. 17 earthquake and the work still to be done to recover from it.
Earl Teraoka said when he started to look for a contractor to work on his house, companies told him that they might be able to provide an estimate -- in June.
"Everything anyone owned that was made of glass or porcelain was broken," Teraoka said today.
"We were down to plastic plates and Tupperware."


Hail the Ugly American
To the Editor:
The headline on Yelena Khanga's Aug. 20 Op-Ed article, "Overrun by Ugly Americans," continues a widespread misconception that is now almost 40 years old.


Refugees Ebb but Tide of Criticism Is Rising
Thanks to stormy weather, the Clinton Administration got some relief today in the Cuban refugee crisis, but it met heavy Congressional criticism for tightening sanctions and refusing to hold broad talks with President Fidel Castro.
As a result of storms and high waves, the number of Cubans setting out to sea dropped precipitously.
The Coast Guard picked up 629 Cubans in the Straits of Florida today as of 10 P.M., a far lower rate than during the previous seven days, when a total of 11,810 Cubans were rescued.


Barton Biggs Is Burying the Bear
For a living, Barton M. Biggs predicts market booms and busts around the globe.
Sometimes he even causes them.
Mr.
Biggs, the chairman of Morgan Stanley Asset Management, is one of the most venerable seers on Wall Street.
If he says, as he has in recent years, "Put money in emerging markets," plenty of institutional investors do so -- and a boom is born.


Versatility Makes Meggett A Good Value For the Giants
Time for math class.
David Meggett will make $1.25 million this season.
He is a running back.
He is a wide receiver.
He returns punts.
He returns kickoffs.
He is Deion Sanders without the entourage and the $3 million salary.
Now, class, break out the calculator.
A good running back in the National Football League makes about $1 million a year.
A wide receiver earns about the same amount.
A punt and kickoff return man might get about $300,000.
In Meggett, the Giants get all of those things for a bargain basement price.


It's a Wonder More Circus Elephants Don't Go Over the Edge; Bad Rats, Good Rats
To the Editor:
People are outraged that a Hillside, N.J., man was even charged for killing a rat.
Rats are viewed as dirty, disease-ridden and evil.
But the truth is more complicated.


A Strike, and Protests, in Bombay After a Hindu Leader Is Killed


No Headline
"Unless you're here grabbing them you don't have a grasp of how vast it is. Their desperation is awesome. We as Americans cannot fathom it because we don't have anything to compare it to." -- PETTY OFFICER BILL CUTCHENS, picking up Cuban refugees.  [ 4:3. ]


INSIDE
Tourists Attacked in Egypt
Muslim extremists attacked a tourist bus in Egypt, killing a Spanish youth, a setback for Government efforts to end fundamentalist violence.
Page 3.
Setback for Simpson
The judge in the O. J. Simpson case denied a request by defense lawyers for blood samples collected by the police at the murder scene.
Page 6.
Decision Near on Garden
ITT and Cablevision appeared to be the winners in the bidding for the Madison Square Garden sports and entertainment empire.
Page 35.


New York Film Festival to Show Its First Feature by Woody Allen
Woody Allen's "Bullets Over Broadway," set in New York City during the Roaring 20's, will have its American premiere midway through the 32d New York Film Festival at Lincoln Center.
The festival will begin on Sept. 23 with Quentin Tarantino's "Pulp Fiction," which won the top prize at the 1994 Cannes International Film Festival, and close on Oct. 9 with "Hoop Dreams," a documentary about high school basketball.
Tim Burton's "Ed Wood," about the director of cult films like "Plan 9 From Outer Space" and "Glen or Glenda," will make its world premiere at the festival.
"Bullets Over Broadway" is Mr.
Allen's first film to be shown at the festival.
It was chosen as the Festival Centerpiece, a new feature intended to add excitement to the middle of the festival and to honor what the festival organizers call "a film of special importance and stylistic distinction." The film, scheduled for Oct. 1 and 2, is set in a New York theater world populated by gangsters, showgirls, and outsize show-business characters.
Dianne Wiest plays a diva on the rampage and John Cusack a naive playwright.
Other cast members are Tracey Ullman, Chazz Palminteri, Rob Reiner, Jennifer Tilly and Jim Broadbent.


No Headline
Orange County has dazzling views, mountainous state parks and farmlands that seem to roll on endlessly, but according to the Federal Government's classification, the county's air is as polluted as that in Times Square.
The designation has angered officials in an area where silos outnumber smokestacks and where the single largest employer is a supermarket chain.
While Orange County officials admit that data collected in the late 1980's showed that the southern half of the county had elevated levels of the pollutant ozone, they say the ozone readings have been below Federal limits for the last four years.


The One-Man Whirlwind of Brazilian Theater
In a land better known in entertainment circles for its internationally popular soap operas than for its contributions to world theater, Miguel Falabella has made a name for himself as something of a theatrical whirlwind.
As a recent cover feature in the local magazine Veja Rio pointed out, the 37-year-old Mr.
Falabella "writes, acts, directs, fills three city theaters, does a novella, sings Disney, makes a lot of money, abuses vanity and dreams of conquering New York. He wants Broadway." Broadway ambitions are considered rather cheeky in a Portuguese-speaking nation that has long struggled to maintain a lively, profitable theatrical tradition.


Stranded, for Security's Sake; Bridgeport Residents Cry Racism as Mall Limits Bus Service
On a winter's night last year, the illusion of security that shopping malls treasure was shattered when gunfire broke out between teen-agers at a bus stop outside the 200-store Trumbull Shopping Park here.
Now, in an effort to restore that sense of security, the mall has decided to prohibit buses from stopping on mall property on Friday and Saturday nights after this weekend, effectively halting bus service from inner-city neighborhoods of Bridgeport at those times.


Sadly, Michael Ponders '95
Gene Michael was in a hurry, in a hurry to finish a conversation so he could drive to Albany and actually watch some baseball.
It was at the Class AA level, but Michael needed to escape.
Maybe he was in a hurry to escape from reality, too.
Like Manager Buck Showalter, Michael, the Yankees' general manager, has grown despondent in recent days because it has become more likely that the first-place Yankees might not play again.
Their 70-43 record, their six-and-a-half-game lead over the Baltimore Orioles and their best chance for a World Series appearance since 1981 are close to being rendered meaningless by the baseball strike.
Reality is setting in.


Toyota Plans 3.5% Increase In '95 Prices
The Toyota Motor Corporation said today that prices on 1995-model Toyota cars and trucks sold in the United States would rise 3.5 percent, or an average of $606, from the initial prices of 1994 models.
The increase appeared slightly higher than those announced by Detroit's auto makers, which plan average increases of 1.5 to 2.5 percent.
Japanese auto makers have been forced to raise prices more often and more sharply because of the rising value of the yen against the dollar, which makes exports to the United States more costly.
The yen has risen to post-World War II highs against the dollar this year.
The strong yen contributed to a fourth consecutive annual decline in profits reported by Toyota, Japan's largest auto maker, on Thursday.


Rival Coaches Agree: Don't Heed the Polls
Tom Osborne doesn't believe in preseason polls, which means he would rather dismiss those No. 1 rankings showing up beside Nebraska.
Don Nehlen, meanwhile, laments how an in-studio expert has yet to show at one of his West Virginia practices.
Signaling the start of another college football season, two men with splendid national coaching reputations today knocked the prognosticators and decided they were both in for a competitive game Sunday at Giants Stadium in Kickoff Classic XII.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 2-5  CUBANS STILL HOPE TO REACH U.S.
The Coast Guard picked up more than 1,600 Cuban refugees Thursday, although there were many empty rafts, and it was clear that they still thought they were headed to the United States.  1


Not Easy to Get Locked in Bloomingdale's
To the Editor:
When we read the letter from one of our customers, Katia Ramsey-Read, about getting locked in Bloomingdale's (Metropolitan Diary, Aug. 24), we were naturally concerned.
We were also confused.
Bloomingdale's is open until 7 P.M. on Monday evenings, and the department she was in is covered by sales associates at all times.
The department is closed by the executive in charge after 7, the fitting rooms are all checked, the escalators are turned off at 7:30, the cleaning lights are on at 7:45, the telephones do not shut off at night, and the main floor is lighted until 8.
Ms.
Ramsey-Read says she came into the store at about 5:30 and got locked in after an hour.
Since the store doesn't close until 7, and the activities described above went on until almost 8, I can only conclude she was here later than she thought.
We want all of our customers to be comfortable shopping at Bloomingdale's during regular store hours and have offered to assist Ms.
Ramsey-Read in any way possible on her next visit.
CHRISTINE MILLER  Executive Vice President, Marketing Bloomingdale's New York, Aug. 25, 1994


Grudge Time for Holy Bull, Go for Gin
The 126th season of racing at Saratoga turned into its final weekend today with seven senior horses entered in the $350,000 Whitney Handicap, a prelude to the fall races that will decide who is the Horse of the Year.
The Whitney will be run on Saturday with an all-star cast racing a mile and one-eighth.
Devil His Due is a slight favorite to withstand the dramatic comeback staged at Saratoga this month by Thunder Rumble.


Thought About Your Pension? You Will
Since World War II, workers at large companies have been able to count on two things: a pension and medical insurance.
You knew that if you had to go to the hospital, your company would pay most of the bill.
You knew that if you stuck around until you were 65, your company would send you a check every month after you retired.
Congress may yet emerge with a health reform plan that would strengthen the medical insurance portion of that system of promises.
But for anyone who hopes to stop working someday, the other pillar is collapsing.
In the last 10 years the corporate pension system has been taking the kind of free-market route that some Republican lawmakers are pushing for health care: Whether you have any money to retire on depends almost entirely on whether you -- not your employer -- save for it.


Toyota Widens a Price Gap


Corrections
An obituary yesterday about Shirley M. Ehrenkranz, dean of New York University's School of Social Work, omitted a survivor.
He is her son, Dr.
Joel Ehrenkranz of New Vernon, N.J.


Looking Like a Fighter
Eight months ago, President Clinton stood before Congress and waved a pen that he vowed to use to veto any measure that did not guarantee universal health care coverage.
Today, the White House began laying the groundwork for him to wave a flag of truce.
Mr.
Clinton's aides are aware of the potential embarrassment that could follow their raising the idea of accepting merely incremental health care legislation.
But they also argue that they can offset any acceptance of such legislation by reviving the President's campaign image as a fighter for change who succeeded in at least starting a job that his foes prevented him from finishing.


Cubans Rescued From Rafts Ask Simply, Where To Now?
Less than three hours after setting out from Key West amid thunder and under darkening skies, the Coast Guard cutter Grand Isle encountered a first raft in the Florida Straits.
It was empty except for what appeared to be a dead dog, its brown coat shiny wet.
Over the next six hours on Thursday, the cutter found nine occupied rafts among many more "empties" and rescued 56 Cuban refugees who had been at sea as long as four days.
They included two elderly men, six women and a 2-year-old boy sucking on a blue pacifier and wearing sagging diapers and a red T-shirt emblazoned with the words "Atlantic Ocean" over a maritime scene.


As Field Gets Shorter, Woods Gets Better
The final four survivors in the United States Amateur emerged through different means today on the Stadium Course at the TPC Sawgrass.
Two achieved easy victories on one side of the draw and two won matches that went to the final hole in the other half.
Tiger Woods, the 18-year-old prodigy from Cypress, Calif., marched into the semifinals by beating Tim Jackson, 5 and 4.
Eric Frishette, 22, beat John Curley, 21, by the same margin.
Those relatively easy passages were in stark contrast to the grinding victories that put two Oklahoma State University teammates in the other semifinal match.


End Seems Near in Bid For Garden
Bidding appeared to be nearing a climax last night in the contest for the Madison Square Garden sports and entertainment empire, in which a partnership of the ITT Corporation and Cablevision Systems Inc. is competing against the Liberty Media Corporation, a cable television programmer.
The ITT-Cablevision team had the higher bid on the table, $1.05 billion, several people close to the negotiations said last night.
But a deal was not certain, because no contract had been signed and Liberty Media, with a bid of approximately $1 billion, had not dropped out.


Leonard Lesser, 79, A.F.L.-C.I.O. Aide
Leonard Lesser, a lawyer, advocate for the poor and union official who worked in Washington for almost 50 years, died on Wednesday at the home of his daughter in Washington.
He was 79.
The cause was cancer, said his daughter, Susan Leighton.


Robert M. Thornton, Art Director, 64
Robert Michael Thornton, a Manhattan art director known for his designs of books and magazines on home decorating, died on Monday at Beth Israel Medical Center in Manhattan.
He was 64 and lived in Greenwich Village.
The cause was lung cancer, said Everett Short, his companion.


G.O.P. Wins Round on Donations but Democrats Are Barely Hurt
In a continuing partisan court fight over campaign finances, the state's Republicans won a round on legal principle today.
But the cost to Democrats may be only a minor inconvenience rather than a big cash payment.
Republican officials sued the state and national Democratic committees last week, charging that the Democratic National Committee had far exceeded state limits on campaign donations by channeling more than $1 million to the New York Democratic State Committee over the last three years.


Bert Yancey, 56, a Pro Golfer Who Fought Manic Depression
Bert Yancey, the professional golfer who overcame manic depression after the disintegration of a brilliant 15-year-career, died yesterday after collapsing while practicing for the Senior PGA Franklin Quest Championship in Park City, Utah.
He was 56.
Professional Golfers Association officials said Mr.
Yancey apparently had a heart attack.


Corrections
The first paragraph of an article on Thursday about the New York City Board of Elections' new policy on bilingual ballots described imprecisely how the ballots had previously failed to comply with Federal law.
As the article explained elsewhere, the board had not rendered candidates' names in Chinese on ballots, as required by law, but it had provided all other information in Chinese as required.


Great View, but Orange County Protests the Air Rating


Q &amp; A
Treasuries in I.R.A.'s
Would interest from a United States Treasury obligation, which is normally exempt from state income taxation, be subject to state taxation as ordinary income if withdrawn from an I.R.A.?
WILLIAM T. ENGLAND, Weston, Conn.
State income tax laws are generally based on Federal taxable income or Federal adjusted gross income.
Robert L. Israeloff, chairman of Israeloff, Trattner &amp; Company, an accounting firm, said that when an individual retirement account is taxed in a certain way for Federal purposes, it is generally taxed the same way for state purposes.
States view income from such an account as I.R.A. income, rather than as income from the Treasury securities within the I.R.A.
Seymour Goldberg, senior partner of Goldberg &amp; Ingber, a law firm, agreed.
"The Treasury bond in an I.R.A. loses its character as an exempt item for state tax purposes," he said.
Annuity Beneficiaries
What are the tax consequences to a beneficiary of a single payment tax-deferred annuity on the death of the owner of the annuity?
HELENE MORGENSTERN, Westport, Conn.
With a pure annuity, the payments cease at death.
But many people hedge their bets in an annuity by buying one that provides for some sort of refund to a beneficiary.
An annuity is considered "income in respect of a decedent" and does not get a new tax basis at death.
Any amount beyond the original investment becomes taxable income to the beneficiary.
"The beneficiary would be entitled to recover the balance of the decedent's investment tax-free," said David S. Rhine, a partner of BDO Seidman, an accounting firm.
"Any excess constitutes taxable income."
When an annuity holder dies, the balance in the account is subject not only to income tax, but also to estate tax.
The beneficiary can deduct the portion of estate tax owed on the annuity on his or her individual income tax return.
Assets in Trust
If someone wants to create a bypass trust in a will and the only asset of significance is an I.R.A., how can the trust be funded and still avoid the taxes that result from an effective distribution from the I.R.A.?
STEPHEN J. BLABER, Brooklyn
If other assets are available, an individual retirement account should not be used for a bypass trust because distributions after your death will continue to be subject to income tax.
But if no other choice is possible, try to avoid accelerating withdrawals from the retirement account and thus incurring higher tax payments.
"Under the minimum distribution rules, naming a designated beneficiary can defer required withdrawals from the I.R.A.," said Tricia K. Bonner, a partner of Thacher Proffitt &amp; Wood, a law firm.
"The bypass trust would have to be created under an irrevocable living trust to qualify as a designated beneficiary at the I.R.A. owner's required beginning date. Authorizing the trustee in the trust instrument to take the minimum amount each year from the I.R.A. will also help to defer income taxes."


HUD Plays Too Rough
Last year a neighborhood group in Berkeley, Calif., protested the conversion of a local motel into a shelter and treatment facility for recovering drug addicts and the mentally disabled.
Before they knew what had hit them, members of the group were under investigation by the Federal Department of Housing and Urban Development, accompanied by demands for their mailing lists and all their writings about the project.
There were threats of fines and jail terms.
Last week HUD finally dropped the investigation, after finding no violations.


Navratilova Advocates Wooden Racquets
MARTINA NAVRATILOVA says she would like to see professional tennis players go back to using wooden racquets.
"The modern racquets have changed the game too much," Navratilova said yesterday at the Connecticut Tennis Center in New Haven where she was a late replacement for STEFFI GRAF in the SNET Classic, an eight-player exhibition tournament.
She advanced to its semifinals last night by defeating hard-serving Brenda Schultz, 2-6, 6-3, 6-3.


At This Arts Center, the Performers Are Still Hard Hats


SPORTS PEOPLE: FOOTBAll; Reggie Johnson Fails Physical
Tight end REGGIE JOHNSON, claimed Thursday by the Cincinnati Bengals, yesterday failed a team physical.
The Bengals had claimed Johnson on waivers from Denver.
The team spokesman, JACK BRENNAN, would not say why Johnson failed the physical. (AP)


Fox Adds 3 Network-Affiliated Stations
Fox Broadcasting, continuing its efforts to strengthen its network of affiliates in local television markets, has gained effective control of the ABC affiliate in New Orleans and NBC affiliates in Honolulu and in Mobile, Ala.
SF Broadcasting, a joint venture of Fox Television Stations and Savoy Pictures Entertainment, made a deal on Thursday to pay $229 million to the Burnham Broadcasting Company of Chicago for three stations: WVUE in New Orleans, WALA in Mobile and KHON in Honolulu.
All three are VHF stations, with channel positions below 13 on the dial, and as such are highly prized.


Here's to the Techies Who Lunch
A cheerful, synthesized voice coming from a Toshiba laptop computer greets the visitor arriving at the High Tech Cafe here: "Name? Number in party? Smoking, nonsmoking or modem-ready?"
Welcome to the cafe of the Dallas Infomart, a convention and sales center known as a high-technology showcase for the latest in computer products and networking.
Within the permanent showrooms that many companies maintain at the Infomart, and at the 55 trade shows and 1,100 seminars and conferences being held there this year, high-tech business people can gather to talk shop and show their wares.
Coffee, Tea or Cables
Now, at the newly opened High Tech Cafe, business can literally continue over lunch, as customers at selected tables can download their food and their Internet mail at the same time -- taking bytes between bites, as it were.


Croatia Refusing Entry to Refugees From Breakaway Area in Bosnia


Bridge
Midnight finally arrived this week for the Cinderella team in the Von Zedtwitz Double Knockout Team Championship.
Playing in the final on Tuesday at Honors Club, 42 East 74th Street, the team, headed by Jerry Goldberg of Yonkers, and including Bob Jaffe, Nancy Kalow, Jane Dillenberg and Jeff Rothstein, all of Long Island City, Queens, seemed poised to take the title.
In earlier rounds, it had upset several much more experienced teams, and with nine deals remaining they led by 16 imps.


Jets Pulling One Way, Esiason Tugging Another
What a way for the Jets to go into the regular season: a last-minute victory over the mighty Tampa Bay Buccaneers and another poor performance by Boomer Esiason.
Esiason is their first quarterback with star quality since Joe Namath.
But tonight he completed a dismal preseason, completing just 4 of 11 passes although the Jets toppled the Bucs, 10-9.


Frederick Block, 85, Manhattan Lawyer
Frederick H. Block, a New York lawyer and former assistant United States Attorney, died last Saturday at his home on the Upper East Side.
He was 85.
The cause was cancer, said Jean Libman Gollay, his former wife.


Texans Fear New Tent City for Cubans
Five years ago, a small city of tents was built here to house 3,500 Nicaraguans, Salvadorans and others fleeing political turmoil in Central America.
Memories of the overcrowding and the cold, wet weather that winter have worried state officials and immigration lawyers here who say the arrival of 51 Cuban refugees here on Thursday from Florida could be the beginning of a repeat of the experience.


After a Lull, Stocks Come Roaring Back
Tentatively, but then with increasing assurance, investors are returning to the stock market.
With a 51-point surge in the Dow Jones industrial average yesterday, they bid up stocks for the largest one-week gain in 19 months.
Until this week, the stock market had been stagnant at best.
But now, stock investors have become encouraged by stabilizing bond prices, a rising dollar and, above all, a more optimistic picture of a sound, low-inflation United States economy.


CHRONICLE
When you're expecting guests like LIZA MINNELLI, LAUREN BACALL, MARVIN HAMLISCH, MELANIE GRIFFITH and ALEC BALDWIN, there's some legitimacy in thinking that your bailiwick is becoming "the star-studded capitol of the country."
MARTY RICHARDS, the about-to-be host who said this, was talking about his house in the Hamptons, but it should be noted that Mr.
Richards is a Broadway producer, and that theater people are sometimes inclined to exaggerate just a tiny bit.


White House Picks New Chief of Staff For the Air Force
The White House today nominated Gen.
Ronald R. Fogleman, head of the United States Transportation Command, to be the next Air Force Chief of Staff.
General Fogleman, a 52-year-old fighter pilot, will replace Gen.
Merrill A. McPeak, 58, who is scheduled to retire in October after serving as the Air Force's top officer since 1990.
The appointment requires Senate confirmation, which is expected.


Balkans Need More Talking, Not More Fighting; The Right to Access
To the Editor:
The principle of humanity has been another casualty in Bosnia.
A stunning illustration occurred last year in negotiations between a commanding general and an aid worker seeking access to a minority population.
When she reminded him of the fundamental principles of international humanitarian law, he countered, "We know your principles, and we will make you change them."


President Foresees Safer U.S.
In exulting over the passage of the $30 billion crime bill, President Clinton predicted wondrous results.
"This crime bill is going to make every neighborhood in America safer," he said, looking forward to the prospect that police officers will no longer be outgunned by criminals, who will also be deterred from crime by the possibility of life in prison as a result of the "three strikes and you're out" provision.


Who Owns Russia's War Booty?
Russian officials acknowledged blushingly last year that whole warehouses of art treasures seized during World War II had been hidden away for decades.
The great prizes included the so-called "Treasure of Priam," unearthed by Heinrich Schliemann at Troy, and a stunning Gutenberg Bible, each calfskin page illuminated with floral decorations.
The Trojan gold was seized in Berlin by the Red Army, and the Bible carted from a book museum in Leipzig, once Germany's publishing capital.
As months passed, however, the blushing stopped, and President Yeltsin's Government found excuses for rebuffing German claims for restitution.
Now the argument is taking a new turn.
The lower house of the Russian Parliament is considering a law saying that wartime booty should be kept as reparations.
This has been taken up as a holy cause by extreme nationalists.
More surprisingly, the idea is supported by some academics and museum curators, who have come to view the objects as national property.


CHRONICLE
Get out the platform shoes, the grapes, cherries, bananas and plums.
It's CARMEN MIRANDA Look-Alike Contest time.
The event is anticipated as the highlight (or high hat) of a two-week "Tribute to Carmen Miranda and the Tropics" starting Thursday.
The contest will be held on Sept. 4 during the 10th annual Brazilian Street Festival of New York, on 46th Street between Fifth Avenue and Avenue of the Americas.
The fact that Brazil won the World Cup should make things even livelier than usual.


A Punishing Passage
The Senate has gone home in a burst of self-congratulation, some of it valid and some ignoble.
In the department of ignobility, consider the crowing from George Mitchell, the majority leader.
He declared a watershed victory over the Republicans "as the party that's tougher on crime. It's the Democrats."
Mr.
Mitchell's definition of toughness translates this way: The Democrats have become more artful demagogues on the death penalty.
Mr.
Mitchell noted that a Democrat wrote the bill, thus establishing title to 58 new death penalties.
It is a seedy spectacle when the supposed party of social justice wants credit for appealing to the basest instincts of the electorate with the most illusory of all crime remedies.


Corrections
A map yesterday with an article about the aftermath of a propane tanker explosion in White Plains misstated the status of a stretch of Interstate 287 in some copies.
The highway is open, not closed, all across Westchester County.


Sports of The Times; Rich Bowls, Big Deals, But Better?
WE are now supposed to comprehend the difference between a coalition and an alliance.
A century and a quarter has passed since the day students from Princeton and Rutgers gathered to begin the process that would one day connect the phrase "smash-mouth" to the mission of American higher education.
It seemed like a good idea at the time.
Decades before professional leagues expanded west and south, their game created connections between fragmented rural populations and faraway cities.
College football overcame its early brutality to define a sense of time and place.
The game provided something that most major league franchises could not and never will, the comfort of lasting personal traditions, passed on in the form of living, breathing heirlooms shared by a region, a state or a nation.
The Dodgers could up and move a continent away.
The Philadelphia Athletics could leave for Kansas City.
But Penn State wasn't going anywhere.


Luckenwalde Journal; In 'East Germany,' Bad Ol' Days Now Look Good
The thousands of people who crowded into this eastern town for a rock concert in early August came not only to hear the Puhdys, once the most popular band in East Germany, but also to revel in their East German past.
Axel Badura, whose home is near the open-air arena here, watched from his window as concertgoers streamed by.
He wasn't surprised by the turnout.


Dance, Light and Poetry Embellish a Flute Recital
Viviana Guzman's flute recital on Thursday evening at Blessed Sacrament Church on the Upper West Side was brief but eventful.
Indeed, with its use of dance and lighting effects, it played like an illustration of the trendy audience-fetching devices advocated in the notorious American Symphony Orchestra League report "Americanizing the American Orchestra." It was a mixed success.
As Ms.
Guzman straightforwardly presented sonatas by Bach and Leclair and the first two movements of Bach's solo Partita in A minor (BWV 1013), you knew from the roster in the program that for good or ill, things would liven up soon.
And sure enough, in the Sarabande and Bourree of the partita, Kelly Holcombe supplied dance that through its aptness, elegance and wit quickly came to seem more than superfluous.


Joe L's Bar Comes Out In Inwood
BY the time summer began, Joe Lechle was regarding most of his customers with serious contempt.
"Creeps," said the 63-year-old owner of Joe L's, the bar he has run for 38 years on Broadway at 192d Street in Inwood.
"Every morning, I'd go into the bathroom and pick up crack vials, needles and aluminum foil they used to wrap drugs. One or two would nurse a rum and coke all night but there'd be 10 others hanging around doing business on the pay phone. My bartenders had to force ourselves to come in to work. I'm telling you, it wasn't fun and there was no money."


Songs of Self-Pity, Anger and Even a Sociopath
Stone Temple Pilots barely had to sing their songs tonight at the Jones Beach Theater.
The audience did it for them, on their feet, happily joining in with every word from the band's two multimillion-selling albums, "Core" and "Purple" (Atlantic).
They were songs about sullen self-pity shading into anger, about feeling aimless and resentful and wondering, "Where ya going to tomorrow?" Verses seethed with dissonance; then choruses shifted to comforting melodies.
Many of the fans wore flannel shirts that looked as if they were fresh from the mall.
Wrapped in the emblems of ready-made, mass-marketed grunge, they were a fine sartorial match for Stone Temple Pilots' music.
Stone Temple Pilots played knockoffs of the lunging riffs and asymmetrical melodies of Pearl Jam, Alice in Chains and Soundgarden; their uptempo songs, like "Unglued," echoed Nirvana.
For variety, a few songs foraged outside Seattle, imitating Jack Bruce in "Big Empty" and the Red Hot Chili Peppers in "Lounge Fly." "Guess I like to steal," Scott Weiland sang in "Creep," and while the character in the song is a sociopath, the line rang true.


Job Cuts and Grass Roots; Strike at a G.M. Parts Plant Demonstrated How a Union's Clout Has Shifted to Locals
For the General Motors Corporation and the United Automobile Workers union, labor politics is increasingly local, as demonstrated this week by the strike of 3,300 G.M. parts makers in Anderson, Ind.
The haggling over national labor contracts every three years in Detroit is a dramatic ritual, and it does set the broad terms of the relationship.
But G.M.'s sweeping, stop-and-go campaign to cut costs and jobs has been largely a matter of incremental gains eked out plant by plant in negotiations with local union officials.


Voices From the Grass Roots: Anger Over Partisan Politics
The customers in the coffee shop were talking politics: health care, the deficit, mandatory prison sentences.
A television behind the counter was tuned to the news.
As the screen flashed on the United States Senate, the crowd grew quiet, waiting for some impassioned oratory from that august chamber.
What they saw was Alfonse M. D'Amato, the Republican Senator from New York, bouncing jovially and singing to the tune of Old MacDonald -- "here a pork, there a pork, everywhere a pork-pork" -- standing next to a huge picture of a pink pig feeding at a trough, intended to symbolize the waste in the crime bill, which the Senate passed late Thursday by a vote of 61 to 38.
The next image on the screen was that of Senator Frank R. Lautenberg, a New Jersey Democrat, countering Mr.
D'Amato's claims with none-too-subtle references to what gets shoveled out of a pigpen.


Yehoshafat Harkabi, Israeli Spy and Adviser, Is Dead at 72
Yehoshafat Harkabi, a former head of Israeli military intelligence and analyst of the Arab-Israeli conflict who called years ago for the acceptance of a Palestinian state, died today in Jerusalem.
He was 72.
He died of cancer, a disease he had battled for several years.


Looking Like a Fighter
Eight months ago, President Clinton stood before Congress and waved a pen that he vowed to use to veto any measure that did not guarantee universal health care coverage.
Today, the White House began laying the groundwork for him to wave a flag of truce.
Mr.
Clinton's aides are aware of the potential embarrassment that could follow their raising the idea of accepting merely incremental health care legislation.
But they also argue that they can offset any acceptance of such legislation by reviving the President's campaign image as a fighter for change who succeeded in at least starting a job that his foes prevented him from finishing.


Balkans Need More Talking, Not More Fighting; History of Embargo
To the Editor:
There is a pervasive myth that the Bosnian arms embargo was imposed by the United Nations Security Council and therefore awaits lifting by that veto-hamstrung body, which will probably never happen.


Jury Faults Law Firm on Harassment
The world's largest law firm and one of its former partners turned a blind eye to complaints of sexual harassment, a Superior Court jury decided here today, ending the first stage of a monthlong trial that has put the nation's legal community on notice that it must practice what it preaches.
The jury of six men and six women, who deliberated for two and a half days, said the law firm, Baker &amp; McKenzie, had failed to take steps to stop one of its most productive partners, Martin R. Greenstein, from harassing a legal secretary, Rena Weeks.
Ms.
Weeks, who is 40, was awarded $50,000 in damages to compensate her for emotional distress.


CHRONICLE
Go figure.
One of those not-too-scientific polls (300 respondents) has revealed that Gotham dwellers consider MADONNA and GERALDO RIVERA "the most energetic New Yorkers." Madonna beat out some pretty energetic types, like KATIE COURIC and KATHIE LEE GIFFORD.
Mr.
Rivera bested DAVID LETTERMAN.
Is it any surprise that the poll sponsor is an energy drink called Sunbolt?


Religion Notes
Selling Papal Souvenirs
A papal visit, like the one scheduled for the United States in October, is intended to awaken the spiritual side of people, but the entrepreneurial side also seems to get stimulated.
Among the souvenirs sold at past visits of Pope John Paul II have been items like pope-soap-on-a-rope and the pope-a-scope, used to see over the heads of others in the crowd.


Vincent Zito, Stage Wigmaker, 56
Vincent Zito, co-owner of the Louis-Vincent Salon in Manhattan, which created wigs and makeup designs for operatic and Broadway productions, died on Thursday at Lenox Hill Hospital.
He was 56 and lived in Manhattan.
He died after a lengthy illness, according to his business partner and companion, Louis Schumaci.


Judge Denies Simpson Request To Obtain Samples of Blood
Capping a week of setbacks for O. J. Simpson, a state judge here today denied a request by the former football star's lawyers to obtain blood samples collected from the scene where Mr.
Simpson's former wife and her friend were slashed to death.
The judge, Lance A. Ito of Los Angeles County Superior Court, said in a written opinion that prosecutors were "less than exemplary" in handling the blood samples.
But he said the defense had failed to show bad faith on the part of prosecutors in the handling of evidence.
Under California law, that is the legal hurdle that must be overcome for defense lawyers to receive evidence before prosecutors are done analyzing it.


COMPANY BRIEFS
CARNIVAL CORP., Miami, a cruise ship company, has completed the sale of its Crystal Palace Resort and Casino in Nassau, the Bahamas, for $80 million to Ruffin Hotel Group, Wichita, Kan.
FIFTH THIRD BANCORP, Cincinnati, a bank holding company, completed the acquisition of the 43-branch Cumberland Federal Bancorporation Inc., Louisville, Ky., for $148 million in stock.


Timothy Gelatt, 39, Chinese Law Expert
Timothy A. Gelatt, a lawyer and an authority on Chinese law, died late Monday at St.
Vincent's Hospital in Manhattan.
He was 39 and lived in Greenwich Village.
The cause was a cerebral hemorrhage that he suffered while walking near his home, said Ko-Yung Tung, a partner in the law firm of O'Melveny &amp; Myers, for which Mr.
Gelatt had worked half-time since May 1993.


Comdisco Rises on I.B.M. Deal
The stock of Comdisco Inc., a leader in the leasing business for large computer systems, rose sharply yesterday after the company said it had settled a three-year-old suit brought by the International Business Machines Corporation.
I.B.M. shares also rose yesterday, continuing the recent run-up in the stock, which has taken it to its highest level in nearly two years.
I.B.M. stock ended yesterday at $70, up 62.5 cents, on the New York Stock Exchange.
Analysts said that that movement had little, if anything, to do with Comdisco but reflected a growing sentiment that the company was finally poised for renewed growth.


RESULTS PLUS
GOLF A Logjam Atop the Leader Board  Nick Price, the British Open and PGA champion, shot a four-under-par 66 for a 36-hole total of 134 and was one shot from the top on a crowded World Series of Golf leader board in Akron, Ohio, that had the Masters champion, Jose Maria Olazabal; Steve Lowery and Mark McCumber tied for first at 133.
Tied with Price at 134 were Greg Norman and the United States Open champion, Ernie Els, while Loren Roberts was at 135 along with Hale Irwin and Scott Hoch.
"It's a congested leader board," Norman said after his 67.
Roberts tightened it with a triple-bogey on No. 18. (AP) TRACK AND FIELD Four Records at Commonwealth Games  Frankie Fredericks of Namibia led the record-setters yesterday in the Commonwealth Games in Victoria, British Columbia.
He beat the Englishman John Regis in a rematch of their 200-meter final in the 1993 world championships in a games-record 19.97 seconds.
Records also fell in three other finals -- the Australian Cathy Freeman took the women's 200 in 22.25, Samuel Matete of Zambia took the men's 400 hurdles in 48.67 and England's Sally Gunnell, the world record-holder, won the 400 hurdles in 54.51. (AP) BOXING Tracy Patterson Loses Title to Sanchez  Hector Acero Sanchez won a 12-round split decision last night in Atlantic City to dethrone the World Boxing Council superbantamweight champion, Tracy Harris Patterson.
Sanchez, 24, from New York City and ranked eighth by the W.B.C., floored Patterson with a left hook early in Round 2, and scored with several right-hand counterpunches throughout the bout.
Patterson recovered from his early problems to outmuscle Sanchez.
His left hook to the challenger's body and right to the head wobbled Sanchez in the 9th and 12th rounds, nearly turning the bout in his favor.
Patterson, 28, from New Paltz, N.Y., was making the fifth defense of his title.
He is the adopted son of the former heavyweight champion Floyd Patterson, who trains him. (AP)


METRO DIGEST
FRIENDS CHARGE POLICE STAGED VISITS
A day after two tearful bedside meetings between a wounded transit police officer and the New York City police officer who opened fire on him, a lawyer for the wounded man's family, as well as his half-brother and a close friend, asserted that the officer had been manipulated and that the meetings had been set up by the Police Department.
Page 1.
EROSION AT JERSEY SHORE RAISES CONCERN
It has been an ideal summer on the Jersey shore.
The days have been clear, the storms have been few and a steady southern breeze has kept the beaches pleasantly warm.
Yet in many places the beaches have been worn ominously thin by an unusual summertime erosion, leaving them extremely vulnerable to the next round of winter storms.
Page 1.
NEW YORK CITY STRAY POLICE BULLET WOUNDS MECHANIC
A Transit Authority bus mechanic was wounded by a stray bullet when two transit police officers opened fire on a man who the police said was charging at them with an iron pipe.
The suspect was also shot, and both men were hospitalized in critical condition.
Page 27.
JOE L'S BAR COMES OUT IN INWOOD
By the time summer began, Joe Lechle, owner of Joe L's bar, was regarding most of his customers with serious contempt.
Every morning he'd find crack vials and needles in the bathroom.
Mr.
Lechle considered closing the place but, he says, "you don't get a pension from running a bar." He also felt responsible for the people who work for him.
So instead of retiring he kept thinking how he might attract a better clientele, people who would have a good time, behave reasonably and spend money.
In early July, he figured it out.
He would make Joe L's a gay bar.
About New York, Page 27.
HOME ON A RAFT, UNDER THE SKYSCRAPERS
David Pearlman and his family pay no rent or taxes, and they don't worry about noisy or nosy neighbors.
They also benefit from offshore summer breezes.
In a novel solution to New York's housing problem, the Pearlman family and a few friends have been living for two years aboard two homemade wooden vessels, one a houseboat, one a raft.
They are anchored in a small cove on the Hudson River near the foot of Chambers Street, where Wall Street skyscrapers dominate the scenery.
Page 27.
REGION SOL WACHTLER TO LEAVE PRISON
Sol Wachtler, the former Chief Judge of New York State, is to be transferred on Monday from a Federal prison in Minnesota to a halfway house in Brooklyn, where he will spend the next 30 to 60 days, the United States Attorney's office in Newark announced.
Page 28.
3 POLITICAL GROUPS FILE FOR BALLOT SPOTS
Three more political groups -- including the Libertarians without Howard Stern and a new party formed by the Rev.
Al Sharpton -- have submitted petitions for a spot on New York's general election ballot in November.
Page 26.
BASEBALL TEAM TO REMAIN IN NEW BRITAIN
The Red Sox, a farm club for the Boston team of the same name, will stay in New Britain, Conn., despite an enticing offer from officials in Springfield, Mass., the team's owner said.
Page 26.
RESEARCHERS GOT BODY PARTS ILLEGALLY
A state investigation has concluded that the State University of New York Health Science Center broke the law by accepting human body parts for research from a former county medical examiner, who made the donations without permission of the families of the dead.
Page 28.


Flaws Found In Housing Of Mentally Ill
In a ruling intended to force New York City to reckon with the plight of housing the mentally ill, a state court judge has ordered 90 days of follow-up care for the thousands of mental patients discharged from city-run hospitals to insure that the patients are housed.
City officials said yesterday that they would appeal the order.
They said it would unfairly impose a costly new burden on the city -- a burden that they said should rightly be born by the state government.


After a Lull, Stocks Come Roaring Back
Tentatively at first, but then with increasing assurance, investors returned to the stock market this week.
And with a 51-point surge in the Dow Jones industrial average yesterday, they bid up stock prices for the largest one-week gain in 19 months.
Until this week, the stock market had been stagnant at best.
Individual investors, as well as institutions commanding billions of dollars in assets, had pulled back from the market and put much of their holdings into cash.


Corporations Forget the Social Contract
To the Editor:
In the business-oriented courses of my college days and later during my 37-year business career, I learned and understood that the American corporation enjoyed special privileges given to it over many years by Congress.
The nurturing and protection were granted because the corporation accepted two important responsibilities: to produce a product or service that created jobs and to provide steady employment.


Baiul to Train Permanently in Hartford
The Olympic figure skating champion, OKSANA BAIUL, who beat NANCY KERRIGAN for the gold in February, will leave Ukraine next month to train permanently at a new rink in Hartford, her coach said yesterday.
The offer was made by a sponsor after Baiul won the Olympic title in Norway in February.


MGM Grand Air Is Resuming Schedule
Citing a growing demand for luxury air travel between the East and West Coasts, MGM Grand Inc. recently announced that it will reestablish scheduled flights between New York and Los Angeles on its luxury airline, MGM Grand Air, beginning Sept. 8.
The service, known as the Golden Triangle, will also introduce direct scheduled service to Las Vegas from New York and Los Angeles.
MGM Grand Air became a charter service at the end of 1992 when scheduled flights between Los Angeles and New York were discontinued after five years of operation.
The fleet of six refurbished planes feature private staterooms, dining tables, stand-up bars, telephones and personal computer outlets.
The aircraft include three Boeing 727's fitted with 34 seats rather than the usual 125 and three DC-8's with 70 seats rather than the usual 186.


Manager's Profile
William H. Miller 3d
Fund: Legg Mason Special Investment Trust, $595 million in assets.
Manager since 1986 inception. (Sponsor: Legg Mason Fund Adviser Inc., Baltimore.)


Susan L. Finch, Charles C. Moore
Susan Leslie Finch, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Richard W. Finch of Northford, Conn., was married yesterday to Charles Cook Moore, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Norman C. Moore of Philadelphia.
The Rev.
Dr.
Wendel W. Meyer performed the Episcopal ceremony at the Princeton University Chapel in Princeton, N.J.
The bride and bridegroom, both 28, graduated magna cum laude from Princeton and are studying law at Stanford University.
Her father is the president of Precision Polymers, a manufacturer of plastic coatings in Northford.
Her mother, Jan Finch, is a director of Worldtek Travel in New Haven.


American Musicals, as Tailored by the British
THERE'S A HEART OF darkness to many a Broadway musical, but these days, it seems, it's the British who lay it bare.
How can this be, one hears the vexed reader protesting, aware of decades of unimaginative British retreads of Broadway classics that have had neither a heart nor a soul of any description.
The answer lies in the absorption into the mainstream musical in England of a handful of directors trained primarily in the classics, not in the klieg lights of Broadway.
These are people used to textual reinvestigation, willing to subject "Carousel" and "Cabaret," to cite just two examples, to the same scrutiny they apply to Shakespeare, Ben Jonson and Brian Friel.
Do they always come up trumps?


Business Language
Next to a computer, a working woman's biggest timesaver is program for dressing.
It starts with a suit


Corrections
An article last Sunday about the potential effects of a court challenge to the 1990 Census included a garbled figure for a proposed revision in New York City's count.
The revision, calculated by the Census Bureau but never formally adopted, would put the city's 1990 population at 7,552,186. (The official census figure was 7,322,564.)


The rage for the real
Save for the occasional flurry -- Elsa Peretti's "Diamonds-By-The-Yard" at Tiffany's in the 1970's; Paloma Picasso's killer rocks at the same store in the early 80's; the sale of the Duchess of Windsor's fabled jewels at Sotheby's in 1987 -- real jewelry as fashion news has been all but moribund for decades.
But last March, the influential English designer John Galliano, who shows in Paris, chose to accessorize his fall collection with important pieces borrowed from such venerable French jewelers as Rene Boivin.
When Galliano repeated the performance in New York in June at Bergdorf Goodman, with diamonds from Van Cleef &amp; Arpels, fashion antennae started whirring.
Editors who had felt ho-hum about the real stuff started giving it more than perfunctory attention.
After several seasons of severe, accessory-less style, somehow the real stuff began to look right.


Catching Up With the Past To Look at Today
MODERN DANCERS CAN BE A sober lot; they usually don't like to appear sentimental.
Yet it's possible that in the next few seasons, they'll find it hard to resist swaying to "Happy Birthday" and the "Anniversary Waltz." A time of commemoration and celebration is at hand.
This year is the 100th anniversary of Martha Graham's birth, and 1995 will be both the centennial of the birth of another modern-dance pioneer, Doris Humphrey, and the 20th anniversary of the death of Humphrey's colleague Charles Weidman.
The Humphrey-Weidman Company was founded in 1928, and the pair worked together until the mid-1940's, when arthritis forced Humphrey to retire from the stage.
Several New York groups are already scheduling festivities in these choreographers' honor.


Shortwave Radio: More Preachers, Less Propaganda
THERE was a time not so long ago when a shortwave listener could tune into Albania's then powerful Radio Tirana and hear in Balkan-accented English, "First, the news: The revisionist Titoist clique of imperialist lackeys has attempted again to violate the true teachings of Marxism-Leninism." That has receded into a quaint past.
Gone, too, Radio Prague's signature tune, a hoary Socialist verse that went, "Raise the left leg, raise the left leg. Not one step backward."


The Colorful and Dependable Geranium
THIS has been a good year for geraniums.
In spite of midsummer heat and humidity, the showy plants are strutting their stuff in window boxes, patio pots and tubs, flower borders and tidy borders around the bases of flagpoles.
The plants in question, with their handsome leaves and spectacular blooms, are what botanists call pelargoniums, not to be confused with hardy perennial geraniums.


Population Growth Is Anything but Harmless
To the Editor:
Surely you published Julian L. Simon's "Population Distraction" (Op-Ed, Aug. 21) only because of his prominence during the Reagan-Bush years, not for its "facts" or the validity of his position.
Mr.
Simon remains stuck in the now thoroughly discredited theory that rapid population growth is harmless.


NO BAD SUMMERS
Am I alone in having felt a cold chill during a reference to one of the "sage observations" taken from "Roberta's new book, 'Summer Is Not a Season. It's a Series of Choices' " in Henry Alford's "No Bad Summers" (Endpaper, Aug. 7)?
This was, "Don't let a child mope indoors because he can't find his snorkeling mask: give him a plastic bag and a large rubber band."


An Unbalanced Profile Of N.M.E.'s New Chief
To the Editor:
Your profile on Jeffrey C. Barbakow, the chief executive of National Medical Enterprises ("The Job, Thankless; the Challenge, Huge, Let's Go," Profile, July 31), came as quite a shock to those of us who have followed The New York Times's reporting on the psychiatric hospital industry.
Despite a token negative comment from a Congressman, the overall tone was relentlessly upbeat.


Melissa S. Lane, Andrew C. Lovett
Melissa Sharon Lane, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Norman H. Lane of North Hollywood, Calif., is to be married today to Andrew Charles Lovett, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Leon Lovett of Barnet, Hertsfordshire, England.
Rabbi Albert Axelrad is to officiate at the Belmont (Mass.) Country Club.
The bride, 27, graduated summa cum laude from Harvard University, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa.
She is a candidate for a Ph.D. in philosophy at Cambridge University, where she is to become an assistant lecturer in the history department in October.


Corrections
An article last Sunday about residents making use of their New York City roofs misspelled the name of the vice president of the co-op board at 415 East 52d Street.
He is John Skouras.The article also misstated two addresses.
The Hampton House is at 404 East 79th Street, not 69th Street; St.
George Tower is at No. 111, not 11, Hicks Street.


Palestinian Leadership Tramples Rights
To the Editor:
As individuals with a long record of concern for Palestinian rights, we are dismayed by the recent actions of the Palestinian National Authority bearing on human rights and responsible government, practices at variance with the requirements of an open, democratic society and incompatible with pledges made to uphold international human rights standards.


Eve R. Theurer and Carl L. Finger
Eve Rachel Theurer, the daughter of Jack Theurer of Jericho, L.I., and the late Barbara Theurer, is to be married today to Carl Laurence Finger, a son of Dorothy and Kenneth Finger of Scarsdale, N.Y.
Rabbi Lester Bronstein is to perform the ceremony at the Bet Am Shalom Synagogue in White Plains.


Woodhull Director Agrees to Step Down
The executive director of the Woodhull Medical and Mental Health Center in Brooklyn has agreed to resign after a meeting on Friday with the president of the New York City Health and Hospitals Corporation, a spokeswoman for the corporation said yesterday.
The spokeswoman, Sandra Mackay, declined to say why the director, Carlos A. Loran, was stepping down.
But a source familiar with the situation, who spoke on condition of anonymity, said it involved Mr.
Loran's resistance to a plan being carried out by the corporation president, Dr.
Bruce Siegel, to reorganize the management of the city's hospital system.
Neither Mr.
Loran nor Dr.
Siegel could be reached for comment yesterday.


A Deadly Summer Night: 6 Shooting Deaths in 5 Hours
Six New Yorkers were shot to death in disparate parts of the city within five hours beginning late Friday and ending early yesterday morning, the police said.
The violence, which included a double killing, began Friday at 9:30 P.M. in Crown Heights, Brooklyn, when Wayne Johnson, 29, was shot in the head three times, said Officer Scott Bloch, a police spokesman.


Heart-Smart Sailing
To ease cardiac patients' concerns about traveling, the Heart Institute at the University of Pittsburgh Medical Center is sponsoring a Caribbean cruise Jan. 23 to 27, 1995.
The cruise on the Royal Caribbean ship Nordic Empress will combine stops in Freeport, Nassau and Coco Cay in the Bahamas with shipboard programs detailing heart-smart diet, exercise and holiday activities.
Passengers can also consult with a nutritionist, exercise physiologist, physicians and other members of the university's preventive cardiology department.
The cruise, including air fare to Miami, starts at $986 a person.
Contact Judy Austin, Rosenbluth Vacation and Cruise Centers, (800) 828-2040.


Jennifer Feingold, Bradley Horowitz
Jennifer Lisa Feingold, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Manuel Feingold of New York, was married last evening to Bradley Jay Horowitz, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph M. Horowitz of Cresskill, N.J.
Rabbi Elliot Strom performed the ceremony at the Garden City (L.I.) Hotel.
Mrs.
Horowitz, 23, and her husband, 25, graduated from Syracuse University.
She is a second-year student at Brooklyn Law School.
Her father is a private investor.
Her mother, Ellen Feingold, is a speech pathologist with the New York City Board of Education.


Extra! Princess In Phone Shock!
When readers picked up their Sunday morning editions of The News of the World two weeks ago, the weekly -- one of Britain's more sensational tabloids ---- offered a juicy exclusive.
A girlfriend of a man who was once a confidante of the Princess of Wales had been receiving a series of harassing telephone calls, the newspaper reported, and detectives at Scotland Yard had traced the calls to private telephones inside Princess Diana's residence.


F.Y.I.
A Street's Face Card
Q.
Who is the man whose face is portrayed on the large circular (apparently official) signs on street light posts on the Nassau Street pedestrian zone?


Sandra Cook, Marc A. Breslav
Sandra Cook, a speech pathologist at Danbury (Conn.) Hospital, was married yesterday to Marc Arie Breslav, an environmental consultant in Cold Spring, N.Y.
The Rev.
Jane Stolten, an interfaith minister, officiated at Camp Minisink in Dover Plains, N.Y.
The bride, 38, is keeping her name.
She graduated from Boston University and received a master's degree in speech and language pathology from the University of Wisconsin at Madison.
She is the daughter of Carol R. Blount of Princeton, N.J., and Ridgely W. Cook Sr. of Winnetka, Ill.
Her father is a private investor.
Her mother is a nurse at the Princeton (N.J.) Medical Center.
Her great-great-grandfather Dr.
Alpheus Hyatt was a founder of the Marine Biological Laboratory at Woods Hole, Mass.


Deborah Motland, Russell Dekker
Deborah Motland, a daughter of Randall K. Motland of Greenwich, Conn., and the late Elizabeth F. Motland, was married there last evening to Russell Dekker, a son of Marcel and Harriet Dekker, also of Greenwich.
The Rev.
Lynne Kramer, a minister of the United Church of Christ, officiated at the home of the bride's father.
Rabbi Charles D. Lippman took part in the ceremony.
Mrs.
Dekker, 26, is a social worker at Children's Village, a residential treatment center in Dobbs Ferry, N.Y.
She graduated magna cum laude from Northwestern University and received a master's degree in social work from Columbia University.
Her father is the president of Securities Associates, an investment concern in Armonk, N.Y.


No Pain, No Gain for Sampras
He's sitting on the sofa locked into a staring match with the television set as he digests his deli sandwich and daily dose of anti-inflammatories.
There's a channel-changer to fill the void in his racquet hand, and whenever he gets tired of watching golf, he can repair to the four-poster bed in a room he keeps as cool and dark as Dracula's vault, the better to get his beauty sleep.
Or, in his case, his power sleep.
"This is it, this is my life; it's like being a retired person," said Pete Sampras, the world's No. 1 tennis player and the defending champion of the United States Open, the event that is dragging him away from six weeks of forced inactivity.


We Shouldn't Phase Out Medical Specialists; I.B.M. Favors Reform
To the Editor:
"I.B.M. Urges 110,000 Workers to Help Defeat Health-Care Bills" (front page, Aug. 19) implies the International Businesss Machines Corporation is opposed to health care reform.


Trade Center Cooling Plan Stirs Health Fears
Plans to place a new underground waterline and electrical conduits for the World Trade Center's cooling system have tapped a growing fear among residents of Battery Park City: electromagnetic fields.
Bryan Cronin, president of the Gateway Plaza Tenants' Association, said residents were also concerned about noise and vibrations from the 18-month project in its backyard.
"But our main concern," he said, "is that moving the electrical conduits next to the large Con Ed transformer adjacent to our building will create a new electromagnetic field, with increased potential risk for us all."


Habitats/Old Saybrook, Conn.; A Pre-emptive Purchase
THE buyers, a couple from Virginia, had no intention of buying the 1647 Cape Cod on a corner lot in the suburban setting here.
But according to a real estate agent involved in the sale, they felt that if they waited another two years until their retirement there might not be any houses left in the neighborhood they'd selected.


Profile; Giving the Pros a Taste of Their Own Medicine
FOR years, Thomas H. Lee and Leon Black have acquired one company after another, never hesitating to step on toes or raise the temperature to get their way.
But in the battle over the Hills Stores Company, a young upstart named Mark Dickstein is giving the reigning takeover pros a taste of their own medicine.


Prague
No matter the season, Prague is an entrancing city, waiting for the curious to discover its many faces.
The problem is that since the "Velvet Revolution" in 1989, millions of visitors -- make that tens of millions -- have been answering the call every year, turning Prague into one of the most popular European cities for tourists.
Indeed, 70 million visitors entered the Czech Republic last year, and even though many of them were day trippers from Germany, that's more than went to France.
Tourists bring benefits for the Czechs -- over $1 billion in revenues last year, which helped balance the budget.
But there are negative side effects, too.
Prostitution, drugs and pickpockets have become commonplace.
Taxi drivers are notorious for overcharging.
It is best to walk, which is half the fun of Prague anyway, or use the efficient trams and subway, which cost only about 20 cents (calculated at 28 krowns to the dollar).


Photographer 'Plucked From Oblivion'
IN a long photographic career Toni Frissell, a woman born to privilege, took more than 300,000 pictures.
Her work graced the pages of magazines like Vogue, Harpers Bazaar and Life.
Now some of her most memorable images and the story of her career and have been "plucked from oblivion," as George Plimpton of Bridgehampton said in his introduction to a book about her that was one of Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis' last editing projects.


Ben Scotch Mariza Scotch and Diery Prudent
Mariza Ingrid Scotch, a design director at Perry Ellis International in New York, is to be married today to Diery Prudent, a writer and fitness consultant in New York.
The Rev.
Patricia R. Colenback, an Episcopal priest, is to perform the nondenominational ceremony at the Old West Church in Calais, Vt.


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
MINI MYSTERIES
Mysterious and evocative paintings measuring no more than 12 by 12 inches were required for entry in a competition sponsored by the Hopper House Art Center in Nyack.
The results go on display Saturday, and the exhibition is scheduled to run through Oct. 2 at the center, which is at 82 North Broadway.
Twenty winners from Massachusetts, Virginia, Washington, Washington State and the New York City area were identified by the jurors.
They are Robert Monk, vice president of Sotheby's, and Susan Lorence, a private art dealer.


New Zealand Method Of Reading Is Lacking
This is in response to the article about Richard C. Owen and his "re-occurring vision of himself" as a publisher-author-teacher-trainer, based on New Zealand's "natural language learning"  [ "Books, and a New Way to Learn to Read," June 26 ] .
It's hard to tell whether Mr.
Owen is naive or diabolical in leaping into the murky waters of what is obviously our current curricular curse of "whole language" with a new label, but otherwise packing all the same pomp, pap and perfidy.
He mentions as guru Marie Clay, who has been peddling whole language on both sides of the globe, telling gullible educators here that "New Zealand has one of the highest literacy rates in the world." For Americans who can still discern that New Zealand is about as far away as you can get from here on the earth, so is Ms.
Clay's message as far as one can get from the truth about New Zealand's literacy and the results of whole language under any label.


Woodbridge Holds Own In Singles
As Wimbledon champions the last two years and the 1992 Australian Open winners, Todd Woodbridge is a part of one of the world's best doubles team with Mark Woodforde.
But, the 23-year-old Australian is currently laboring to make his tennis career whole once again by elevating his singles ranking to similar heights.
Woodbridge, who three summers ago was ranked No. 31 but now is No. 136, took another step toward a high ranking yesterday by beating Johan Carlsson, 6-2, 6-3, to win one of 16 qualifying spots for men in the United States Open, which starts tomorrow at the National Tennis Center.
Drop the Labels
"I don't call myself a doubles specialist and it does annoy me a little bit that people think of me like that," Woodbridge said.


Player Ownership
To the Sports Editor:
America's national sport is plagued by the perpetual conflict between the rights of management to administer the finances of the game as they see fit and the rights of the players to participate in the profits which, by their skill and talents, they generate.
It seems to me that baseball is about ripe for employee ownership.
Short of this solution, we will be forever condemned to conflict between players and management with the constant threat of strikes and management retribution.


TRANSACTIONS
Football  National Football League  ARIZONA CARDINALS -- Waived Perry Carter and Mose Richardson, cornerbacks; Chris Swartz, quarterback; Darryl Hardy, linebacker; and David Wilkins defensive end.
Signed Karl Dunbar, defensive end.
Placed Garrison Hearst, running back, on the physically-unable-to-perform list.


Streetscapes/The Seligman Mansion, 30 East 56th Street; The Buyer Hopes to Reverse 'Eat Street's' Decline
THINGS don't look good for what the columnist Earl Wilson called "Eat Street," the concentration of restaurants in the old town houses that line 56th Street between Fifth Avenue and Avenue of the Americas.
Over the last 20 years the street's top-quality dinner restaurants have declined, often replaced by delicatessen or lunch-style establishments, and high-end retailers have been moving around the corner from Fifth Avenue.


In California, an Art Center Grown From Fragments
A CLASSIC CHINESE LANDSCAPE painting does not depict an actual place.
It represents an ideal state of harmony between an artist and the universe.
The artist has spent a lifetime contemplating mountains, trees and waterfalls, seeking to merge his life with nature.
The painting records a desire for union with the forces that shape the world.
Can artists today derive something of comparable value from the modern American landscape, in all its paved, malled, strip-mined, landfilled, rusted and Winnebagoed glory?
Yes: J. B. Jackson, the distinguished writer on American landscape, has accomplished this with words.
In his classic essays, Jackson is neither nostalgic about the pastoral past nor enamored of pop suburban sprawl.
He absorbs the natural, he absorbs the man-made, and he extracts from them an infectious confidence that some new order can emerge from the difficult interaction between the two.
A contemporary sense of place may yet arise from a vision wide enough to encompass rivers, trailer camps, prairies, freeways, forests and freedom of movement.


Horrors


Old-Time Religion, Modern Uncertainty
EACH summer since 1831, open-air religious services have been held at Camp Woods in Ossining, providing participants with a chance to find inspiration while experiencing living history.
But this year's sessions, held from July 29 to Aug. 7, could be among the last.
As attendance dwindles, along with the donations that make up the program's entire $10,000 annual budget, this social and religious tradition is enduring a precarious year-to-year existence.


Northridge Comes Up Short in Rain-Delayed Title Game
When it was all over, when the sleeves were wet from wiping tears away, Spencer Gordon of Northridge, Calif., was still worried about the fans.
"I'm looking for a kid named Justin," he said.
"That's the only reason I came out this way. We all signed this shirt he gave us and now I can't find him."


Sanders to Give Falcons a Second Chance
Atlanta Falcons Coach JUNE JONES said yesterday that free agent DEION SANDERS has told him he will give his former club the opportunity to match any offer he receives from another club.
"Basically, Deion has promised us that he'll bring us any offer he gets and see if we can match the thing," said Jones.
"We're kind of operating under that assumption."


Letters Are Acts of Faith
To the Editor:
Vivian Gornick's essay motivates this letter, though I might have phoned to thank her, if her number were handy.


Profile; Giving the Pros a Taste of Their Own Medicine
FOR years, Thomas H. Lee and Leon Black have acquired one company after another, never hesitating to step on toes or raise the temperature to get their way.
But in the battle over the Hills Stores Company, a young upstart named Mark Dickstein is giving the reigning takeover pros a taste of their own medicine.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
BIOGRAPHY  MAD AS HELL  The Life and Work of Paddy Chayefsky.
By Shaun Considine.
Random House, $25.


CURRENCY
Last
Prior
Year
Week
Week
Ago
Japanese Yen
100.45
98.68
103.75
per Dollar
German Mark1.5315
1.5397
1.6640
per Dollar
Canadian Dollar1.3703
1.3758
1.3193
per U.S. Dollar
British Pound1.5315
1.5480
1.5030
U.S. Dollar per British Pound
Gold$383.50
$382.00
$369.25
Republic National Bank
Currency: Friday NY Close


As Time Stands Still, The Seconds Tick By
The clock.
Everyone is waiting for this clock to start running on truly meaningful negotiations in the baseball strike.
Thus far, though, the only clock that is running is the one ticking away the last seconds, minutes and hours of the 1994 season.


Sergeant, Mom, Her Dream Is Still Fenway Park
IN Old Saybrook earlier this summer, Police Sgt.
Jan Bagwell stopped a car containing several teen-age boys for a minor traffic violation and, as she approached the car, heard one of the boys inside identify her to the others: "That's Jeff Bagwell's mother."
It was to be expected.
All summer, in the supermarket, the hardware store, on the street, whether she was on duty or not, people have been stopping her, on duty and off, to inquire how Jeff is doing or to offer congratulations on the game of the night before.


In California, an Art Center Grown From Fragments
A CLASSIC CHINESE LANDSCAPE painting does not depict an actual place.
It represents an ideal state of harmony between an artist and the universe.
The artist has spent a lifetime contemplating mountains, trees and waterfalls, seeking to merge his life with nature.
The painting records a desire for union with the forces that shape the world.
Can artists today derive something of comparable value from the modern American landscape, in all its paved, malled, strip-mined, landfilled, rusted and Winnebagoed glory?
Yes: J. B. Jackson, the distinguished writer on American landscape, has accomplished this with words.
In his classic essays, Jackson is neither nostalgic about the pastoral past nor enamored of pop suburban sprawl.
He absorbs the natural, he absorbs the man-made, and he extracts from them an infectious confidence that some new order can emerge from the difficult interaction between the two.
A contemporary sense of place may yet arise from a vision wide enough to encompass rivers, trailer camps, prairies, freeways, forests and freedom of movement.


Letters Are Acts of Faith
To the Editor:
One of my most interesting, important and exciting relationships is with a man I met for three hours nearly six years ago at a Thanksgiving dinner.
Heiner is a psychologist who lives in Germany, and he loves art, music and traveling with the same passion that I do.
We were drawn to each other immediately the night we met and spent those three hours in an intense exchange of ideas.
We have been writing ever since.


Investors Are Smiling on Oracle Systems' Stock
FROM prince to beast back to prince again?
That appears to be the case with the Oracle Systems Corporation, the computer software company whose shoddy accounting practices led to a $100,000 fine by the Securities and Exchange Commission and $24 million in settlements of shareholder lawsuits.
Oracle's shareholders were stung in the summer of 1990, when the company said it had miscalculated revenues for the five quarters that ended on May 31, 1990.
Shareholder suits ensued, as did a management cleanup that swept away a bevy of executives.


Glory Days
To the Editor:
Many of us can only imagine what time has done to the interior of the New Amsterdam  [ "Reviving a True Classic on West 42d Street," Aug. 14 ] .
There is, however, a remnant of the New Amsterdam's glory days that can bring pleasure to the passersby on the theater's western wall.
On a clear day one can just make out the letters of Florenz Ziegfeld proclaiming his Follies, celebrating "the Utter Glory of the American Girl," and the "Midnight Frolics" on his rooftop theater promising further Ziegfeld magic.
While the observant New Yorker can relish the showman's fading promise, surely by the millennium it will have vanished, fallen prey not to disinterested realtors, but to the sun and to time.
RIAN KEATING  New York


Woodstock's Children
A "WOODSTOCK," AS FUTURE dictionaries may define it, is (1) a mass concert in a reeking mudhole, (2) a party weekend with hundreds of thousands of neighbors, (3) a limited-scale calamity and survival drill, (4) a test of public civility, (5) a generational rite of passage.
Essential elements include soft drugs, some nudity, overwhelmed security, the kindness of strangers and a sense of history being made.
The blueprint came from the 1969 Woodstock festival, which created a happy myth for the baby-boom generation: peace in wartime, fun amid the mess.
Woodstock '94, 25 years later, yielded the same images of joyful tie-dyed dancers and acres of mud-spattered revelers.
And the startling thing was that for so many of the people who came to Saugerties, N. Y., living up to and living through those images was everything they had hoped for.
Suspicious of their boomer legacy, they still wanted to sample it.


Potholes Were Left Out Of Quality-of Life Report
To the Editor:
The Aug. 7 quality-of-life article, "What Makes Us Angry," failed to report on two serious deteriorations: potholes and faulty traffic lights.
Too many of last winter's potholes are still with us, and traffic lights are out of sync all over the city.


Big Law Firm Is Held Liable In Harassment
The world's largest law firm turned a blind eye to complaints that one of its most productive partners was a sexual harasser, a Superior Court jury has decided, ending the first stage of a month-old trial that has put the nation's legal community on notice that it must practice what it preaches.
The jury -- six men and six women who deliberated for two and a half days -- reached its verdict on Friday, finding that the law firm, Baker &amp; McKenzie, had failed to take steps to stop the partner, Martin R. Greenstein, from harassing a legal secretary.
The decision awarded the secretary, Rena Weeks, $50,000 from the firm and Mr.
Greenstein as compensation for her emotional distress.


A Homey Flavor in an Old Roadhouse
ROGER'S has returned.
East Enders with long memories will remember the original at this site in Sagaponack.
The sign at the door says Roger's was founded in 1971, and this is now Roger's Redux, 1994.
Roger Martin, the proprietor, is back on the front lines after 20 years as a restaurant consultant.
He is joined by his daughter Stacey, who earned her stripes at the TriBeCa Bar and Grill in Manhattan, and by Timothy Egan, the chef, who was most recently at Della Femina in East Hampton.


Katie Brown and William J. Gedale
Katie Brown, a landscape designer in Greenwich, Conn., was married yesterday to William Joseph Gedale, the president and chief executive of General American Investors, mutual fund managers in New York.
Judge Louis Caravella of the Greenwich Justice Court officiated at the Homestead Inn in Greenwich.
Ms.
Brown, who is keeping her name, graduated from Smith College and received a certificate in landscape design from the New York Botanical Garden.
She is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
W.
Harry Schwarz schild of Richmond.


Broncos Send Maddox to the Rams
The Denver Broncos traded TOMMY MADDOX to the Los Angeles Rams for a 1995 fourth-round draft pick.
Maddox will likely be the Rams' No. 3 quarterback behind starter CHRIS MILLER and CHRIS CHANDLER.
"It's good to be coming back to a place I've been before instead of a place that's altogether new," said Maddox, a former U.C.L.A. quarterback who was the Broncos' top pick in 1992. (AP)


Whitewaterese
When the recently departed general counsel of the Treasury Department, Jean E. Hanson, characterized a conversation she'd held with Bernard Nussbaum, then the White House counsel, as a "stay-back from the Waco prebrief," she inadvertently opened the gates to heavy linguistic investigation.
Lexicographers tune in to Congressional hearings as a great source of Washington jargon and bureaucratic euphemism.


Dollars Define Cuba's Haves And Have-Nots
When thousands of Cubans rioted against Government security forces here early this month, they shouted slogans against President Fidel Castro.
They also hurled rocks at hotels where dollar-paying foreign tourists were staying and at stores that sell goods only for dollars.
"You work, and you earn 100 pesos a month, and you can't afford to live in this country," said Jose Bolano Rodriguez, whose stepdaughter was arrested in the riot that prompted Mr.
Castro to let people escape freely in rafts.


Sampling the Season Awaiting Audiences
SINCE subscribers pay less for tickets, get better seats, and usually wind up with a variety of other perks, it's a good time to plan for the concerts that await in the coming season.
What follows is by no means a complete list of symphonic activity in the state; consider it rather a sampler to whet your appetite for these and other symphonic series.
The Stamford Symphony leads the orchestral way with a September start at the Palace Theater of the Arts.
Opening night is Sept. 17 at 8:30 P.M. with a repeat at 3 the following afternoon), as the group's music director, Roger Nierenberg, conducts three staples of the repertory, Mendelssohn's Overture to "A Midsummer Night's Dream," Schumann's "Spring" Symphony and Beethoven's Fifth.


Corrections
An article on May 29 about dining in Vancouver misstated the range of the cost of a meal at the Star Anise restaurant.
A reader's letter last month pointed out the error.
A three-course dinner for one person, including a glass of wine and tip but not tax, would be about $27 to $31 in United States currency, not $45 to $58.


In or Out Of Style
To the Editor:
In "Tonality Is Dead: Long Live Tonality"  [ July 31 ] , Michael Beckerman writes that "trying to write tonal music at a place like Columbia University in the 1960's and 70's was like being a dissident in Prague during the same period, with similar professional consequences."


Editorial Notebook; Posturing Over Baseball's Pie
I don't care if the baseball strike ends tomorrow or next year.
I stopped rooting when the Phillies blew a six-game lead with 12 games to go in 1964.
My casual interest in the current strike is coldly professional.
To an economist, the public posturing and much of the commentary seem silly.
Ballplayers are attacked as obscenely greedy; the owners are accused of guile and mercenary calculation.
The accusations seem largely beside any interesting point.
The game throws off huge profits -- far more than what the players could earn doing anything else with their lives and what most of the owners require to remain in business.
As in any sector where large profits are at stake, labor and management fight over the spoils.
Players, owners, fans and pundits can pontificate about who is "right." But centuries of Western discourse have never settled on a principled answer as to who deserves which deserts.


Dr. John J. Untereker, Rehabilitation Specialist, 82
Dr.
John J. Untereker, a specialist in rehabilitative medicine who practiced in New York for more than 30 years, died Aug. 18 at the University of Kentucky Medical Center in Lexington, Ky.
Dr.
Untereker, who lived in Richmond, Ky., was 82.
The cause was an intestinal infarction, said his son Dr. William J. Untereker.


Alison Senold and Douglas Kantor
Alison Adele Senold, a daughter of Meredith Senold of Rockville, Md., and the late Frank Senold, was married on Tuesday to Douglas Stephen Kantor, the son of Mickey Kantor of Washington, the United States trade representative, and the late Valerie W. Kantor.
Paris B. Dixon, a deputy clerk of the Montgomery County Circuit Court in Rockville, officiated at a private ceremony at the courthouse.
A public ceremony is to take place today at Glenview Mansion in Rockville, with Judge Diane Wayne of the Superior Court of Los Angeles County presiding.
The bride, 26, and the bridegroom, 25, graduated from the University of Virginia.
She is studying for a master's degree in social work at Smith College.
Her mother is the director of contracts at the American Institute of Architects in Washington.
Her father was an architect in Annandale, Va.


Christa D'Alimonte, Jason Weinstein
Christa Ann D'Alimonte, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John S. D'Alimonte of Glen Cove, L.I., was married there last evening at Harrison House to Jason Marc Weinstein, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Stephen M. Weinstein of Lake Forest, Ill.
Rabbi Ben Abraham performed the ceremony, and the Rev.
Michael Callahan, a Roman Catholic priest, took part in it.
The bride, 25, is an associate at Shearman &amp; Sterling, a New York law firm.
She and her husband graduated from Princeton University, she cum laude.
The bride received her law degree from Georgetown University.
Her father is a senior partner in Wilkie Farr &amp; Gallagher, the New York law firm.


OTHER PEOPLE'S WHEAT
THERE'S A FRAMED COLOR PORTRAIT OF gleaming trucks and combines in the trailer that is home to Belinda and Delton Robison as they follow the ripening wheat from Texas in the early spring to Montana, where it sometimes snows on the harvest.
Delton likes shiny things and trades his six combines in every year, the way some people trade in Cadillacs.
The cockpit of one of this year's four-wheel-drive John Deere 9600's is an air-conditioned tinted glass box that floats two stories above the dusty chaos of the wheat field.
Looking out from Delton's brown leatherette seat, with country music coming over the stereo, the orderly rows of wheat below seem distant.
The roar of the spinning header is no louder than a comforting hum as it chops the grain and feeds it into the heart of the combine, where a large steel cylinder rubs against a concave plate to free the berries from the chaff.


The Cairo Conference
A week from now thousands of people from all over the world will gather in Cairo for the once-in-a decade International Conference on Population and Development.
Like the conferences in 1974 and 1984, this one will deal with a population explosion that despite the extraordinary worldwide acceptance of family-planning programs still threatens to impoverish the planet.
In the earlier meetings, women were on the edge of the discussion.
Now they are at center stage because, as Timothy Wirth, Under Secretary of State for Global Affairs, put it, "We must recognize that women know . . . what they need, and they must be equal partners in programs and policies."


On Sunday; Of a Fear In the Back Of the Mind
WHEN black transit cops don plainclothes to go down into the subways to catch robbers, rapists, pickpockets and muggers they carry one abiding fear:
Other cops.
Particularly backups rushing to help them if they make an arrest or confront a thug.


Data Bank/August 28, 1994
Data Bank/August 28, 1994
New Orders for Durable Goods
July
June
May
Monthly percent change
-4.2
1.2
1.4
Gross Domestic Product
II Q'94
I Q'94
IV Q'93
1987 dollars, in percent
3.8
3.3
6.3
3-Month Treasury Bills
Aug. 26
Aug. 19
Aug. 12
Rate in percent
4.54
4.54
4.35
30-Year Treasury Bonds
Yield in percent
7.48
7.49
7.50
Crude Oil, W. Texas Intermediate
Friday spot price, per barrel
$17.14
$17.58
$18.05
Auto Production
In units, weekly total
119,127
126,754
117,619
Truck Production
In units, weekly total
119,556
122,359
109,101
Weekly Jobless Claims
Aug. 19
Aug. 12
Aug. 5
In thousands
322
325
325


Defiantly Deaf
THE PROTESTS AT THE LEXINGTON CENTER, WHICH includes New York's oldest Deaf school, are an important stage in the Deaf struggle for civil rights, and on April 25, the first day of student demonstrations, I ask an African-American from the 11th grade whether she has also demonstrated for race rights.
"I'm too busy being Deaf right now," she signs.
"My two older brothers aren't Deaf, so they're taking care of being black. Maybe if I have time I'll get to that later."
A Deaf woman standing nearby throws in a question for my benefit: "If you could change being Deaf or being black, which would you do?" The student looks confused, and is suddenly shy.
Her signing gets smaller, as though she doesn't want everyone to see it.
"Both are hard," she signs back.


Aug. 21-27: Sifting the Ashes; Brave Firefighters' Mistakes Led to Tragedy, Inquiry Says
The Federal investigation into the Colorado mountain blaze that killed 14 firefighters last month found that the victims' risky behavior was largely to blame for the tragedy.
The report, a 150-page document released in Denver last week, said the "can-do attitude of supervisors and firefighters" led to a compromising of standard safety procedures, including the failure to plot an escape route.


Colonial Affair Repels Devil His Due's Charge
In the best and quirky traditions of Saratoga racing, Colonial Affair confused the race for year-end honors for senior horses today when he beat Devil His Due to the wire by a nose in the $350,000 Whitney Handicap.
It was only the second victory in 10 starts for Colonial Affair since he won the Belmont Stakes last year, but it was a major one.
He ran next to last for half a mile, while Contract Court, stalked by Williamstown, was setting the pace.
Then Colonial Affair kicked back into the race with a powerful move as they turned for home.
He pulled clear by two and one-half lengths as he and Devil His Due swept past the leaders and staged a sizzling duel to the wire.


Mary L. Neary and John M. Rubin
Mary Louise Neary, a daughter of Mimi G. Neary of Montclair, N.J., and Gerald C. Neary of Belle Mead, N.J., was married last evening at Highlawn Pavilion in West Orange, N.J., to John Mark Rubin, the son of Joan S. Frieder of Philadelphia and Mark S. Rubin of Cherry Hill, N.J.
The Rev.
Gerard Graziano, a Roman Catholic priest, officiated.
Rabbi Philip Berkowitz took part in the ceremony.


Corrections
The Westchester Q&amp;A column last Sunday about Dr.
Lenise Dolen misidentified the organization of which she is vice president.
It is the National Association of Professional Geriatric Care Managers.


Where Native Brooklynites Caught Their Fish
To the Editor:
In "The Compleat Urban Angler" (Aug. 21), no mention was made of the Canarsie Pier at exit 13 of the Belt Parkway in Brooklyn.


Midnight in Dozza
To the Editor: James Sturz's article "Wall-to-Wall Art in Dozza" (Aug. 14) was a wonderful 44th birthday present: Dozza was the last stop on my most memorable trip to Italy.
In October 1992, my sister Linda and I toured off-the-beaten-track Italy by car.
I wanted to show why I visited Italy year after year.
Avoiding the main tourist sites (she could always return and see them on her own) we set out for the more remote Italy: Viterbo instead of Rome, Herculaneum instead of Pompeii, Alberobello instead of Bari.
Having lingered too long at almost every stop, we had to cancel plans to visit Dozza and Ferrara and head straight for Bologna, our departure city.


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
The No-Phone Zone
HOW annoying is a cellular phone conversation when you're not involved in one?
So annoying that this summer the Long Island Rail Road established no-phone zones on trains to the Hamptons.
"It's a long journey to the East End," Sam Zambuto of the railroad said, "and the customers on the cars want to relax. They don't care to hear other people's telephone conversations."


Lynne W. Beers, Jeffrey K. Walters
Lynne Whitney Beers, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas Whitney Beers of Old Lyme, Conn., was married there yesterday to Jeffrey King Walters, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
G.
King Walters of Houston.
The Rev.
David Good performed the ceremony at the First Congregational Church.
Mrs.
Walters, 30, is a social worker at St.
Joseph Services for Children and Families in Brooklyn.
She graduated from Middlebury College and received a master's degree in social work from New York University.
Her father and her mother, Judith Beers, own Sudberry House, a manufacturer of wooden accessories for needlework in Old Lyme.


JAVA JIVE
Where was Jim Frederick when I needed him (On Language: "Java Jive," July 31).
In the early 1960's, I was one of a group of advertising copywriters who ate together every Friday.
In Italian restaurants, our more sophisticated buddies introduced us to espresso, which was just then becoming popular.
They told us that, in French restaurants, the equivalent of espresso was a demitasse.
But even though it arrived jet black, in an espresso cup, demitasse didn't have the same bite.
After a few months, I asked a waiter what a demitasse was.
He replied, "A half cup of regular coffee." NEIL LEONARD New York, N.Y.


What's in a Symbol? A Lot, the M.T.A. Is Betting
Would New York City's transit system by any other name still be the same confusing tangle of rail and bus lines in the eyes of the riders?
The Metropolitan Transportation Authority thinks not, and it is spending $3 million to prove it.
Over the next four years, the authority plans to replace the myriad names and logos used by its five subsidiaries with a uniform M.T.A. logo and somewhat simpler names, though not necessarily shorter ones.
The Metro-North Commuter Railroad, for instance, becomes the M.T.A.
Metro-North Railroad, while the Metropolitan Suburban Bus Authority becomes M.T.A.
Long Island Bus.


Fear of Frying: The Real Skinny on Low Fat
TAKING a combative stand against dietary fat these days is easy, like showing up for a debate and learning that the other side called in sick.
But even though the new anti-fat books all wave the same banner, they're not all on the same team.
Some are driven by extreme health concerns -- offering food as medicine that just might prevent a second heart attack, for instance.
Some are clearly the work of food phobics, who are easy to spot; they may talk a lot about the "filth" in the food supply and reserve their most passionate focus for the foods that need to be avoided (you can almost hear them hiss as they use the phrase "animal products").
And then there are those authors who still love food for its abiding satisfactions and have taken the injunction to lower fat as a challenge to preserve the art of cooking.


Interior Secretary Endures Storms From All Directions
INTERIOR SECRETARY BRUCE BABBITT has been fighting forest fires this summer, donning a yellow fireproof shirt and taking up a shovel in hot spots from the Colorado Rockies to the Washington Cascades.
He says he enjoys staring down a wall of flames.
Fires may actually be a relief compared with the heat Mr.
Babbitt has faced from the two extremes in the debate over how to manage nearly 500 million acres of public land.
In Wyoming last month, Mr.
Babbitt surprised opponents when he showed up at a barbecue and ranchers' rally against his policies.
Beef was on the spit, but the grill was hottest under Mr.
Babbitt.
Speaker after speaker ridiculed the 56-year-old Interior Secretary.
Through it all, he chatted and swapped stories with the crowd, as if he were just another cowboy.


Esme L. Usdan, James C. Snyder
Esme L. Usdan, the daughter of Nathaniel and Suzanne Usdan of New York, is to be married today to James C. Snyder, the son of James and Lynn Snyder of Toms River, N.J.
Rabbi David Posner is to perform the ceremony at the bride's parents' house in Greens Farms, Conn.
The bride is an interior designer in New York.
She graduated from Yale University and the Parsons School of Design.
Her father is the president of Heller &amp; Usdan, a paper converting company in Moonachie, N.J.
Her mother is the president of the Lemberg Foundation in New York, which supports education and the arts.


Wigstock Gets a Waterfront Home
Wigstock, the annual Labor Day drag festival ousted from Tompkins Square Park, has found a new, if temporary, home at the Christopher Street waterfront.
The date is set for next Sunday, Labor Day Eve, in deference to Monday's Jewish holiday of Rosh ha-Shanah.
This year's festival, marking its 10th anniversary, will feature drag stars like RuPaul and Julia Sweeney.
Organizers are preparing for up to 25,000 visitors.


Vibrant Branch Not Slowed by N.A.A.C.P. Turmoil
The T-shirts that some white students at Stratford High School in Berkeley County just north of here wore last spring were emblazoned with the Confederate battle flag and the phrase: "One Hundred Percent Cotton. And you picked it." School officials allowed the students to wear these shirts.
But when Shellmira Green, a 17-year-old black honor student, wore a T-shirt with the Confederate flag motif done up in the red, black and green colors of African liberation, she was suspended from school.
She and her mother contended that the school's action was discriminatory and violated her First Amendment rights.
So they called the North Charleston branch of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People for help.


Aug. 21-27; Washington's Pyrrhic Vacation
In the rush for the exits after the curtain finally fell last week on Capitol Hill, Bill Clinton and family took the lead.
By Friday night they were holed up on Martha's Vineyard, where they aim over 12 days to forget what has made summer in Washington seem an endless struggle.
For the President, for Congress and for their many aides, this abrupt interruption of the legislative tussle is a welcome respite from late-night debate and six-day weeks.
It provides relief, however curtailed, for those who had begun to stare mournfully at non-refundable tickets, bringing on at last the summertime transition from flourescent light to sunshine, from wingtips to bare feet.
For the White House, which rented beds for staff and Secret Service agents on the Massachusetts island beginning last Monday, it grants a pardon from the ignominy of asking taxpayers to pay for empty rooms.


Janine Spinnato, Sean P. Leyden
Janine Madeline Spinnato, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph E. Spinnato of Woodbury, L.I., was married yesterday to Sean Patrick Leyden, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Gerard Leyden of Southbury, Conn.
The Most Rev.
Henry J. Mansell, the vicar for administration of the Roman Catholic Archdiocese of New York, performed the ceremony at St.
Patrick's Cathedral.
Mrs.
Leyden, 25, and her husband, 26, graduated from Fairfield University.
The bride received a law degree from St.
John's University in June, and she is to become an associate next month at Epstein, Becker &amp; Green, a New York law firm.
Her father, a former New York City Fire Commissioner, is the president of the Hotel Association of New York City.


Writing on the Wall (And Door, Stoop...)
Stencils are everywhere, as much a part of the city's raucous, in-your-face decor as Times Square's neon.
"These things usually fade away or get covered up," said Darren Port, 28, a designer who has been photographing them for a decade.
But if the city has a stencil hall of fame, it's along Mercer Street below Houston, where the designs tend to remain.
Herewith, Mr.
Port's catalogue of a serendipitous stencil museum.


Maxwell Hahn Dies; Charity Director, 94
Maxwell Hahn, an executive of the Field Foundation in New York from 1941 to 1965, died on Wednesday at the Mount San Antonio Gardens retirement home in Claremont, Calif.
He was 94.
The cause was a stroke, said his son, Philip M. Hahn.


Aug. 21-27; Dial 'D' for Distressed
The Princess of Wales says she is not a phone pest.
"You can't be serious," Princess Diana told a London reporter she summoned to a three-hour private audience last weekend.
"I don't know how to use a parking meter, let alone a phone box."
That the Princess felt compelled to mount her own spirited defense was a measure of her pique over a detailed report, published last Sunday in another newspaper, that the police had traced scores of harassing telephone calls made to a London art dealer back to her residence, as well as to her car phone and pay telephones near Kensington Palace.


Knock-Off Fever Leaves Streets for the Storefronts
For many years, in different pockets of the city, street vendors have offered "Gucci" bags, "Calvin Klein" clothes and "Rolex" watches, illegal knockoffs of expensive brands.
But a strip of stores along the Grand Concourse and East Fordham Road are taking a more benign version of knockoff fever to new, sometimes humorous levels.
Shoppers can stop at Cap Kidz, break for lunch at Kennedy Fried Chicken, and wander off to Toys.
The Bronx's strongest retailing district, the area boasts more than 325 stores, most discount or mid-end.
But it is also dotted with signs evoking -- in name, design or spirit -- those of national retailers.


And Now for Something Completely Different


AIDS in the Heartland
MY OWN COUNTRY A Doctor's Story of a Town and Its People in the Age of AIDS.
By Abraham Verghese. 347 pp.
New York: Simon &amp; Schuster. $23.


BEHIND THE WHEEL/1995 Aurora; Olds Is Hitching Its Hopes to A Rising Starship
WHEN you look at Oldsmobile's slick new Aurora, it's hard to believe that only a couple of years ago there were mutterings inside General Motors about killing off the Olds division.
And when you think about Oldsmobile's history, the whole notion is even more preposterous.
Olds, of course, is one of America's oldest car nameplates, established in 1897 and flourishing long before it came into the G.M. fold in 1908.


Kathleen Hixson, Kenneth Langan
Kathleen Hixson, a daughter of Patricia N. Hixson of Red Bank, N.J., and the late Richard E. Hixson, was married yesterday to Kenneth James Langan, a son of Walter and Jean Langan of Ocean Pines, Md.
The Rev.
Jane Rockman performed the Episcopal ceremony at the Church of the Ascension in New York.
Ms.
Hixson, 38, is an associate in the Los Angeles office of Rogers &amp; Wells, a New York law firm.
She graduated from the Manhattan School of Music and received a law degree from Fordham University.
Her father was a bass trombonist with the Casals Festival Orchestra.
Her mother is a violinist and a music teacher in Red Bank.


Letters Are Acts of Faith
To the Editor:
What a wonderful, contemplative, interesting piece!
Ms.
Gornick shows that "the world I find myself in" makes calls increasingly necessary.
But I'm old fashioned.
A letter is better.


PLAYING IN THE NEIGHBORHOOD
CHELSEA  An Old Cookie Jar? And at Such a Price?
Need an old cookie jar? Or how about an old sofa? Or maybe you need a Louis XIV chair?


S. J. Crowell, T. B. Saltonstall
Stephanie Jane Crowell, a daughter of Nancy D. Crowell of Burlington, Vt., and Christopher S. Crowell of Old Lyme, Conn., was married yesterday to Thomas Bourne Saltonstall, a son of Elizabeth Z. Chace of Providence, R.I., and Robert Saltonstall Jr. of Boston.
The Rev.
Mark Eppinger-Mendes, a Congregational minister, performed the ceremony at Point Gammon Lighthouse on Great Island, West Yarmouth, Mass.
Mrs.
Saltonstall and her husband, both 29, graduated from the University of Vermont.
The bride is the manager of the Greenwich Polo Club in Greenwich, Conn., and the Saratoga Polo Association in Saratoga, N.Y.
The bridegroom is an account manager at Structural Graphics, a three-dimensional advertising design company in Essex, Conn.
The bride's father is the company's president.


THE PRESIDENT'S PAST
Emerson stated that a "foolish consistency is the hobgoblin of little minds." President Clinton's is not a little mind.
By mastering the art of compromise, he has been able to achieve a remarkable amount of beneficial legislation in a short time.
The problem is that we have become accustomed to seeing mediocre minds in action and cannot adjust to watching an excellent one -- coupled with a caring heart -- in action.
JEAN MCGEEHEE Mentone, Ala.


Treating Urban Shocks With Wartime Methods
It has been more than a year since her 18-year-old son was gunned down in East New York and she still bears the deep emotional scars from that day.
She remembers vividly the day he was born, their last conversations and when the police arrived to tell her the bad news.


CLINTON WILL OPEN TALKS WITH CUBA ON REFUGEE CRISIS
The Clinton Administration announced today that it would open limited talks with Cuba on immigration matters in the hope of defusing the refugee crisis.
Along with bad weather, which again today apparently lowered the number of Cubans taking to boats or rafts to flee, the agreement to hold talks gave the Administration its first reason to hope that the flood of refugees, which began early this month, might be brought under control.


Train to Fiumicino
To the Editor: On a recent trip we made some discoveries about the rail shuttle between Rome's central railway station and Leonardo da Vinci Airport, or Fiumicino.
The new trains are clean, fast and inexpensive: 12,000 lire one way, roughly $8.
But locating the train can be frustrating.
On Sunday, July 3, we set off for Stazione Termini to get an 8 A.M. train to the airport that we hoped would allow plenty of time to check in for our flight, scheduled to leave at 9:40.


'Movie Star' Meant Something; So Did 'Gangster'
PLAYLAND By John Gregory Dunne. 494 pp. New York: Random House. $25.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
ISRAELI HISTORY  A PROPHET  FROM AMONGST YOU  The Life of Yigael Yadin:  Soldier, Scholar, and Mythmaker  of Modern Israel.
By Neil Asher Silberman.
Addison-Wesley, $29.95.


World Markets; Can Italy's Government Get It Together?
ITALIANS showed the remarkable ability this year to reward Silvio Berlusconi for his victory in last March's national elections by scooping up shares on the Milan stock market in unheard of volumes for about one month and then, after Mr.
Berlusconi and his political partners stumbled from one gaffe to the next, to simply walk away.
That, in effect, explains the frenzied buying last spring that sent the Mibtel index of shares to a high in May of about 13,500, only to deflate in dribs and drabs ever since, to 11,004 when the market closed this week


An Upset in the Cane Pace
From a betting perspective, Cam's Card Shark was made invisible before the start of last night's $391,780 Cane Pace at Yonkers Raceway.
But from a racing perspective, the 3-year-old superstar colt failed to make his presence felt.


Residential Resales
In the following reports, the "listed at" price is the asking price when negotiations began that ended in the sale.
Time on market is from most recent listing to contract.
MANHATTAN
GREENWICH VILLAGE  $535,000
710 Broadway (4th St.)  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 3,200-sq.-ft. loft co-op; elevator, 2 fireplaces, 11-ft. ceilings, terrace; maintenance $2,118, 67% tax deductible, listed at $595,000, 5 weeks on market (Brokers: Albert Ashford; Ambrose Mar-Elia)


The Return of the Punk Girl Native
For five years, three young women from Minneapolis crisscrossed the country in a dented, wheezing van in search of punk rock clubs willing to give their band, Babes in Toyland, a chance to play.
In a new book, "Babes in Toyland: The Making and Selling of a Rock-and-Roll Band," Neal Karlen recounts the threesome's rise from garage band to their discovery by Warner Brothers Records.
In this excerpt, the band returns home triumphant with a spot on the 1993 Lollapalooza tour.
IT WAS MINUTES BEFORE show time, and the three members of Babes in Toyland were pretending not to hear the sound of 40,000 stomping feet that was shaking their dressing room in the bowels of the sold-out St.
Paul Civic Center.
The group had been truly famous for only two weeks since they'd joined Lollapalooza so sometimes they forgot they'd alchemized into the most lionized female rock band on the planet.
Living inside Lollapalooza's traveling cocoon, the Babes had barely begun synthesizing the fact that they were suddenly known.


Letters Are Acts of Faith
To the Editor:
As I write to you, my phone has been broken for five days.
How heartened I was to open the Book Review and find Vivian Gornick's essay.
Yes!
I told myself.
Quit sulking, girl, and start writing.


RESULTS PLUS
FOOTBALL  Raiders Nip Oilers With 2-Point Play  Billy Joe Hobert threw a 15-yard touchdown pass to Charles Jordan, who made an acrobatic catch in the end zone, and hit Daryl Hobbs for a 2-point conversion pass with 28 seconds to play, rallying the Los Angeles Raiders to a 24-23 exhibition victory over the Oilers in Houston yesterday.
The Oilers rallied from a 16-9 deficit to lead by 23-16 in the fourth quarter.
Bucky Richardson led the Oilers on a drive to a field goal and then threw a 3-yard touchdown pass to John Henry Mills to put Houston ahead. (AP)


In the Region/Connecticut; Foxwoods' Expansion Plans Trouble the Region
THESE are unsettled times in southeastern Connecticut.
Electric Boat and related arms industries in Groton and New London eliminated more than 8,000 jobs.
And the Mashantucket Pequots are buying up land for expansion with profits from their Foxwoods gambling casino, while patrons and 9,000 employees clog local roads 24 hours a day.
The next six months promise to be even more unsettled if the Federal Government approves plans for a second gambling casino by the Mohegan tribe in Montville across the Thames River from Foxwoods and lets the Mashantuckets annex a large parcel of land.


In California, an Art Center Grown From Fragments
A CLASSIC CHINESE LANDSCAPE painting does not depict an actual place.
It represents an ideal state of harmony between an artist and the universe.
The artist has spent a lifetime contemplating mountains, trees and waterfalls, seeking to merge his life with nature.
The painting records a desire for union with the forces that shape the world.
Can artists today derive something of comparable value from the modern American landscape, in all its paved, malled, strip-mined, landfilled, rusted and Winnebagoed glory?
Yes: J. B. Jackson, the distinguished writer on American landscape, has accomplished this with words.
In his classic essays, Jackson is neither nostalgic about the pastoral past nor enamored of pop suburban sprawl.
He absorbs the natural, he absorbs the man-made, and he extracts from them an infectious confidence that some new order can emerge from the difficult interaction between the two.
A contemporary sense of place may yet arise from a vision wide enough to encompass rivers, trailer camps, prairies, freeways, forests and freedom of movement.


RECORD BRIEF
Crawford: Violin Sonata, Three Songs to Poems by Carl Sandburg, 'Piano Study in Mixed Accents,' Other Works Patricia Berlin, mezzo-soprano; Ida Kavafian, violinist; Joseph Bloch and Vivian Fine, pianists; Lark Quintet.
CRI CD 658; CD.


Building Homes of Sweat and Dreams
THE pride in Elyse Fernandez's voice is unmistakable as she describes in loving detail how she and her husband transformed a livable, but bare- bones, three-bedroom apartment in the southwest section of this city into their personal vision of the American dream.
"When we moved in six years ago, we just had the basics," said Mrs.
Fernandez, a housekeeper who lives with her husband and two teen-age sons in a tidy brick building on Elliott Avenue.
"My husband and I did everything ourselves, from installing sliding doors in the bathroom to putting in new kitchen floors. We also sanded and polished the brick wall. My husband is a handyman, and we try to do everything together."


Repeat After Pete: It's Boomer, It's Boomer, It's Boomer
It may not be a controversy, but it sure is a puzzlement.
With the Jets' preseason over, having ended Friday night for the second straight week on an upbeat, Pete Carroll-kind-of-rah-rah-finish, they now face the real world: the season's opener against Buffalo next Sunday.


U.S. 3:50 Milers
To the Sports Editor:
Marc Bloom evokes a happier time in track and field here and makes a number of useful suggestions for increasing the sport's popularity ("Track and Field: A Sport With Everything but an Audience in the U.S.," The Times, Aug. 21).


Letters Are Acts of Faith
To the Editor:
Vivian Gornick's meditations on letter writing and the telephone ("Letters Are Acts of Faith; Telephone Calls Are a Reflex," July 31) brought me back to my first work-study job in college, at the Schlesinger Library of Radcliffe College, where I photocopied a deteriorating collection of late 19th-century correspondence onto acid-free paper.
A truly menial task, to be sure, but not boring: the letters were written by a young couple whose families would not permit them to see each other, so they continued their romance by writing to each other several times a day, over a period of several years. (Eventually the families relented, and they were married.) Their letters were everyday life and at the same time poetic, full of personality; it's hard to imagine the same spirit in a telephone conversation.
PHILIP RESNIK  Arlington, Mass.


This Week's Numbers
Last
Consensus
Period
Estimates
(I.D.E.A. INC.)
Monday
Personal income, July, percent change
0.1
0.5
Tuesday
New-home sales, July, thousands
635
625
Consumer confidence index, August
91.6
92.0
Wednesday
Leading indicators, July, percent change
0.2
0.1
Purchasing managers' index, August
63.0
63.8
Thursday
Weekly jobless claims, thousands
322
325
Construction spending, July, pct. change
0.2
0.4
Friday
Nonfarm payroll, Aug., change, thousands
259
250
Unemployment rate, August
6.1
6.1
This Week's Numbers
Monday
British financial markets closed
Thursday
Chain stores release August sales data


A SENSE OF PLACE
VERY well.
The State of New Jersey wants to take over Newark's troubled school system.
So.
When will the State of New Jersey take over my troubled garage?
Oh, sure, you say: the Newark school district is battling the takeover, and the educational future of an entire city is at stake.
You say my garage is thoroughly undeserving of serious attention in comparison with truly weighty considerations.


Sarah A. Christy and Luis P. Velasco
Sarah Alden Christy, the daughter of David S. Christy Sr. of New York and Barbara W. Grant of San Diego, was married yesterday to Luis Pablo Velasco, a son of Luis H. Velasco Russo and L. Genoveva Carrera de Velasco of Quito, Ecuador.
The Rev.
Alex Viola performed the Episcopal ceremony at the Woodfield Inn in Flat Rock, N.C.
Ms.
Christy, 29, is keeping her name.
She is an associate projects manager in the instructional and training division at Soza &amp; Company, a government and information services firm in Fairfax, Va.
She graduated from the University of Kansas and received a master's degree in journalism from Columbia University.


Giants Aren't Loaded Enough for These Bears
Their names are Steve Walsh and Shane Matthews.
And, no, they don't have Super Bowl rings on their fingers.
It was not a good sign for the Giants when, in their final preseason game, turkeys like Walsh and Matthews were doing the carving instead of vice-versa.
The Chicago Bears' quarterbacks, thanks to very little pressure from the Giants' defensive line and poor tackling once a pass was caught, looked like Pee Wee, Super Bowl, and all-universe champions.
What's the National Football League world coming to when the Bears' neolithic offense is stuffing the ball down the Giants' throats?


Neutral Sites
To the Sports Editor:
For 80 of my 88 years I have been an avid baseball fan, but for the purpose of this letter not a partisan one.
When there were no more games to see, I felt a great anger, soon replaced by a deep sadness.
I strongly suggest the following:


Woods Rules Both Long And Short
Officially, the margin of victory for Tiger Woods in today's United States Amateur semifinal was 5 and 3, and he shook hands with another beaten opponent at the 15th green at the Stadium Course on the TPC at Sawgrass.
But in reality, the match was over at the ninth hole, when Woods wrote yet another chapter in the growing legend that one day will come to be known as "Tiger Tales."
Woods, 2-up and rolling inexorably over Eric Frischette, stepped up to his ball in the fairway.
On a big par 5 that measures 582 yards, he had outdriven Frischette by 30 yards, and he had 283 yards to the pin.
He held a 3-wood, there was a slight breeze in his face, and he was about to rip it.


We Shouldn't Phase Out Medical Specialists; Big Blue's Message
To the Editor:
How much did I.B.M. pay its vice chairman, Paul J. Rizzo, to prepare an electronic mail message urging I.B.M. workers to help defeat two Democratic health care bills (front page, Aug. 19)?
What did it cost the company to distribute the message on its computer system?


When Broadway Meets the Midway, It's Big Business
ON the surface, state fairs have shed their rustic ways.
But at heart they haven't changed much.
These giant postcards of Americana have somehow managed not to sacrifice their hog-pulling, cotton-candy roots as they've sprouted into very big businesses indeed.
Just look at the Wisconsin State Fair, which drew close to a million fairgoers at its 11-day run earlier this month.
Rural rubbed shoulders with urban, old with new.
Farmers in overalls munched turkey legs alongside bikers in Harley-Davidson T-shirts.
Local brewery workers and Mediterranean Leghorn roosters stared at each other in the Poultry Barn.
Wide-eyed children watched jumpers swan-dive off a 14-story Bungee jump, cheered the Miller High Life Pig Racing contest or climbed the World's Largest Piggy Bank (16 feet high).


Do Foster Parents Need Special Training?
No wonder the state has trouble finding a sufficient number of foster homes ("Foster Care for the Older Children," Aug. 14), and it is not because of economics -- the monthly stipend and other benefits more than pay the cost of caring for a child and may even constitute a windfall for some families.
A bigger problem may well be the 10-week training requirement.
I have a couple of acres of lawn and woods, a swimming pool and access to a private beach as well as to other recreational facilities.
Several years ago I had a couple of empty bedrooms and wanted to take in for the summer months two children whose summer would otherwise consist of watching television in steamy apartments.
I have brought up three children of my own, I have a degree in psychology and I have 15 years' experience with Fresh Air Fund guests, as many as four at a time.
I was a chairman of the Fresh Air Fund in this area for several years.


Profile; Giving the Pros a Taste of Their Own Medicine
FOR years, Thomas H. Lee and Leon Black have acquired one company after another, never hesitating to step on toes or raise the temperature to get their way.
But in the battle over the Hills Stores Company, a young upstart named Mark Dickstein is giving the reigning takeover pros a taste of their own medicine.


The New Prejudice Against Letting Visitors Get Lost
ONCE UPON A TIME, THE GREAT European museums did not see it as a moral duty to guide their visitors.
It was assumed, on the contrary, that if visitors were bright enough to walk into the museum they would also be bright enough to find their way around.
They did not want, and did not need, a semaphore system to keep them on track.
If quite another point of view was put forward in the United States, it was because it has always been the role of American museums to provide a community service rather than to put the specialist first.
Sometimes that role seems to have grated.
As long ago as 1954 there was a director of the Metropolitan Museum who said "We get them into the museum, and what do they look at? One thing after another. If they come to a fire hose, they look at that too."


Top Volleyballers Find the Shore Ideal
THE surf pounded the shore and the sky was clear blue as a bronzed 6-foot-4-inch volleyball player, Karch Kiraly, dug his feet into the sand and lunged forward.
Mr.
Kiraly, a two-time Olympian indoor volleyball gold medalist, spiked the ball over the net, scoring in a spirited two-player game that NBC-TV covered live on a recent Saturday.
Beach volleyball, which began as a sport that epitomized the California good life, has come east to the sandy shores of Belmar.
The town is a favorite site for the Association of Volleyball Professionals tours as well as a mecca for amateur beach volleyball players.


Whose Backyard Should Feel the Impact?
"Rail Proposal Pits Backyards vs. Trains"  [ July 24 ]  is the first literal example of the Not In My Back Yard syndrome -- or Nimby -- that I have seen.
This term is usually applied to the attitude of citizens toward the siting of projects somewhere within what they perceive to be an area that will have a detrimental impact on the quality of their lives.
In this case, the residents purchased their property with the full knowledge that a major commuter railway was going through their backyards; they knowingly encroached onto the right-of-way with their gardens, patios, etc.


Sports of The Times; The Owners Should Have Let It Alone
AFTER watching the baseball owners bumble into this nasty standoff with the players, I am convinced they never grew up with the old folk adage, "If it ain't broke, don't fix it."
This is the wisdom I keep passing on to the college football people when they mess with their traditions.
They ought to study the baseball owners, who wanted to atone for their own clumsy spending in the past: Stop me before I spend again.
The owners called for an artificial cap on salaries, so now the clodhoppers have an industry-threatening strike on their hands.


Up-to-Date Albania
The end of Communist rule in Albania has meant that visitors can sidestep state-run tours and travel on their own.
The 256-page "Blue Guide to Albania" (Norton, $17.95) offers an introduction to the history, culture and points of interest.
It was by James Pettifer, a British journalist specializing in the Balkans.


Anne E. Hoare, Michael Nassar
Anne Elizabeth Hoare, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
George P. Hoare Jr. of Short Hills, N.J., was married there yesterday to Michael Charles Nassar, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Odell J. Nassar of Wyckoff, N.J.
Msgr.
William P. Devine performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at St.
Rose of Lima Church.
Mrs.
Nassar and her husband, both 28, are graduates of Lynchburg College.
She is a product specialist for Polo Ralph Lauren in New York.
Her father is a senior partner in the New York law firm of Rogers &amp; Wells and is also a first vice president of the New Jersey Intellectual Property Law Association.


U.S. to Pay Victims of Copter Downings in Iraq
The United States will pay $100,000 to each of the families of the 11 foreign citizens killed when United States F-15 jets accidentally shot down two American helicopters over northern Iraq in April, the Defense Department says.
Defense Secretary William J. Perry ordered the unusual payments "in recognition of the unique circumstances related to the aircraft accident," which killed six military officers from Britain, France and Turkey, and five Kurdish workers employed by the United States, the Pentagon said in a statement issued Friday.


New Chinatown, New Territories
MALAYSIA AND INDONESIA ++ (212) 267-0088; 18 Doyers Street, near Bowery; $; no credit cards
There's not much atmosphere or comfort here, except on the the menu.
Among recommended dishes are the Indonesian curry soups: soto ayam, an aromatic broth filled with shredded chicken, fried potato dumplings, slices of hard-cooked egg and pressed rice, and asam shrimp, which combines shrimp in their shells and okra in a tart and sweet tamarind broth.
Another good way to begin is with the special Indonesia and Malaysia cakes, made of glutinous rice rolled around a minced fish mixture, steamed in banana leaf and served with a tomato-chili dipping sauce.
Other options include skate with onion, ginger, garlic and chili steamed in banana leaves and keow teow, a rice noodle dish stir-fried with pork, shrimp, egg and bean sprouts. ($25 and Under: 4/8/94)  MANDARIN COURT


Emily A. Ferman, R. A. Catalano Jr.
Emily Allison Ferman, the daughter of Audrey and Edward Ferman of Cornwall, Conn., was married there yesterday to Robert Anthony Catalano Jr., the son of Anne E. Mitchell of Marlborough, Mass., and Mr.
Catalano Sr. of Bailey Island, Me.
Kenneth Keskinen, a justice of the peace in Cornwall, officiated at the home of the bride's parents.
The bride, 29, is keeping her name.
She was until recently a membership services manager at Media Alliance, a nonprofit organization for media professionals in San Francisco.
She graduated cum laude from Middlebury College.
Her parents are the publishers of the Magazine of Fantasy and Science Fiction, a monthly publication, in Cornwall.


Liza Lambert, R. T. Henshaw 4th
Elizabeth Riley Lambert, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John F. Lambert of Greenwich, Conn., was married there yesterday to Richard Townsend Henshaw 4th, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Henshaw 3d of Waccabuc, N.Y.
The Rev.
Denis Matthews performed the ceremony at St.
Mary Roman Catholic Church.
Mrs.
Henshaw, who is known as Liza, is the manager of software development at Hearst Magazines in New York.
She graduated from Middlebury College.
Her father is a senior partner in Bentley, Mosher, Babson &amp; Lambert, a Greenwich law firm.
Her mother, Loretta R. Lambert, teaches the fifth grade at Greenwich Academy.


Taking Advantage of a Bumper Crop of Tomatoes
I am not trying to scold you," the owner of my local nursery said as he looked around for some six-foot stakes. "But next year put your tomatoes in a cage.
They will do much better that way."
Almost overnight, it seemed that the tomatoes in our garden had grown twice their height and were falling all over the place.
The hot weather and heavy rainfalls have not only produced a bountiful crop this year but the tomatoes also seem particularly fragrant and juicy.


Electronic Book Improves on Gutenberg
To the Editor:
"Don't Believe the Cyberhype" (editorial, Aug. 21) dismisses the notion that electronic books will ever replace real books.
Yes, real books are superior, but electronic books have a major advantage over paper books you fail to mention.


Maura Mullen, Philip Semprevivo Jr.
Maura Ann Mullen, a daughter of Judge and Mrs.
Michael F. Mullen of Huntington, L.I., was married there yesterday to Philip Carmine Semprevivo Jr., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Semprevivo of Ridgewood, N.J.
Msgr.
John F. Casey, an uncle of the bride, officiated at St.
Patrick's Church.
Mrs.
Semprevivo, 28, is a circulation assistant at Reader's Digest Publications Inc. in New York.
She and the bridegroom graduated from Fairfield University.
Her father is an acting justice of the State Supreme Court and the supervising judge of the Suffolk County Superior Criminal Court, both in Riverhead, L.I.


Politics? What Is Politics?
At a news conference last week on Long Island, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo was asked about the political implications of his announcement that he would seek funds for a school for gifted students on the Island.
Here is an excerpt from an exchange between reporters and Mr.
Cuomo.


Hemming (and Hawing)
SKIRTS CAN BE THIGH-HIGH, AT THE KNEE, OR JUST JUST ABOVE.
IF YOU CAN'T MAKE UP YOUR MIND, CHOOSE ALL THREE


Very Hot Wheels Find a Parking Place of Honor
THERE'S ONE.
WOWWW. eyepopping yellow.
And another.
Ooooo.
Red.
Silver.
White.
Corvettes everywhere.
No, it's not a Chevy half-price sale.
But if you're on the road almost anywhere in the next five days you're likely to see a passel of the rockets that have entrenched themselves as America's only true sports cars.


Conversations: Zhu Muzhi; Want to Sell China's Record On Human Rights? Get Mr. Smooth
CAN you teach an old propagandist new tricks?
Zhu Muzhi is living proof of it.
Assigned to craft a sophisticated international lobbying campaign to counter China's dismal human rights record, Mr.
Zhu, 78 years old, is already a master of the sound bite -- a quick study at the spin-control rules of Madison Avenue and Capitol Hill:
The best defense is a good offense.
"I certainly think America is not perfect when it comes to human rights. I do not think you have gotten rid of racial discrimination or segregation. The Los Angeles riots are a case in point."


The Colorful and Dependable Geranium
THIS has been a good year for geraniums.
In spite of midsummer heat and humidity, the showy plants are strutting their stuff in window boxes, patio pots and tubs, flower borders and tidy borders around the bases of flagpoles.
The plants in question, with their handsome leaves and spectacular blooms, are what botanists call pelargoniums, not to be confused with hardy perennial geraniums.


Studies Confirm Pauling on Vitamin C's Anti-Cancer Benefit
To the Editor:
Your obituary of Linus C. Pauling (front page, Aug. 21) refers to the Nobel Prize winner's claim that vitamin C helps in the treatment of cancer.
Your only comment is that a 1979 Mayo Clinic study of patients with advanced cancer showed no benefits from vitamin C, or ascorbic acid, and readers are likely to infer that the Mayo study ended the matter.


JAVA JIVE
About the article on the arcana of coffeespeak and the rigor of knowing enough Italian to fake it in a coffeshop senza agitazione (without fuss):


Will Silver Screen Yield to Live Arts at the Paradise?
Hopes for the future of Loew's Paradise, the ornate 65-year-old movie palace that closed early this year, are taking an unexpected turn.
A task force formed to study its prospects will propose that it be transformed into a performing arts center, according to a spokesman for the Bronx Borough President.
A.B.I.
Property Partners of Delaware, which acquired the theater in June after the previous owners failed to make mortgage payments, was considering turning it into a shopping center.
But the Landmarks Commission, at the urging of the Bronx Borough President's office among others, is likely to order the protection of the theater's interior, which would make such a development virtually impossible.


Adelaide Nelson, Kent E. Backlund
Adelaide Josephine Nelson, the daughter of Mrs.
Frances Nelson of Breckenridge, Minn., and the late Guy Nelson, was married on Friday to Kent Erik Backlund, a son of Gun and Ingemar Backlund of Kungsbacka, Sweden.
The Rev.
G.
Sterling Zinsmeyer, performed the nondenominational ceremony at the Old School Baptist Meeting House in Warwick, N.Y.
The bride graduated from Northwestern University.
She received an M.B.A. from the Columbia University Graduate School of Business, where she is the director of corporate relations.


Singapore Opens Zoo For Night Creatures
A zoo designed to acquaint visitors with the nocturnal habits of animals has opened this summer in Singapore.
The 99-acre Night Safari Park is adjacent to the Singapore Zoological Gardens, about a half-hour drive from the city center in the Mandai section of the island.
It is open daily, from 7:30 P.M. to midnight.
The park is divided into more than 45 habitat areas, including Himilayan foothills, Equatorial Africa, Asian riverine forest, South American pampas and Nepalese river valley.
Moats and camouflaged barriers separate the people from the park's 1,200 animals, which include the Asian elephant, tiger, Indian rhinoceros, painted stork, bearded pig, striped hyena and sloth bear.
The zoo can be toured by taking a 50-minute tram ride, or by strolling along the 1.9 miles of foot trails, which takes about two hours.


NEW YORKERS &amp; CO.
Nat West Announces Plans To Expand Into the Bronx
Under pressure from a community action group that questioned its commitment to the inner cities, Nat West Bank announced last week that it would expand into the Bronx, opening several branches beginning next year.


Lori J. Levy, Richard Sitomer
Lori Jean Levy, the daughter of M. Barry and Pamela Levy of Merrick, L.I., is to be married today to Richard Allen Sitomer, a son of Geoffrey and Behera Sitomer of Dix Hills, L.I.
Rabbi Jeremiah Wohlberg, the president of the New York Board of Rabbis, is to officiate at the Water's Edge in Long Island City, Queens.


Rest-Stop Security In the South of France
In an effort to tighten security against theft involving drivers in southeastern France, 27 highway rest areas between Marseilles and Menton have been recently equipped with signs in French, English, German and Italian advising tourists not to leave keys or valuable goods in their cars.
According to police sources, 140 thefts and car burglaries occurred in 1993 in the rest areas involved in the project.
To reduce theft, Escota, the company managing highways in the area, has undertaken an overall project.
In addition to posting signs, it has extended lighting in parking areas and is planning to install free telephones connected to the nearest police station.


Luscious Looks
From Paris and Milan come two fantasies for Fall.
One is feminine, poetic, adorned with frippery.
The other has mystique of men's wear given an alluring touch for women.
Their romance comes to life in the chateaus of Normandy.


Economic Referendum in Lithuania Fails
A referendum on economic measures backed by the opposition apparently failed today when not enough voters turned out to make the vote valid.
The Central Elections Center in Vilnius, the capital of Lithuania, said just before the polls closed that only 35 percent of eligible voters had cast ballots.
More than half of the country's registered voters needed to take part for the referendum to be valid.


Andrea Backscheider, Robert Burridge
Andrea Gayle Backscheider, the daughter of Dr.
Paula Backscheider and the Rev.
Dr.
Nickolas A. Back scheider of Auburn, Ala., was married yesterday to Robert Raven Burridge, the son of Dr.
Robert Burridge of Ridgefield, Conn., and the late Elizabeth Burridge.
The bride's father,performed the ceremony at Westminster Presbyterian Church in Ann Arbor, Mich.
The bride, 27, is an assistant professor of psychology at the University of Notre Dame in Notre Dame, Ind.
She graduated from Stanford University and received a doctorate in psychology from the University of Michigan in Ann Arbor, where her husband is studying for a doctorate in computer science and engineering.
Her father is also a computer consultant at Auburn University in Auburn, where her mother, Paula Backscheider, is the West Point-Pepperell Eminent Scholar in English.


THE PRESIDENT'S PAST
In "The President's Past" (July 31), Michael Kelly asks, "So why doesn't all of this  [ Clinton's successes ]  matter more?"


Mutual Funds; Making a Case for Market Optimism
"EXIT, pursued by a bear." That stage direction from Shakespeare's play "The Winter's Tale" introduced William H. Miller 3d's June shareholder report for the Legg Mason Special Investment Trust.
It reflects Mr.
Miller's belief that the worst is over.
The stock market may yet fall, he wrote, "but with 70 percent of stocks already down, the dollar on the front page and people lining up at the Citibank branch in Tokyo to get out of the dollar at its all-time low, with pessimism about stocks at a five-year high, and analysts speculating about when the next Fed rate hike will come, the scene is set for the bear to exit."


With Health Overhaul Dead, A Search for Minor Repairs
After a year of arguing that making incremental changes in the health care system would make a bad situation worse, the Clinton Administration and its allies are now scrambling to contradict themselves.
They have to, since they acknowledge that Congress will not pass a bill providing health insurance for all Americans by a specified date, which used to be what President Clinton said he had to have.


A Bit of Real History In Johannesburg Museum
UNTIL this month, about the last place a visitor to South Africa would look for a credible account of the country's past would be a museum.
History in South Africa -- the history taught in schools, the history displayed in museums -- has always been white history, and selective at that.
It consisted of glowing accounts of frontier conquest, tragic tableaux of war between British and Boer, and heroic sagas of the gold rush that neglected to mention who digs the ore.
The opening on Aug. 6 of MuseumAfrica in Johannesburg is the most ambitious effort yet to set that right.
In this sleek new gallery, black mineworkers, squatter-camp families, speakeasy hostesses and domestic servants have pride of place.


The Storyteller in the Garden
WOMEN, ANIMALS, AND VEGETABLES Essays and Stories.
By Maxine Kumin. 299 pp.
New York: W. W. Norton &amp; Company. $25.


IDEAS &amp; TRENDS: The British Catskills-by-the-Sea; So These Blokes Go to Blackpool and Die Laughing
"NOW for my impression of Blackpool," says Brian Conley, a comedian working the giant theater at the end of Blackpool's North Pier.
He disappears, then immediately returns with an umbrella pulled inside-out, and slogs his way slowly across the stage, as if he were struggling against a fierce sea wind.
The audiences here dissolve in laughter each time he does the gag, because they are, in a way, co-conspirators, many of them faithful if long-suffering veterans of summer holidays at this blustery seaside resort, crouched on the chill, gray shores of the Irish Sea.


A License to Sell
MICHAEL J. CORTES serves those who only stand and wait.
He works as New York State's first and only authorized license plate salesman.
His sales territory is confined to the blocklong lobby of the motor vehicles office on Worth Street in lower Manhattan, where he plies the captive audience of motorists shuffling along in the serpentine lines.


No Headline
Of course we will support him.
One hand washes the other. -- SAM STERN of New Square, N.Y., after Governor Cuomo opened a housing project there.  [ 31:2. ]


Cath-22 Plus: A Conversation With Joseph Heller
"A CROTCHETY old fogey of 28" is how Joseph Heller, with shrewd self-knowledge, described his zanily exaggerated alter ego, Yossarian, the cynical bombardier hero of "Catch-22." I found that description when I recently reread Mr.
Heller's classic 1961 novel before settling down with an advance copy of his new one, "Closing Time," which purports to be a sequel to "Catch-22" and which will be published by Simon &amp; Schuster next month.
That description of Yossarian reminded me of my first impression of Mr.
Heller, whom I met in 1974 when his second novel, "Something Happened," appeared.
He struck me immediately as a crotchety old fogey of 51.
He was also amusing and occasionally almost charming.
Five books later, Mr.
Heller has evolved into an even more crotchety old fogey of 71.
During the only time that I formally interviewed him -- in 1979, just before the publication of his third novel, "Good as Gold" -- he did his best to appear winsome, in the evident belief that being seen as lovable would help sell his new book.
But the minute he knew the article was safely locked up, the winning ways all but vanished.


New Tours to Myanmar
For the last two decades, tourism in Myanmar (formerly Burma) has been so tightly restricted that the country remains one of the world's least-known destinations.
Would-be visitors to Myanmar, however, will have several tour possibilities to choose from this fall.
From Oct. 27 to Nov. 12, Wings of the World will conduct a tour into the remote bamboo-teak forests of northern Myanmar.
Russell Ciochon, a paleoanthropologist who was involved in primate research in Burma in the late 70's, will lead this expedition to the hill-tribe village of Mogaung.
Joining the group will be a geologist, Patricia Holroyd of the United States Geological Survey, and Alan Hall, an expert on Southeast Asia's bird life.
Activities will include six days of excavating and collecting fossils, bird-watching and hiking around Mogaung.
Time will also be spent in the ancient cities of Mandalay and Pagan and in the capital of Yangon (formerly Rangoon).
The $6,295 price includes round-trip air fare from San Francisco, Los Angeles or Seattle, lodging, local transportation and meals.
In Mogaung village, accommodation will be in shelters built especially for the group.
Information: (800) 465-8687.


Michelle Greszes, David Gershbaum
Michelle Greszes, a daughter of Sarita and Ben Greszes of Great Neck, L.I., is to be married today to David Gershbaum, a son of Hilda R. Gershbaum of Far Rockaway, Queens, and the late Dr.
Joseph S. Gershbaum.
Rabbi Ralph Pelcovitz is to officiate at the Pierre in New York.
The bride, 21, is a student at Yeshiva University, from which the bridegroom, 24, graduated and where he is now a third-year medical student.


Letters Are Acts of Faith
To the Editor:
No publisher ever put out a book called "Great Phone Calls of the Western World."  FRANK MODELL  Guilford, Conn.


QUEENS UPDATE
*
SPRINGFIELD GARDENS Federal officials have decided to close a 100-bed immigration detention center at 145-55 226th Street.
While neither the Immigration and Naturalization Service nor Wackenhut Corrections, which runs the center, would comment, Representative Floyd H. Flake's office in Washington said the proposed site for a new center is in an industrial complex next to Kennedy International Airport.
The center has been a point of controversy in the area for years, and last month, protests erupted after residents discovered that a bid to renew the lease and double the holding capacity had been submitted.


'Victory' Over Crime, At Least Politically
IT had seemed from the beginning that a bill that would address the nation's crime problem might ultimately become that anomaly in capital politics: an expedient idea that also had substance.
But by the time the $30 billion measure finished lurching through Congress, it had become the latest and best example of gridlock, partisanship and politics at its most elemental.


B. H. Sutherland And Anders Berry
Barbara Hill Sutherland, a daughter of Mrs.
Richard K. McLaren of Osterville, Mass., and the late John Sutherland, was married yesterday to Anders Taylor Berry, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
John R. Berry Jr. of Hyannis Port, Mass.
The Rev.
Laura Ahrens performed the ceremony at St.
Andrew's-by-the-Sea Episcopal Church in Hyannis Port.
Mrs.
Berry graduated from the University of Colorado.
Until recently, she was a special-events planner based in Washington.
Her stepfather, Mr.
McLaren, who is retired, was a lawyer in New York.
Her grandfather the late Joseph H. Sutherland was the president and vice chairman of J. P. Stevens, the textile company in New York.


Brother and Addict: A Secret Life
To the Editor:
I have just finished reading Robert Lipsyte's Coping column.
"A Writer Under the Influence of 'Bad News' " (Aug. 21).
I didn't get to the paper until about 5 P.M., as I spent most of my Sunday at the Medical Examiner's office waiting to identify the body of my dead brother.


Reunions Mark the End of Another Fresh Air Fund Season
While the other counselors climbing off the buses after nine weeks at camp looked as if they were about to die, Jenny MacLean, 21, sat on the floor of the main concourse of the George Washington Bridge Bus Terminal on 178th Street dealing out lollipops and cards for a game of Uno.
"Are you in or not?" Miss MacLean asked Edward Chavis, 10, one of 540 city children returning from two weeks of summer camp sponsored by the Fresh Air Fund.


Letting Shirttails Fly
Fashion is not always about new clothes; sometimes, how you wear a garment makes a statement.
For instance, this summer the men's shirt is back, with shirttails flapping out over the trousers -- an idea that is not very new except for the attitude of those who are wearing it.
Only last year, grunge dictated that the shirt should be worn with the sleeves tied around the waist.
Now, the shirt is often wrinkled, a look that suggests anti-designer, but that doesn't mean it is not a studied style.
It's the uniform worn by models on their way to work at the high-fashion designer men's wear shows (far left, far right and the three men at top).
The look is being picked up by fashion followers, some of whom are adding diminutive vests.


THE PRESIDENT'S PAST
Adictum widely circulated among psychologists suggests that past behavior is the best predictor of future behavior if objective measurement is not available.
Assuming this is true, I'd like to see a couple of well-researched candidate profiles like "The President's Past" as we approach the next election.
That kind of information might keep the voting public from turning local political mistakes into national ones.
ANNE O'BRIEN Scottsdale, Ariz.


Police Arrest Merchant In Jewelry Fencing Case
The arrest of Alvin Kramer came as no surprise to merchants who work along a vibrant stretch of Canal Street, near the picturesque Manhattan Bridge in Chinatown.
For years, they watched suspicious characters wander in and out of Mr.
Kramer's gritty gold-refining shop at 98 Canal Street, hawking necklaces, bracelets, rings and sometimes precious stones.
But most of his neighbors had no idea just what sort of business Mr.
Kramer conducted there.


New &amp; Noteworthy Paperbacks
UNDUE INFLUENCE: The Epic Battle for the Johnson &amp; Johnson Fortune By David Margolick.
Quill/Morrow, $15.
This was a courtroom slugfest like no other: It pitted Basia Johnson, the Polish immigrant widow of the corporate magnate J. Seward Johnson, against the Johnson children, who couldn't stand to see the bulk of their father's millions go to a former household maid.
The author, who covers legal affairs for The New York Times, "is a wonderful observer, and he serves up vivid scenes," Michelle Green said here last year.


Aug. 21-27; Vive La France


Deborah C. Silver And P. J. Moses
Deborah Carrie Silver, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Harold Silver of Washington Township, N.J., was married last evening to Peter Jeffrey Moses, a son of Abe J. Moses of Monroe, Conn., and the late Donna C. Moses.
Rabbi Fred Dworken performed the ceremony at the Heritage Inn in Southbury, Conn.
Mrs.
Moses, 28, is an associate product manager at Revlon Inc. in New York.
She graduated from the State University at Binghamton, N.Y.
She and her husband received M.B.A. degrees from the University of Chicago.
Her father is the controller at the Weave Corporation, a textile company in Hackensack, N.J.
Her mother, Linda Silver, is the customer service manager at the company.


Thalia Tries to Avert Second Death
Over the last two weeks, film aficionados may have noticed the doors locked and the lights out at the Thalia Theater, the old revival movie house on 95th Street west of Broadway.
The Thalia closed two weeks ago after Fine Line Features backed out of an agreement to show first-run art films and foreign films there through the year 2003, said Roy K. Ennacheril, the landlord of the Symphony building, where the theater is located.


A Battle on School Prayer Takes Shape in Georgia
Not long ago, prayer in school might have seemed like an issue already put to rest by the courts.
But a suburban Atlanta teacher's refusal this week to observe a new state law requiring a brief period of "quiet reflection" was a reminder that the question is very much alive and that voluntary school prayer has a constituency that extends far beyond the easily pigeonholed agenda of the religious right.


Sound Bytes; Therapy on a Virtual Couch
HER first two books, "The Sexual Self" and "Night Thoughts: Reflections of a Sex Therapist," offered no hint that Avodah Offit had an affinity for computer technology.
But the New York psychiatrist and sex therapist says she bought her first personal computer in the late 1970's, "as soon as it became vaguely affordable," a North Star model for about $6,000.
Dr.
Offit was introduced to electronic mail in 1987, when a computer-literate friend gave her the communications software -- and she has been on-line since.
Her E-mail expertise provided the narrative framework for her current novel, "Virtual Love," published by Simon &amp; Schuster.
The novel is written as E-mail correspondence between two psychiatrists.


A Neighborhood In Waves
HISTORIANS OF CITIES ARE OFTEN FOOLED BY the endurance of buildings.
The camera loves buildings because they conform to the camera's idea of standing still, of not flinching, of acting natural.
When you look through the photographic archives of a city like Buffalo -- a galvanic giant not so long ago -- what you frequently see is a crowd of humans smeared in motion across the foreground, while in the background the buildings stand tall, resolute, confiding.
It's easy to imagine a neighborhood -- the Lower West Side of Buffalo, for instance -- as though it were mainly a stockpile of buildings, an architectural shoreline of sorts.
Into it flows a "wave" of people, marked by ethnic background or economic class.
The wave leaves a high-water mark on the neighborhood and then it recedes, making room for another wave.
The only thing that remains in focus is the buildings.
What is human is averaged out in the motion of the wave.
You get at one kind of truth with that kind of history -- like driving through Buffalo on the New York State Thruway, hoping to make Cleveland by nightfall.
But in a living neighborhood there is never only one kind of truth.


Aug. 21-27: O. J. and the Sheik; In Two High-Profile Trials, Tribulations for the Defense
It was a rough week for defense lawyers in two prominent trials.
In New York, a Federal judge disqualified two of the city's most aggressive lawyers, William M. Kunstler and Ronald L. Kuby, from any role in the World Trade Center bombing-conspiracy trial of Sheik Omar Abdel Rahman and 12 others next month.
The judge ruled that the two couldn't adequately represent their last remaining client, Ibrahim El-Gabrowney, because they had represented other defendants and thus had conflicts of interest that could deny him an adequate defense.


Correction
A Technology article on Aug. 7, about using an abandoned mine to produce hydro-electric power misstated the number of 100-watt light bulbs that could be illuminated at once with one kilowatt.
It is 10, not 1,000.


Lauren Kahn, Steven M. Torre
Lauren Suzanne Kahn, the daughter of Harvey and Roslyn Kahn of Hartsdale, N.Y., was married yesterday evening in Old Greenwich, Conn., to Steven Michael Torre, the son of Thomas and Josette Torre of Ardsley, N.Y.
Rabbi Robert Rothman officiated at the Hyatt Regency Greenwich.


An International Season for Three Orchestras
THE Performing Arts Center at Purchase College is home to the county's three major professional orchestras, the Westchester Philharmonic, Philharmonia Virtuosi and the Westchester Symphony, all of which are offering preseason subscription plans, with better seats at lower prices.
An international flavor sparks the orchestras' programming: the Philharmonic has titled its year "International Expressions -- A Season of Festivals"; the Virtuosi are opening with an "Old Viennese Kaffee Konzert -- Mit Schlag," and the Westchester Symphony includes a "Viva Italia" evening as part of its 70th anniversary celebration.
For the Philharmonic (formerly the New Orchestra of Westchester), this 12th subscription season marks the beginning of "a 2-year, 10-concert exploration of the nations and composers that have contributed to the great tradition of Western music," the music director, Paul Lustig Dunkel, said.
"A new world has been created in the past five years, and interestingly, three of those countries whose musical heritage we will be exploring have recently undergone dramatic political changes."


Hangman's Tree Deserves New Name and More Help
To the Editor:
In your Aug. 21 F.Y.I. column, you concentrate on the value of wood, rather than on the value of nature's artworks lost to arborcide.
On the other hand, your mention of this threat does focus attention on trees when our best one -- the misnamed "Hangman's Elm" in Washington Square Park -- is endangered by budget cuts.
I would propose that it be given a new name -- the Greatest Tree in New York -- and some way be found to assure its future care.


ATM's for Autos
Following the principle of the automatic bank-teller machine, Thrifty Car Rental has introduced automated car-rental machines at 31 sites throughout the United States and Canada.
The machines allow customers with a driver's license and credit card to rent a car parked nearby.
Using the machine's telephone, customers speak with a live agent.
Built-in cameras verify the driver's license and credit card and photograph the customer.
When the transaction is complete, the machine dispenses keys and contract.
The machines make cars available at small airports, hotel lobbies and similar places where a rental desk would be impractical. (800) 367-2277.
TERRY TRUCCO


Not Exactly Striving for the Most Perfect Lawn on the Island
FOR a Long Islander, Lynn Balk was talking heresy.
"We keep as little lawn as possible," she said.
Grass doesn't mean much to Mrs.
Balk and her husband, Karl, of Farmingville, even though they live on an island where sod is as revered as Saabs and where 80 percent of the people live in single-family homes surrounded by green grass and empty bags of crab-grass killer.


Engaged With the World: Big Issues, Tiny Marvels
UPTOWN -- Benefit parties for AIDS charities are often places where social worlds collide.
Still, it seemed almost surreal to see Jon Bon Jovi and Richie Sambora, the hard-core New Jersey rockers, dining next to Dr.
Mathilde Krim, the stately director of the American Foundation for AIDS Research, at Tavern on the Green on Aug. 24.
"It isn't something our schedule usually allows us to do, but we think it's a wonderful cause," Mr.
Bon Jovi said later.


Lindsay Rodes And C. C. Marks
Lindsay DeBus Rodes, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas M. Rodes of Garrett Park, Md., was married yesterday to Christopher Charles Marks, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles E. Marks of Princeton, N.J.
The Rev.
Zachary Fleetwood performed the ceremony at Grace Episcopal Church in The Plains, Va.
Ms.
Rodes, 31, is keeping her name.
She is a vice president at J. P. Morgan Investment Management in New York.
She graduated from Yale University.
Her father is a benefits consultant in Garrett Park.
Her mother, Barbara Rodes, is the director of library and information services at the World Wildlife Fund in Washington.


The Big City; The Zeppole That Ate Manhattan
Perhaps it has happened to you this summer.
You go out for a weekend stroll, expecting to find the neighborhood deserted, and you happen upon a street fair.
Music is playing, food is sizzling, vendors are hawking brightly colored wares -- and as you behold this New York celebration, this festival of urban energy, you find yourself wondering: How big a bulldozer would it take to push the whole thing into the nearest river?
Don't be alarmed.
You're having a normal response to a street fair.
Others are already well beyond you -- most notably Abe Le bewohl, the owner of the Second Avenue Deli, who has become the first martyr of the antifair movement.
During the past five years, as the number of large street fairs has doubled, New Yorkers have progressed through a series of emotional stages.


In Tennis's Sweet Spot With Billie Jean &amp; Co.
Capering and mugging from Wimbledon to the United States Open, Billie Jean King's version of tennis unbuttoned ended its firefly season last week, an annual reminder of what tennis was and a tease of its possible future.
There was Billie Jean, the Energizer bunny, urging the crowd to be noisy, while Luke, one of the madcap Jensen brothers, writhed on the court in feigned agony as the public address speakers blared "Big Girls Don't Cry." In the distance, through the nighttime, cigarettes winked and ice cubes tinkled on the veranda of the Longwood Cricket Club.


Nicholas J. Langenfeld, Professor, 93
The Rev.
Nicholas J. Langenfeld, a retired professor of social welfare at Fordham University, died Thursday at the Jesuit Infirmary at the university's campus in the Bronx.
Father Langenfeld, who lived in Manhattan, was 93.
The cause was cardiac arrest, said Linda Sollars, a cousin.


Q. &amp; A.
Do Re Mi Fa Sol La Ti: Oh No!
Q Ten years ago the building I live in became a cooperative.
I live then and live now below an opera singer who gives vocal lessons in her apartment several times a week.
Until three years ago there was no problem.
Although there were lessons almost every day, they were only for an hour or two at a time.


Private Jungle on a Tropical Island Called Astoria
ANTONIO CARELLA would like to visit his sisters and brothers in southern Italy, but he hasn't taken a vacation in three years.
"Last time I did that, my banana plant died," he said, petting a green leaf the size of a small canoe.
"My friend overwatered it."


Unusual Creations for a Special Event
DAVID CARMICHAEL, the creative, 24-year-old pastry chef at Sign of the Dove in Manhattan, has his mind on motion pictures these days, especially the movie "M*A*S*H*."
Next month Mr.
Carmichael, who is from East Hampton, will be in Huntington with the executive chef of the Sign of the Dove and four of his assistant pastry chefs to make a special dessert for the film maker Robert Altman.


Viewpoints; Electric Vehicles: They're Practical Now
WHEN people talk about electric cars, someone usually argues that their "range" must be improved before they are "really practical." Well, that's just not true.
Of course, the range of these vehicles is improving all the time.
While today's batteries will power an electric car for 60 to 80 miles without recharging, batteries with a range of 120 miles are being tested commercially.
And in May a Geo Metro, converted to electricity, completed more than 214 miles without stopping for a recharge.


INSIDE
MAKING IT WORK 3  Grizzled veterans of civic indifference take note: Michael J. Cortes wants to help you (and fill the state's coffers, too).
NEW YORKERS &amp; CO. 4  With talk of "bootstrap equity," a fast-growing program is guiding small businesses across the economic frontier.


Between Pity and Anger, Guilt and Betrayal
THE doorbell rings.
Through the peephole you see a youngish white man, hands in pockets, head down.
He is very thin.
He is dressed neatly but casually; running shoes, khakis, a Polo shirt, a baseball cap.
He is a stranger, but familiar; he looks like someone you see on the street every day.


ITT-Cablevision Deal Reported To Buy Madison Square Garden
Madison Square Garden and its properties -- including the Knicks, the Rangers and the MSG network -- will be sold to Cablevision Systems, a cable television giant based on Long Island, and the ITT Corporation, executives of a rival bidder said yesterday.
Officials of the Garden's owner, Viacom Inc., did not announce a deal today, but executives of the competing bidder, the Liberty Media Corporation, said they were told they had lost the bidding contest.
Viacom acquired the Garden and its related properties when it merged earlier this year with Paramount Communications Inc.


SUNDAY, August 28, 1994; Fat in the Fire
Good thing peace is busting out all over the Middle East, because Moshe Antelman of Rehovot, Israel, has developed a singularly nasty weapon for the next war: a bullet that contains pork fat.
Antelman, a rabbi and chemist, developed the lard-laden ammo for use against devout Muslims, who believe any contact with pig flesh robs the soul of its chance to enter paradise.
Like Hamlet, who refrains from killing his wicked stepfather at prayer since the old man would go to heaven, Antelman isn't content with mere death.
His sentiments are best summed up in the words of a villain in a less respected work, "Buffy the Vampire Slayer": "Kill him. Kill him a lot."


Avoiding A Rights Clash
To the Editor:
The article "Avoiding a Clash of Rights" on July 3 states that the street address of an owner-investor in a co-op who lives elsewhere might be a privileged document.
It tells about a Manhattan co-op that refuses to give out the addresses of shareholders in connection with proxy solicitations, requiring instead that such solicitations be mailed by the managing agent.


Some Shaky Precedents For New York Sports Fans
When one thinks of Cablevision Systems, which with the ITT Corporation has acquired the properties of Madison Square Garden for $1.05 billion, one cannot help but think of the Triplecast, a disastrous 1992 Summer Olympics pay-per-view joint venture with NBC.
Cablevision ran the marketing and distribution of the venture, the "Heaven's Gate" of television, blithely promising 2.5 million buyers for the overpriced, untested service.
It attracted fewer than one tenth that number.


The People Watchers Meet the Art Lovers
NOT too long ago, Jane Stubbs received a telephone call at her place of business, Stubbs Books and Prints.
"I'd like to be put on your party list," the anonymous voice said.


The Colorful and Dependable Geranium
THIS has been a good year for geraniums.
In spite of midsummer heat and humidity, the showy plants are strutting their stuff in window boxes, patio pots and tubs, flower borders and tidy borders around the bases of flagpoles.
The plants in question, with their handsome leaves and spectacular blooms, are what botanists call pelargoniums, not to be confused with hardy perennial geraniums.


Security Never Takes a Vacation
WHEN it comes to safety in a hotel, many travelers have a gap in their psychological outlook: they are on vacation, possibly someplace they know where they feel comfortable, but in any case away from the familiar hurly-burly.
Therefore nothing terrible can happen to them.
This "vacation vacancy," as one expert called it, blows the fuse of travelers' self-protective devices, and can be more dangerous than losing a hotel key, leaving luggage on the sidewalk or wearing lots of jewelry.


Taking Advantage of a Bumper Crop of Tomatoes
I am not trying to scold you," the owner of my local nursery said as he looked around for some six-foot stakes. "But next year put your tomatoes in a cage.
They will do much better that way."
Almost overnight, it seemed that the tomatoes in our garden had grown twice their height and were falling all over the place.
The hot weather and heavy rainfalls have not only produced a bountiful crop this year but the tomatoes also seem particularly fragrant and juicy.


Outside Counsel: Needed for Defense
The June 26 issue of the Long Island Weekly contains a letter to the editor from Laurel Hollow resident Judith Zinn, concerning deputies in my office ("What Kind of Lawyers Work for the County?") which requires a response beyond the shorter answer - Ethics!
Zinn questions the need to retain outside counsel when the county has its own staff lawyers.
The "need" is predicated by the Code of Professional Responsibility.
This code requires all attorneys to zealously represent their clients, and no one attorney could ethically represent the potentially varying and differing interests of the numerous past and present officials named in the lawsuit.
Outside counsel was required so that each named past or present official and each agency could be properly represented as required by the county's Administrative Code and the Attorney's Code of Ethics.
The plaintiffs in the lawsuit (Blankman, et al. v. Nassau County, et al.; U.S.C.D., E.D.N.Y., 91 Civ 3929 (L.D.W.)) chose to sue individual members of the Board of Supervisors and a number of present and past government officials and agencies.


New England All the Way
EVERY summer Wellfleet, Mass., becomes one of those small New England towns that seems lodged within the collective American unconscious rather than existing on its own.
It's a green, tidy, languorous seaside village, where day lilies and hydrangea bushes cluster beside every other front door; where the church steeples are white, the sky shines bright blue and the salt spray roses seem always in bloom.
Yet with its watery salt marshes, hidden ponds and miles of wild, sandy coastline, Wellfleet is far more elemental, certainly more moody, than anything painted by Norman Rockwell.
Instead, it looks like a place re-membered from childhood, one of those places that seemed larger than it really was, and both welcoming and mysterious.
Adding to Wellfleet's miragelike effect is its literal precariousness.
According to some predictions, at the current erosion rate the outermost third of Cape Cod -- which includes Provincetown, Wellfleet and Truro -- could disappear in a couple of thousand years.
"The edge of the sea is a strange and beautiful place," wrote Rachel Carson, adding that "always it remains an elusive and indefinable boundary." And perhaps nowhere is the shore more strangely beautiful, or its boundaries more elusively indefinable, than this crook of land 75 miles out to sea, with the Atlantic Ocean battering one side and Cape Cod Bay sifting away the other.
At the Cape's narrowest point, Marconi Station in Wellfleet, the ocean is scarcely half a mile from the bay.


THE ROOTS PEOPLE
I hope that Lear did not go to the wrong Stavishche, since there are two listed in the Times World Index Gazetteer, both near Kiev.
EMANUEL SCHWAGER Jenkintown, Pa.


Corrections
An article on July 10 about gardens in London described the restoration of the site of the church of St.
Mary Aldermanbury incorrectly.
The site was developed by the City of London as a public open space, not by Westminster College in Fulton, Mo.
A reader's letter last month pointed out the error.
This correction was delayed by an editorial lapse.


Denise Mitchell, W. D. Goodbar Jr.
Denise Elaine Mitchell, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John T. Mitchell of Venice, Fla., was married yesterday to William Dean Goodbar Jr., the son of Mrs.
D.
Bruce Ellsworth of Colorado Springs and the late Mr.
Goodbar.
The Rev.
Jack Sutton performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at the Cathedral of the Immaculate Conception in Denver.
The bride is a senior consultant, in Denver, with Andersen Consulting.
She graduated from Cornell University and received an M.B.A. from the University of Colorado at Boulder, from which the bridegroom graduated and also received an M.B.A.
Her father retired as a vice president of Nabisco Brands, in East Hanover, N.J.


Man and Supermodel
Fitting ringside at the latest round of fashion shows in Paris, I found my mind wandering to other fields of interest -- among them, men.
It did not have to stray very far.
There, in the front row, were Kyle MacLachlan, the actor; David Copperfield, the magician; and Michael Hutchence, the rock star.
They had turned out to watch their girlfriends, the so-called supermodels Linda Evangelista, Claudia Schiffer and Helena Christensen, respectively.
To tell the truth, the men's faces were at times more entertaining than the clothes.
MacLachlan maintained a permanently thoughtful expression, as though he were contemplating some great work of art while Evangelista worked the runway.
Copperfield broke out in a lascivious, self-congratulatory grin every time Schiffer appeared.
Hutchence sat back and regarded Christensen with quiet satisfaction.
The models would every once in a while interrupt their oblivious gazes into the beyond and acknowledge their boyfriends with glances that seemed to telegraph any one of a number of messages: "Hi, sweetheart," or "They all want me but I'm yours," or "You know I find this every bit as boring as you do." All three men made polite if unconvincing attempts to pay attention to the other models when their particular women weren't on the catwalk.
It would be nice to interpret their attendance as a show of support -- the respectful gesture of the "new man," encouraging his partner in her work.
But day after day, as the paparazzi stampeded to snap their pictures, it was hard to ignore a certain photo-op aspect to the proceedings, and as the flashbulbs popped, the pride these men took in their women came to seem proprietary and gloating.
By their presence, they asserted their claim, declaring themselves the kind of guys who rate the love of a supermodel.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
MEMOIR  BORN NAKED  By Farley Mowat. Peter Davison/Houghton Mifflin, $21.95.


Michele Gottlieb, James Nemschoff
Michele Leslie Gottlieb, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Stanley Gottlieb of Tarrytown, N.Y., is to be married today in Pound Ridge, N.Y., to James Alan Nemschoff, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Earl R. Nemschoff of Sheboygan, Wis.
Rabbi Shoshana Hantman is to perform the ceremony at the Inn at Pound Ridge.
The bride is a marketing manager, in Chicago, in the new media division of Rand McNally &amp; Company, the publishing concern.
She graduated magna cum laude from the University of Pennsylvania and received an M.B.A. from Stanford University.
Her father is a vice president of taxes and the director of taxation at the Hearst Corporation, the New York publishing company.
Her mother, Elaine Gottlieb, retired as a secretary at Public School 85 in the Bronx.


Upper East Side Is Divided on Plan For Security Force
An extraordinary proposal that would dispatch 500 unarmed private guards to patrol from East 59th to 96th Streets is being fiercely debated on the Upper East Side.
The proposal, by a prominent real-estate management company, would dwarf previous private security efforts in the city.
It calls for a force that would be nearly double the number of city police officers in the area.
The plan would be financed by a special neighborhood property tax.


INSIDE
Incumbency Has Its Joys
In public appearances around the state, announcing grants and marching in parades, Governor Cuomo rarely mentions the upcoming election.
He doesn't have to.
Page 31.
Haiti's Other World
For most of Haiti's elite, the promises of the exiled President that the poor would share the wealth were a threat, and they oppose his return.
Page 14.
Fed Official Dissents
Alan S. Blinder, the vice chairman of the Federal Reserve, suggested keeping interest rates low to hold down unemployment.
Page 26.
New Little League Champion
Venezuela beat Northridge, Calif., 4-3, to win the World Series.
SportsSunday, section 8. (Some copies went to press before the game ended.).


On 87th St., A Vacant Lot f Trouble
For 30 years now, the vacant lot on 87th Street has been dumping ground, public urinal, dog run, encampment for homeless men, playground and basketball court, sometimes all at the same time.
And on a block where low-income tenants and brownstone dwellers are often uneasy neighbors, it has also been a source and a symbol of local tensions.


Letters Are Acts of Faith
To the Editor:
Vivian Gornick's article ignores a rapidly growing form of literate communication: electronic mail.
After only six months on line, I have found myself writing more letters than ever before.
Perhaps some of the novelty will wear off, but much of the excitement and thoughtfulness of letter writing is being experienced by millions via the very same telephone lines that Ms.
Gornick blames for the decline of letters.


Letters Are Acts of Faith
To the Editor:
Vivian Gornick might be pleased to know that the epistolary reflex is activated when the kids go away to camp and school.
Telephone calls cannot insure that a child will not feel deprived at mail call.
Besides, telephone conversations between parents and children, particularly when constrained by time limitations, quickly degenerate into caricatures of generational angst.


SUNDAY, August 28, 1994; Rich Is Better
Today's question of the week is for Donald Trump, the more-or-less resurrected developer and symbol of 80's opulence.
Q. Have you ever been intimate with poverty?


If You're Thinking of Living In/Malba; An Enclave Beneath a Majestic Bridge
VINCENT LODICO grows strawberries, squash and pears, persimmons and figs in his garden in Malba.
He's especially proud of two 15-foot trees that sprouted from India nuts he potted 25 years ago.
"If they grow in the panhandle of Texas," said Dr.
Lodico, a surgeon and president of the Malba Association, "they'll grow in Malba."


THE NEWEST MOYNIHAN
The interview with Senator Moynihan revealed a clever, chameleonlike politician who cannot be labeled or categorized.
He is a liberal with a liberal voting record, but sounds like a conservative.
He abjures his voting record, especially his part in referring to the Social Security program as an entitlement.
When challenged, he feigns a mock self-righteousness that it is "others" or other political forces that have used the yearly surpluses provided by the F.I.C.A. tax, rolling them over year after year, to mitigate the impact of deficits.
However, to his public he characterizes himself as the defender and protector of Social Security.


Q and A
Buenos Aires Music
Q.
I will be in Buenos Aires on Nov. 6 and 7 and would like to attend any performances scheduled at the Teatro Colon on either or both nights.
Can you tell me if anything will be staged then and how to go about getting tickets? -- Carlos G. Munoz, New York, N.Y.


A Sitting Governor Keeps Running Hard
It was billed by the Governor's office as a ground-breaking ceremony for a state-financed housing project.
But it felt like an old-fashioned political rally.
There was, for one thing, the 1,000 Hasidic men and boys packed almost to the rafters of the old synagogue, a sea of black coats and white shirts waving banners and chanting in unison, "Welcome Governor, Welcome Governor."
And then there was the matter of the name the Hasidim had given to their apartment complex: Mario Cuomo Plaza.


Political Notes; There's No Law Yet, but There Is a Collection Chief With Lots to Do
It is supposed to be a prototype of Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani's efforts to restructure New York City's government: the consolidation of agencies that collect fees or fines into one "collection czar," saving the city millions of dollars.
The only problem is that the Mayor's office did not win approval of state legislation that would give the new division the powers it needed -- and lawmakers in Albany have gone home at least until after this fall's elections.


Bookshelf
ADAM ZIGZAG.
By Barbara Barrie.
Delacorte. $14.95. (Ages 10 to 14) Adam Brody is growing up in upper-middle-class Manhattan, but his problems confronting dyslexia, the ways things zigzag on the page in front of him, are not bound by class or place.
Adam and his sister Caroline tell the story.
OUR GRANNY.
By Margaret Wild.
Illustrated by Julie Vivas.
Ticknor &amp; Fields. $13.95. (Ages 4 to 7) Two preschoolers tell about their beloved granny, who has a wobbly bottom, wears a funny bathing suit, marches in demonstrations and, best of all, lives with them.
The funny, fuzzy, watercolor illustrations are wonderfully affectionate.


Working Girl


Black No Longer Face Physical Fences, but Barriers Still Exist
Prentice Gautt remembers his crazy caper as if it happened yesterday.
On a hot Saturday afternoon in July he and two high school friends boarded a bus in Oklahoma City and rode 45 minutes to Norman.
"We walked from the bus station in Norman to the University of Oklahoma," Gautt said.
"We jumped the fence to Owen Field, ran up and down on the field two or three times and then went back home. Why'd we do it? Just to be able to say that we had been in the stadium. Not one of us felt that we would be able to play on that team. We never dreamed that a black would play for the University of Oklahoma."


Prisons, Privatization and Profits
To the Editor:
Your recent article on prison privatization produced warm feelings about what's going on in our nation's few private prisons -- profits are up, costs are down, prisoners are learning how to sew and guards and prisoners are downright chummy.
A pretty picture but far from reality.


Maja Hellmold and Daniel Sholler
Maja Hellmold, a daughter of Ralph and Margaret Hellmold of Leonia, N.J., was married last evening to Daniel Bradford Sholler, a son of Robert and Carol Sholler of Barrington, R.I.
Rabbi Nathaniel Benjamin performed the nondenominational ceremony at Wave Hill in Riverdale, the Bronx.
The bride and bridegroom graduated from Harvard University.
Mrs.
Sholler, 31, is to enter the M.B.A. program at New York University next month.
Her father is the president of Hellmold Associates, an investment banking firm in New York.


On Revising Classics
To the Editor:
Richard Taruskin's article "The Trouble With Classics: They Are Only Human"  [ Aug. 14 ]  purports to be a review of a new recording, but ends up being a call for censorship in classical music because of a so-called anti-Semitic phrase in a motet by Busnoys.


POSTINGS: The Prospect Park Stop; Ironwork and Mosaics Brighten a Renovated City Subway Station
For years, the Prospect Park station at Flatbush Avenue and Ocean Avenue in Brooklyn had the dark, dank and decrepit look of many an unrenovated New York subway stop.
"It was a total mess," said Wendy Feuer, director of the Metropolitan Transit Authority's Arts for Transit and Facility Design.
The atmosphere has brightened considerably this summer, however, thanks to a renovation with unusual artistic touches.
Outside, at the Empire Boulevard entrance, there's a green iron entrance gate decorated with elephants, a reference to the nearby Prospect Park Wildlife Center -- the zoo.
Inside are new floors, lighting and a ceramic mosaic mural and frieze of leaves called "Brighton Clay Re -- Leaf No. 1" by the Manhattan artist Susan Tunick, who used leaves that had fallen in Prospect Park for the mold.


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
PRUDENCE CRANDALL
Prudence Crandall might have been lost to history had it not been for the restoration of her house in Canterbury, where the eighth annual Prudence Crandall Day is to be celebrated on Saturday from 10 A.M. to 4:30 P.M.
The house, a National Historic Landmark administered by the Connecticut Historical Commission, was converted into a school by Ms.
Crandall from 1833 to 1834 -- arguably the shortest-lived school in the state.
Its demise was the result of prejudice and threats from area residents because the pupils were young black women who, Ms.
Crandall believed, were entitled to a better education than they were getting elsewhere.
A decade or so ago the building was restored and reopened as a museum, and recently Gov.
Lowell P. Weicker Jr. designated Sept. 3 a state holiday honoring Ms.
Crandall and her academy.
Visitors on Saturday may take self-guided tours of the museum and its current exhibition, "Woman's Work Is Never Done," and there will be a multitude of activities: Children can participate in sack races, egg-and-spoon and three-legged races, hopscotch and a checkers tournament.
An adult horseshoe-pitching tournament will be held at noon, and at 1 and 3 P.M.
American folk music will be performed by Ruth O'Neil on guitar and Rosie Edgar on fiddle.
Throughout the day artisans will demonstrate theorem painting, chair caning, American Indian beadwork and wood carving and other Colonial crafts.
Among several food options are waffles cooked over an open fire -- a popular annual feature prepared by members of the Canterbury Historical Society.
The house is at the junction of Routes 14 and 169, and admission is $2, $1 for children and older people, free to children 5 and under.
Call 546-9916 for more information.
RACING AT LIME ROCK
Labor Day weekend signals the 12th annual BMW Vintage Festival of automobile racing at Lime Rock Park in Lakeville.
Campers may settle in on the park's sites on Thursay, in advance of registration and inspection of cars that will take place on Friday from 7 A.M. to 5 P.M. and Saturday from 7:30 to 1:30.
Practice sessions are scheduled from 10 to 6 on Friday.
An art exhibition will be open from 10 to 4, and a swap meet will be in progress from 9 to 6 Friday through Monday, and Sunday will be devoted to a Concours d'Elegance and the Shelby American Automobile Club Show from 10 to 2.
Awards will be presented from 3 to 4 P.M.
Qualifying races are scheduled on Saturday from 2 to 5:30, and major racing on Monday begins at noon and continues until 6 P.M. when awards will be presented until the park closes at 8 P.M.
Featured cup races include the GMC, ITT Flygt, AGIP and Bosch, the Lime Rock Cup Can Am Race, Izod and Vintage Motorsports Cup Races, BMW and Skip Barber Racing School Cup Races.
Admission prices at the gate range from $10 on Sunday to $25 on Monday to $55 for the full event Friday through Monday.
Prices are lower in advance.
Call 435-0896 for reservations or more information.
FOLK MUSIC BENEFIT
Take a picnic, be glad that your ticket money is going to worthy causes, and enjoy the music of Peter Yarrow of Peter, Paul and Mary as well as Washboard Slim and the Blue Lights, purveyors of jugband music and blues, and the Ash Creek String Band with its mix of Southern gospel, Celtic and contemporary acoustic sounds.
The occasion is the sixth annual Founders Bank/Eli Whitney Folk Festival to be held on Saturday in Edgerton Park, an English 18th century-style park built in 1909 in New Haven and now listed on the National Register of Historic Places.
Each year the festival presents major folk musicians in concert, using with the proceeds going to further the work of the Connecticut Fund for the Environment, a 16-year-old non-profit advocacy organization dedicated to wildlife protection, water pollution and waste disposal.
The other recipient is the Farmington Canal Rail-to-Trail Association, which has been successful in converting three miles of the washed-out rail bed that replaced a 1828 canal into a jogging, biking, hiking trail in Cheshire.
Three more miles in Hamden are under reconstruction and the goal is to extend the trail from New Haven to Northampton, Massachusetts.
The entrance to the park is at Whitney Avenue and Cliff Street near the Hamden line, and tickets are $13 in advance, $15 at the gate, or $35 for preferred seating and membership in both organizations.
Call 248-6582.
TWO AT THE BRUCE
Two exhibitions that are approaching their closing dates at the Bruce Museum in Greenwich are well worth a visit.
They both cover aspects of a part of the world that most of us will never see in person.
"Tribal Treasures: Carpets and Jewelry from Central Asia" will run through Sept. 11, containing a treasury of Turkmenistan culture lent by private collectors.
"The Afghan Folio," a photographic exhibit may be seen through Sept. 6.
For many centuries Nomadic peoples sharing a richly diversified heritage with the Middle East, North Africa and Russia, produced an array of rugs and textiles that they used in decorating or covering their portable dwellings known as yurts.
A simulation of a yurt interior is in the exhibition.
In recent decades many nomad weavers have settled down in one place and made a living from selling their richly designed and brilliantly colored carpets and cloth in bazaars and to dealers.
Some 50 carpets, animal covers, wedding trappings and prayer rugs are on view.
Gold and silver jewelry inlaid with carnelian and other stones or colored glass has been a staple of Turkmen traditional costume.
Restrained and simple in design it takes the forms of headdresses, collar clasps, earrings, girdles, breast ornaments, bracelets and rings as well as embellishments for knives, rifles and household implements.
Forty pieces are on display.
"The Afghan Folio," a set of 32 dye transfer print photographs by Luke Powell, is the result of several visits to Afghanistan during the 1970's when Mr.
Powell recorded villages, mosques, ruins, people and cultural traditions on film, before much of it was destroyed in war.
The collection is considered exceptional for its artistry and its encapsulation of a fading culture.
Previous showings were held at the Asia Society in New York, the Smithsonian Institution in Washington, Manesh Hall in Moscow and the United Nations European Headquarters in Geneva.
The Bruce Museum is reachable from Exit 3 of Interstate 95, open Tuesday through Saturday from 10 A.M. to 5 P.M., Sunday from 2 to 5.
Admission is $2.50, $2 for children 5 through 12 and older people, free on Tuesdays.
Call 869-0376 for more information.
FOR BIBLIOPHILES
The cavalcade of library book sales that occurs around this time each year continues in Newtown, where the Cyrenius H. Booth Library at 25 Main Street holds its 19th annual event on Saturday from noon to 5 P.M., Sunday from 11 to 4 and Monday from 9 to 4.
Some 90,000 books will be available under tents, and on Monday browsers can double their pleasure by watching the town's renowned Labor Day Parade, which marches down Main Street beginning at 10 A.M.
A craft fair will also be in progress on the library lawn on Sunday and Monday and refreshments will be available all three days.
Early buyers on Saturday will receive numbered tickets at $5, on sale from 7 A.M.
Admission thereafter is free.
Books will be sold at half-price on Monday from 9 to 1:30, and from 2 to 4 P.M. the library will provide large bags that buyers can stuff with remaining items for $5.
For more information call 426-0152.
CONTEMPORARY ART
A collection of contemporary British art may be seen through Sept. 5 at the Bistro Cafe, 31 Bank Street in New Milford.
Assembled by Cricket Hill Associates of Dobbs Ferry, N.Y., a mother-daughter partnership specializing in presenting English and Scottish painters to an American audience, the display is diverse in style and content.
Only artists of national prominence in Britain are represented, and all the works are for sale.
For more information call 914-693-6062.
ELEANOR CHARLES


Island Oasis For Families
"I DON'T want to go to the Geckos!" the 4-year-old boy whined to his father.
Still, to the Geckos he went, joining the Monkeys, the Mowglis and the Dinosaurs for an all-day program of Mini Camp activities while his father headed for the beach.


Some Leaders in Japan Begin to Question U.S. Bases
Japan's new Socialist Prime Minister has worked hard in his first two months in office to ease concerns that he would turn the country sharply to the left, coming out in favor of everything from nuclear power to the national anthem.
But now the dominant partner in the coalition Government, the conservative Liberal Democratic Party, has also started to question its traditional thinking in a critical area, national defense.
The new debate on Japan's military strategy is in its early stages, and no one expects a sudden lurch in policy.
But the discussion is focused on what had been for four decades the unquestioned core of the country's security planning -- the network of American military bases running from Okinawa in the south to the northernmost island, Hokkaido.


Do-It-All Kafelnikov Wins Marathons, Too
Yevgeny Kafelnikov thought he would have been long gone from here by now.
Instead, the 20-year-old Russian will be playing in his fourth final of the year on Sunday, this one against Cedric Pioline, a 25-year-old Frenchman who just wants to have his game where it was a year ago.
Pioline, the runner-up in last year's United States Open, defeated Renzo Furlan of Italy, 4-6, 7-6 (7-4), 6-0, in the second semifinal today.


The Omega Series Gives Sailors as Chance tp Prepare for The America's Cup
It may still be summer, but the start this week of the Knickerbocker Cup off Port Washington, L.I., marks the beginning of an autumn flurry of international match-racing events.
Now more than ever, sailors gearing up for the 1995 America's Cup races have their eye on the Omega Grand Prix match-racing circuit.
With the Omega competitions, they get to sail on someone else's boat without having to give away secrets on how their own America's Cup yachts are doing.
It is, in effect, a way of cleaning the cobwebs off a person's sailing skills without having to kill the spider.


At Last! Clothes You Have to Have
Think what we've just been through.
These last few seasons, if you weren't suffering from an attack of terminal black, enamored of grunge or clerical costumery, looking like a waif or as if you had wandered out in your underwear, you were out of it.
But now, what a change!
Fall fashion is shooting off like fireworks, spewing provocative styles in all directions.
Every woman should be able to find something she likes, maybe even cannot live without.
Some of these new notions are highly sophisticated.
A lot are redolent of the glamour of eras past.
Not a few are blindingly flashy.
And several are frankly frivolous.
It is possible, for instance, to mirror -- like the image on this page -- a dream of decades-past elegance.
Or to look like a tart hanging out on a street corner.
You can appear as cuddly as a kitten.
Or as sleekly confident as the computer-age woman you actually are.
Whatever the edge or angle, though, all the new fashions share a sense of dressing up again, of making an effort to look alluring.


PHOTOGRAPHER'S JOURNAL


Think About . . .
A shapely suit with an attention-getting skirt length.
Try a Jacket that clings.
Or one that caresses.
A skirt that rides high on the thigh.
Or tickles the knee.
For a final kick, sexy high heels and a jaunty hat.


Abigail Kamen and Andrew Holland
Abigail Jane Kamen, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Harry P. Kamen of New York, was married last evening at the Pierre Hotel in New York to Andrew Robert Holland, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Melvyn A. Holland of South Dartmouth, Mass.
Rabbi Richard Chapin performed the ceremony.
The bride, 27, is an editor at Harper Paperbacks in New York.
She graduated from Princeton University.
Her father is the chairman and chief executive of the Metropolitan Life Insurance Company in New York.
Her mother, Susan Kamen, retired as an assistant vice president at New York Life Insurance Company.


Cuban Exiles Turn Funeral Into Protest
About 20,000 people marched in the Little Havana section here today to bury a Cuban refugee who died at sea and to demand tougher sanctions against the Cuban Government, which they blamed for forcing thousands of Cubans to risk their lives fleeing in tiny boats and rafts.
The angry crowd turned out for the funeral of 34-year-old Rafael Gamez Rodriguez, whose body was brought to shore on Aug. 17 by his brother, Pedro, another refugee, on a raft made of inner tubes.


In America; Shots In the Subway
Just a few hours after the Senate passed the crime bill on Thursday night, Godfrey Williams boarded a Manhattan-bound subway train at a station in the Bedford-Stuyvesant section of Brooklyn.
It was nearly 11 P.M. and he was on his way to work.
Mr.
Williams, 40, had two jobs.
He was the superintendent of his building in a residential neighborhood that was once grand but has long since fallen on hard times.
At night he was a watchman in a ritzy office building on Park Avenue.


SUNDAY, August 28, 1994; Sound Off! Rewind!
Getting too laid-back?
Need discipline?
You could hire a personal trainer or join a Zen monastery, but time is short.
So why not simply try "Run to Cadence" cassettes?
"Running through the jungle, it's hot and dry/You can't stop running or you're gonna die," chanted by an actual stomping, clapping military unit, is the next best thing to a personal drill sergeant.
George Casey, who came up with the idea, says he and his wife, Ellen, sell about 50,000 tapes a year, mostly at Army and Navy PX's around the world.


Water Is a Source of Inspiration for Landscape Sculptures
FIRST of all, Shady, a hamlet west of Woodstock on Route 212, lives up to its name -- the trees move closer to this stretch of road as if to engulf it.
Second, Elena Zang's gallery is not the type normally featured in this column, for most of it is a terraced garden climbing the hill in back.
Third, Ms.
Zang is a potter before she is a dealer, but she is one who knows a good setting for sculpture when she sees it.
Having moved to this spot four years ago, Ms.
Zang decided to stage not only indoor displays of her own work and that of her companion, Alan Hoffman, but also outdoor exhibitions of works produced by the many sculptors living in the area.
That some of the artists have international reputations is only to be expected; Woodstock is dense with painters and sculptors, not to mention writers.
In fact, its fame as a summer resort for the creative set predates its musical notoriety by several decades.


Leslie C. Weil And M. Mark Lee
Leslie Caryl Weil, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
J.
Peter Weil of Jericho, L.I., is to be married today to M. Mark Lee, a son of the late Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph R. Lee.
Rabbi David Lincoln is to perform the ceremony at the Mark Hotel in New York.
The bride, 34, is an account manager at Lane's Floor Covering in New York.
She graduated from Parsons School of Design.


S. D. Stephenson, Norman Keyes Jr.
Sarah Deuel Stephenson, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Leigh D. Stephenson of Portland, Ore., was married yesterday to Norman Arthur Keyes Jr., the son of Mr.
Keyes Sr. of West Falmouth, Mass., and Anita D. Claeboe of Ponte Vedra Beach, Fla.
The Rev.
Martha Shaw performed the Unitarian ceremony at the summer home of Mrs.
Allston B. Gurney, the bride's grandmother, in Harrington, Me.
Ms.
Stephenson-Keyes, 31, is the acting assistant director of education at the Museum of Modern Art in New York.
She graduated cum laude from Yale University and studied decorative arts at Christie's in London.


Aug. 21-27: In Debt; After Ouster of Chavis, Uncertainty for N.A.A.C.P.
As a pugnacious young black militant in the 1970's, Benjamin F. Chavis Jr. served more than four years in prison as one of the defiant "Wilmington 10" convicted in the firebombing of a white-owned grocery store in North Carolina (a conviction later overturned).
Last weekend, defiant as ever, Mr.
Chavis was ousted as executive director of the N.A.A.C.P. by its board of directors, replaced for an interim period by Earl T. Shinhoster, a 30-year veteran of the organization.
Mr.
Chavis had clashed with the board most recently over his secret commitment of as much as $332,400 of the organization's funds to a former aide who charged he had sexually harassed her.
But Mr.
Chavis had been at odds with the board often during his 16-month tenure, notably over his courting of black separatists like Louis Farrakhan of the Nation of Islam and his running up of more than $3 million in debt.


Shots in the Subway: A special report.; A Split-Second Misjudgment Fuses the Lives of 2 Officers
Desmond Robinson went to extraordinary lengths to avoid looking like a police officer.
He shaved his head but not his beard.
He wore earrings to work, along with shorts and sandals.
He became so good at dissolving himself into the fluid masses on the subways that his colleagues bestowed on him the ultimate nickname for an undercover officer: The Phantom.
He was the just the kind of adversary most dreaded by the roving bands of pickpockets who work the trains and spend more time looking for the police than they do hustling for the easy wallet.
Most of them never get arrested, having mastered the art of spotting an officer's nervous glance through his disguise.
But they rarely spotted Officer Robinson.
"If you were a perp, he could be on you out of nowhere," said Sgt.
Michael Conway, his former supervisor in the transit police.


Canada's Security Agency Accused of Spying on Canadians
Canada's domestic security agency, which is responsible for investigating suspected subversion, espionage, terrorism and sabotage, has been shaken by allegations of spying on the Canadian Broadcasting Corporation, the Canadian Jewish Congress and a leading political party.
In the last two weeks, Toronto newspapers have published "read and destroy" documents of the agency, known as the Canadian Security Intelligence Service, suggesting an abuse of power reminiscent of the domestic spying in Canada and the United States in the 1970's.


Fed Official Disapproves Of Rate Policy
Alan S. Blinder, the vice chairman of the Federal Reserve, publicly broke ranks with most of his colleagues today, saying he believed that the nation's central bank should seek to hold down unemployment in setting interest rates.
Speaking at the Federal Reserve's annual conference here, Mr.
Blinder said that while controlling inflation was important, the Federal Reserve could limit unemployment for a few years at a time through low interest rates.
He strongly criticized the idea, widely held among his colleagues and many economists, that a central bank would be more effective in fighting inflation if it focused solely on maintaining stable prices.
Mr.
Blinder's comments revealed an intellectual split within the Federal Reserve, but seemed unlikely to produce a split over policy for the time being.
Mr.
Blinder said he thought unemployment in the United States, which stood at 6.1 percent in July, was now roughly as low as it could go without feeding inflation.
The clear implication of his comment, though not explicitly stated, was that the Federal Reserve could continue to raise short-term interest rates to fight any threat of inflation as long as unemployment stayed low.
First Clinton Appointee
But Mr.
Blinder's comments did suggest that if unemployment and inflation rose simultaneously again, as occurred in the 1970's, he would be much more reluctant than his colleagues to raise interest rates further.
Mr.
Blinder is President Clinton's first appointee to the central bank, and his comments today were especially significant because he is a leading candidate to head the central bank when Mr.
Greenspan's term expires early in 1996.
President Reagan first appointed Mr.
Greenspan in 1987, and President Bush appointed him to a second term in 1992.
In contrast to Mr.
Blinder's statements today, Alan Greenspan, the chairman of the Federal Reserve, has tried for years in testimony before Congress to distance the central bank from responsibility for unemployment.
Mr.
Greenspan told a House panel on Aug. 10 that maintaining stable prices was the primary goal of the Federal Reserve.
He reminded Representatives that he had previously testified in favor of a bill that would require the Federal Reserve to pursue zero inflation above all other goals, including the reduction of unemployment.
He has said he does not believe sustained reductions in unemployment can be achieved by permitting low interest rates and rising inflation.
Long-Term Approach
While Mr.
Greenspan has never publicly defined the duration of a sustained reduction, none of his comments have suggested that the Federal Reserve might be able to hold down unemployment for a few years, as Mr.
Blinder suggested today.
Mr.
Greenspan said on Aug. 10 that any unemployment gain was "ephemeral" and "very quickly dissipates."
Mr.
Blinder did say he did not believe that interest rates could be used to hold down unemployment over the long term -- which he defined as 5 to 10 years.
He said he believed the economy was now roughly at the maximum level of employment possible without feeding inflation.
He had testified at his Senate confirmation hearing last spring that he supported the Federal Reserve's first three interest-rate increases.
He is widely rumored to have supported the Fed's decision to raise short-term interest rates by another half a percentage point on Aug. 16, although Fed officials have refused to confirm or deny this.
Mr.
Blinder has never publicly expressed a view on the Fed's fourth interest-rate increase, which took place in May, after his confirmation hearing but before he joined the Fed.
Mr.
Greenspan made an oblique reference here on Friday to his distaste for using low interest rates and higher inflation to hold down unemployment, a tactic known in economic policy circles as using monetary policy to seek macroeconomic gain.
"Any tendency to seek a bit of macro policy relief by pushing on the outer limits of monetary policy risks longer-term financial instability," Mr.
Greenspan said.
Endorsing a Fed Goal
Congressional Democrats amended the Federal Reserve Act in 1978 to require the central bank to seek full employment as well as price stability.
It is this amendment that the bill supported by Mr.
Greenspan would change.
But in an interview after his speech today, Mr.
Blinder endorsed the full-employment goal.
"A central bank should have an employment objective," he said.
"The evidence is overwhelming."
Janet Yellen, who is President Clinton's other appointee to the Federal Reserve Board this year, also endorsed the use of monetary policy to hold down unemployment at her confirmation hearing in July.
But she was not as emphatic as Mr.
Blinder was today, nor did she actually criticize the idea that central banks can control inflation better if they do not look at unemployment.


Renee Jolles and Michael B. Rubin
Renee Jolles, a violin soloist and chamber musician in New York, and Dr.
Michael Benjamin Rubin, a radiology resident at Montefiore Medical Center in the Bronx, are to be married today at the St.
Regis in New York.
Rabbi Gerald C. Skolnik is to perform the ceremony.
The bride, 28, is a member of Continuum, a chamber-music group, and the New York Piano Trio.
She graduated and received a master's degree in music from the Juilliard School, where she now teaches music in the precollege division.
She is a daughter of Jerome and Susan Jolles of Forest Hills, Queens.
Her father is a composer and piano teacher.
Her mother, a harpist, is a member of the Jubal Trio and a teacher at the Mannes College of Music in New York.
She and the bride also perform as the Jolles Duo.


47 Years After a Crash, Flier Plans Pilgrimage To B-29's Resting Place
MOST of all, John G. Lesman says, he remembers the numbing cold.
Amid Arctic winds and a constant winter twilight, 55 degrees below zero "can draw the strength in your soul right out of you," said Mr.
Lesman, a 70-year-old retired airline navigation instructor.
In 1947 he and 10 other men endured 68 hours in such conditions while awaiting rescue after crash-landing their B-29 bomber on a frozen lake bed in Greenland.


A Musical Night
Vibe magazine celebrating its first anniversary, at Roseland, Aug. 18.


Status Upgraded on Injured Driver
The condition of ERNIE IRVAN, critically injured a week ago in a crash during practice at Michigan International Speedway, was upgraded to serious but stable at St.
Joseph Mercy Hospital in Bristol, Tenn.
The announcement, made yesterday by BRIAN VANDERCOOK, a Robert Yates Racing spokesman, came at Bristol International Raceway, where Nascar's Winston Cup series was racing last night. (AP)


Keeping Pixels In Their Place
To the Editor:
It would be helpful if the promoters, developers and advance men for CD-ROM and Continuum would become at least partially knowledgeable about the discipline they hope to use for educational purposes: art history and connoisseurship  [ "The Pixels and Perils of Getting Art On Line," Aug. 7 ] .


Vineyard Vacation: 'Veg Out'
The President is finally on vacation, after grappling with Cuba, the crime bill, health care, Whitewater -- all of which kept him from the really big event here, the county fair.
Still, he isn't lolling on the beach.
He went jogging this morning, and then hit the golf course at 10:20 with his old friend Vernon E. Jordan.
This is Mr.
Clinton's second visit to this laid-back island five miles off the shoulder of Cape Cod.
It was a lot harder to get away from the office this summer.
The President, who arrived on Friday night with his wife, Hillary, and daughter, Chelsea, is more than a week overdue.


Daed in the Water
THE LADIES' LUNCH By Patricia O'Brien. 284 pp. New York: Simon &amp; Schuster.


Michelle Cleary, Thomas Sepanski
Michelle Lynn Cleary, the daughter of Marilyn Laurent and Robert Cleary, both of Ocean Township, N.J., was married yesterday to Thomas Angelo Sepanski, a son of Rosemarie and John Sepanski, of Cold Spring Hills, L.I.
Judge Louis Ohlig, of the Suffolk County Court in Central Islip, L.I., officiated at the former Otto Kahn mansion in Cold Spring Hills.
Mrs.
Sepanski, 28, is an account executive for an office services subsidiary of Pitney Bowes Inc. in New York.
She and her husband graduated from George Washington University.
Her father owns Clear Telecommunications in Ocean Township.


THE NEWEST MOYNIHAN
As a New Yorker, I am both proud and comforted that our state has a Senator whose ideas, seminal and developed, invite discussion, debate and real thinking, not just sloganeering ("The Newest Moynihan," by Todd S. Purdum, Aug. 7).
Wouldn't it be great if the television shows would give more time to Senator Moynihan's welfare, health, tax and foreign policy proposals and a little less time to the O. J. Simpson trial or the antics of show business personalities?
FRANK C. ARRICALE Bayside, Queens


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: August 28, 1994
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
6
FORREST GUMP, by Winston Groom. (Pocket, $5.50.) A slow-witted man makes his way through three decades of American history.
2
28
THE CLIENT, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $6.99.) Just before he kills himself, a lawyer reveals a deadly secret to an 11-year-old boy.
3
9
WITHOUT REMORSE, by Tom Clancy. (Berkley, $6.99.) John Kelly tries to rescue prisoners held in North Vietnam.
4
20
CLEAR AND PRESENT DANGER, by Tom Clancy. (Berkley, $6.99.) The C.I.A.'s Jack Ryan fights drug lords in Colombia.
5
10
A CASE OF NEED, by Michael Crichton writing as Jeffery Hudson. (Signet, $6.99.) A 1968 novel about the death of a surgeon's daughter.
6
11
THE SHIPPING NEWS, by E. Annie Proulx. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $12.) A man mourns his adulterous wife in Newfoundland.
7
2
NIGHTMARES &amp; DREAMSCAPES, by Stephen King. (Signet, $6.99.) Stories (mostly about the macabre), a teleplay, an essay and a poem.
8
2
LIKE WATER FOR CHOCOLATE, by Laura Esquivel. (Anchor/Doubleday, $5.99.) Frustration, love, hope -- and recipes -- sampled by a woman on a Mexican ranch.
9
1
GONE, BUT NOT FORGOTTEN, by Phillip Margolin. (Bantam, $6.50.) The wives of several Portland, Ore., businessmen disappear.
10
5
POT OF GOLD, by Judith Michael. (Pocket, $6.99.) A mother and daughter win $60 million.
11
1
THE WYNDHAM LEGACY, by Catherine Coulter. (Jove, $5.99.) In Regency England, a demanding earl and a serene duchess cope with life together.
12
5
SACRED CLOWNS, by Tony Hillerman. (Harper Paperbacks, $6.99.) Two Navajo tribal policemen and a web of politics and murder.
13
6
A SIMPLE PLAN, by Scott Smith. (St. Martin's, $5.99.) Madness besets a man who plans to pocket a fortune on which he stumbled.
14
5
SNAGGED, by Carol Higgins Clark. (Dove/Warner, $5.50.) While in Miami, Regan Reilly contends with a variety of crimes.
15
5
GUARDIAN, by John Saul. (Fawcett, $5.99.) A single mother strives to protect her children from a stalking, unseen killer.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
NonFiction
1
33
CARE OF THE SOUL, by Thomas Moore. (Harper Perennial, $12.) A psychotherapist discusses spirituality and everyday life.
2
564
THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $10.95.) Inspiration.
3
17
MAMA MAKES UP HER MIND, by Bailey White. (Vintage, $10.) Life in a tiny Georgia town, as seen by a first-grade teacher.
4
16
GIRL, INTERRUPTED, by Susanna Kaysen. (Vintage, $10.) A memoir of mental illness.
5
33
WHERE ANGELS WALK, by Joan Wester Anderson. (Ballantine, $10.) Stories about angelic intervention in human affairs.
6*
80
I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS, by Maya Angelou. (Bantam, $4.99.) The poet's depiction of her childhood and adolescence.
7
14
REENGINEERING THE CORPORATION, by Michael Hammer and James Champy. (Harper Business, $13.) A manifesto for business innovation.
8*
15
LISTENING TO PROZAC, by Peter D. Kramer. (Penguin, $12.95.) A psychiatrist reflects on mood-changing medications and their effects.
9
2
THE LAST BROTHER, by Joe McGinniss. (Pocket, $6.99.) A biography of Senator Edward M. Kennedy.
10
6
A BOOK OF ANGELS, by Sophy Burnham. (Ballantine, $10.) Encounters with celestial beings as recorded by people past and present.
11
43
THE TAO OF POOH, by Benjamin Hoff. (Penguin, $9.) Taoism as seen through the A.A.
Milne character.
12
21
YOUNG MEN &amp; FIRE, by Norman Maclean. (University of Chicago, $10.95.) An account of a disastrous fire in a Montana forest in 1949.
13*
150
A YEAR IN PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Vintage, $10.) A sojourn in the south of France.
14
12
FORTUNATE SON, by Lewis B. Puller Jr. (Bantam, $5.99.) The autobiography of a Marine general's son who was mutilated in combat in Vietnam and recently committed suicide.
15*
64
THE SILENT PASSAGE, by Gail Sheehy. (Pocket, $5.50.) Menopause and today's women.
16*
17
RACE MATTERS, by Cornel West. (Vintage, $9.) Issues affecting black Americans.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
NonFiction
1
180
THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE, by Stephen R. Covey. (Fireside/S&amp;S, $12.) Principles for success.
2
1
GUMPISMS: The Wit and Wisdom of Forrest Gump, by Winston Groom. (Pocket, $5.) Witticisms by a fictional slow-witted wanderer through history.
3
5
EAT MORE, WEIGH LESS, by Dean Ornish. (Harper Perennial, $14.) Diet counsel.
4
13
RAND MCNALLY ROAD ATLAS. (Rand McNally, $8.95.) The 1994 edition.
5*
42
WHAT TO EXPECT WHEN YOU'RE EXPECTING, by Arlene Eisenberg, Heidi E. Murkoff and Sandee E. Hathaway. (Workman, $10.95.)
Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending Aug. 13, at 3,050 bookstores plus wholesalers serving 38,000 other retailers, statistically weighted to represent sales in all such outlets nationwide.
An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.


Memory Tripping
Many of the photographs in the opening pages of Elliott Landy's WOODSTOCK VISION: The Spirit of a Generation (Continuum, cloth, $39.50; paper, $19.95) illustrate the confrontational society that developed in the 1960's: police officers and demonstrators are depicted in a clash of nightsticks, blood and bared teeth.
"You could be the policeman or the demonstrator," Mr.
Landy writes, "but either way, you were still part of the fighting." The violence shown in these shots contrasts with the spirit of the photographs of the 1969 Woodstock festival in the book's closing section.
These two sections surround a stunning collection of photographs of the best-known rock stars of the 60's.
Mr.
Landy's images refract the inspiration he felt while documenting performances by Janis Joplin at the Newport Folk Festival and by Jim Morrison and Jimi Hendrix at the Fillmore East.
"If the 60's generation wanted to change the world, the musicians were viewed as the leaders," Mr.
Landy writes.
"As artists they had discovered how to tap into the essence of the time, how to utilize masses of energy to move people and communicate their feelings." Mr.
Landy discusses at length his professional and personal relationship with Bob Dylan, particularly the sessions that resulted in the cover for the album "Nashville Skyline," a photograph that he says "perhaps . . . reflects the love we were all seeking to find through making the world a better place." Mike Lang, one of the organizers of the Woodstock festival, asked Mr.
Landy to photograph the event; the images of the peaceful, communal life Mr.
Landy witnessed there stand in an interesting, though frustratingly brief, contrast to the violence shown in the book's opening paragraphs.
KEITH DIXON


BROOKLYN UPDATE
*
BROOKLYN HEIGHTS A lack of support from businesses may jeopardize a project to keep Montague Street clean, officials of the Brooklyn Heights Association said.
But many merchants on Montague Street, the unofficial main street of Brooklyn Heights, said that they were unaware they were supposed to pay a fee, which is $2 a day.


Prisons, Privatization and Profits
To the Editor:
Anthony Ramirez is entirely too sanguine about the future of the private prison industry ("Privatizing America's Prisons, Slowly," Aug. 14).
Underemphasized in this story of impressive corporate income and satisfied inmates is the labor issue, which, as the article acknowledges, is important when labor costs amount to two-thirds of operating costs.


A Pepper Rally
Let us now praise sweet peppers.
Raw, they have a sunny crunch; cooked, they become sweetly intense and toothsome, with a smoky aftertaste that hints of things to come.
Right now, there are mountains of red, yellow, green and orange peppers at farmers' markets, a rococo display of summer's last gasp.
But sweet peppers are no longer limited to August and early September.


Corrections
Photographs accompanying an article on Aug. 21 about renting a villa in Italy erroneously depicted rooms that were not in the part of the house rented by the author.
The interiors shown on page 1 and page 16 are in the owner's wing, available only when the house, which sleeps 12, is rented in its entirety.
The rate for the whole house was about $3,760 a week in July and August this year, $3,120 at other times, based on an exchange rate of $1.60 to the British pound, and is expected to increase by 10 percent next year.


Letters Are Acts of Faith
To the Editor:
One of my most interesting, important and exciting relationships is with a man I met for three hours nearly six years ago at a Thanksgiving dinner.
Heiner is a psychologist who lives in Germany, and he loves art, music and traveling with the same passion that I do.
We were drawn to each other immediately the night we met and spent those three hours in an intense exchange of ideas.
We have been writing ever since.


Letters Are Acts of Faith
To the Editor:
The joy of letter writing has not yet been lost to the ages.
When the correspondent lives in another country, long distance telephone rates provide a continuing incentive to put pen to paper rather than mouth to receiver.
Since my only brother moved to Israel nearly a decade ago, we have corresponded at least monthly by mail.
If we have remained close, it is because of these letters, which often run 20 to 30 pages, more than to our occasional telephone calls or rare visits.
Our friends consider us quaint practitioners of an anachronistic art.
Now, armed with Vivian Gornick's essay, I understand why we persist.
BARRY E. LICHTENBERG  Teaneck, N.J.


The Boys in Their Summer Dresses
What a summer this has been for men in dresses!
While Patrick Swayze, Wesley Snipes and John Leguizamo were wearing ball gowns for the filming of "To Wong Foo, Thanks for Everything, Julie Newmar" (scheduled to open next summer), movie theaters seemed to be filled with males of all ages, nationalities (and species) in women's clothing.


Upscale Perhaps, but Still Afraid
THE STORE OWNER
Jeff Saunders, owner of McCabe's Wines and Spirits at 77th Street and Third Avenue Q.  Is crime serious in your neighborhood?
A.
It's getting worse here, definitely.
Cars are broken into and stolen on a daily basis.
When school lets out, kids come around terrorizing people on the streets, just nasty.
I'm constantly chasing shoplifters out of the store.
Once we caught a team of purse snatchers right out here on the corner.
Q.
Have you been a victim?
A.
I was robbed here last year at Christmas time, and a sales clerk was killed.
It was a bad situation.
Q.
Has crime affected how you live?
A.
It's changed me.
I'm definitely more aware.
I'm looking to buy a new car, and I'm thinking what models do they they steal the fastest.
I have a gun permit now.
I applied after the robbery.
Q.
What about the proposed private security force?
A.
In theory it sounds good, but when it comes to extra taxes, if I spend money I can hire my own.
I'd have to see the details.
THE RESIDENT
Sally Kuhn: Art historian, writer and an Upper East Side resident for 25 years.
Lives on 77th Street.
Q.
Is crime serious in your neighborhood?
A.
I would say it's a moderate issue.
There's certainly been an increase over the years.
Q.
Have you ever been a victim?
A.
A mugging, about 15 years ago.
Q.
Does concern about crime affect the way you live?
A.
Definitely.
I take extra precautions and live very defensively.
I'm careful how I travel, carrying my keys in a place different from my money and trying to look strong and alert.
The type of apartment I've chosen to live in, with a 24-hour doorman, is definitely because of these issues.
Q.
What about the proposed tax to pay for private security?
A.
Would we become a gilded ghetto, a gated community with no gate?
Initially my reaction is: No more taxes.
Don't raise the expense so that everybody will leave town, and there's nobody left to guard.
THE COMMANDER
Capt.
George Kelly, newly installed commander of the 19th Precinct Q.  How serious is crime on the Upper East Side?
A.
Crime is taking a dramatic downturn compared to last year in just about every category.
It was the same thing last year and the previous year.
I believe this is a relatively safe precinct but we do have our share of crime.
Q.
Do Upper East Siders have exaggerated fears?
A.
It's certainly not an exaggerated concern.
Safety has become the No. 1 issue throughout the country, and the East Side is no different.
Q.
What's your experience with private security officers?
A.
In my old precinct in Queens, the Lindenwood Village Association has had a patrol around the clock for three years, and it has contributed to a reduction in crime and the perception of crime.
Q.
What about the proposed security force for the Upper East Side?
A.
I would be all for anything that would reduce crime, but it's really up to the community to decide.


Nen Makes His Name in the Marlins' Bullpen
His is not a household name -- if households are still talking about baseball -- like Barry Bonds, Ken Griffey Jr., Roberto Alomar, Brian McRae and Moises Alou.
Everybody knows they are sons of former major leaguers.
But often the best people can do with Robb Nen, besides trying to remember if it's his first or last name that has a double consonant at the end, is say, "Was his father what's his name?"
Yes, his father is Dick Nen, a .224-hitting first baseman in six major league seasons with the Dodgers, the Cubs and the Senators.
But in less than a strike-suspended season, Robb (double b) Nen (single n) has established himself as someone more significant than the son of a former major league player.
He has been part of an experience that should show teams they don't have to give up packages of prospects or bundles of bucks for that closing relief pitcher they yearn, like some clubs almost did with Randy Myers and Rick Aguilera this year.


Isn't That a Bodega on Your Back Porch?


COLORING LESSONS
David Updike's aside about "anti-politically-correct thought police" made me smile and nod my head in recognition (About Men: "Coloring Lessons," July 31).
That is one of society's problems in a nutshell: the backlash against "politically correct" ideas is having a chilling effect on real attempts to improve the relationships between all people.
MARK ALLISON Shiremanstown, Pa.


Corrections
A picture caption last Sunday with an article about bicycling lessons for adults misidentified one of the students.
She is Babsie John, not Rosemary Edge.


A Family Business Built on the Family Pet
IT'S a story straight out of Horatio Alger," said Jack R. Greenberg, describing the rise of Pet Products, a company he founded in Yonkers with his two sons 13 years ago. The company is now moving to larger quarters in Cortlandt.
"Pet Products has been profitable since Day 1," he said.
"We started in business with an initial investment of $150,000, and this fiscal year, we reached $10 million in sales."


Why'd a Rooster Cross 30th Ave.?
One night in April, Teresa Rungoo returned exhausted from a vacation in her native Ecuador and quickly slipped into bed.
A few hours later, she was awakened from pleasant dreams by a crowing rooster.
Displeased and sleepy, she and her neighbors gathered in the yard next to hers.
Atop an apple tree, stately and plump, a rooster was greeting the sun that was rising out of Flushing Bay and would soon shine on this street in Jackson Heights.
The rooster came down, two hours later.


Anne Stetson, Mark Dibble
Anne Stetson, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Kenneth M. Stetson of West Hartford, Conn., was married yesterday at the Pilgrim Congregational Church in Harwichport, Mass., to Mark Pendleton Dibble, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
John D. Dibble of Middlebury, Conn.
The Rev.
Dr.
James A. Todd, a Congregational minister, performed the ceremony.
The Rev.
Stanley Sandberg, the bride's maternal grandfather and a Lutheran minister, took part.


Lake Baikal
To the Editor: Jane Harrigan's article "A Swath of Blue in Russia's 'Wild East' " (July 10) described the natural beauty of Lake Baikal, but did not mention the imminent threats to it.
Much of Lake Baikal remains pristine, but pulp manufacturing, acid rain, sewage, logging and tourism jeopardize this fragile treasure.
I also visited Lake Baikal recently, where, as the staff attorney with the American branch of the private nonprofit Environmental Law Alliance Worldwide, I worked with local environmental lawyers.
Scientists estimate that Lake Baikal holds 20 percent of the earth's fresh water.
However, Baikalsk Pulp and Paper Mill dumps toxins into the lake.
Nearby cities, lacking treatment facilities, dump sewage in.
The logging of surrounding forests also jeopardizes Baikal.
Scientists suspect that pollution may be contributing to declines in the population of native fish species.


Free Park Concert Benefits Thousands
In the Aug. 14 Long Island Journal, under the heading "Crowds for Concerts," Sgt.
Harry Olsen of the State Park Police complained about the traffic entering and leaving Heckscher State Park on Aug. 6, the night of the free New York Philharmonic concert.
I'm sure that the state police assigned to traffic control at Woodstock would have cheerfully traded places with him!
The Woodstock audience paid $135 a ticket for the privilege of hearing an assortment of rock groups . . . and many in the audience had to park their cars 50 miles away and be shuttled to the concert.
The free New York Philharmonic concerts, which have been presented for the last 17 years, have made it possible for more than half a million Long Islanders, of all ages, to enjoy "priceless music, absolutely free." The concerts are free due to the generosity of dozens of civic-minded individuals and businesses, in partnership with the LongIsland State Parks and state and local governments.


The Colorful and Dependable Geranium
THIS has been a good year for geraniums.
In spite of midsummer heat and humidity, the showy plants are strutting their stuff in window boxes, patio pots and tubs, flower borders and tidy borders around the bases of flagpoles.
The plants in question, with their handsome leaves and spectacular blooms, are what botanists call pelargoniums, not to be confused with hardy perennial geraniums.


Put Noises Off
To the Sports Editor:
I do not always find myself in the same camp with Andre Agassi, but his comments regarding the music at the Volvo International are right on target.
The gross intrusion of extraneous sounds has no place in tennis -- or any sports event, for that matter.
I have no desire to set the clock back to Forest Hills, but the current trend of assaulting the senses appears to have leaped from the stadiums to the courts -- a pity.


Home Shopping's New Beat
"WHAT else do we have for back to school, Kari?" Ken Ober asked his co-host, Kari Wuhrer, as they provided play-by-play commentary for an MTV fashion show, which featured $90 denim jackets and $60 hockey jerseys.
"What every student needs, of course, to carry his or her books to class -- the Beavis and Butt-head 'School Sucks!' backpack," said Ms.
Wuhrer, who was wearing purple sunglasses and a slip dress, and her blond hair Buckwheat style.
As her narration continued, a model in a bikini walked down the runway carrying the $40 black canvas backpack embroidered with the academic epithet and likenesses of Beavis and Butt-head, the cartoon characters whose immense popularity is based on their being inane and profane.


Corrections
The Practical Traveler column on Aug. 14 about cruise ship sanitation referred imprecisely to the relationship between the ship World Discoverer and Clipper Cruise Line.
The World Discoverer is owned and operated by Discoverer Reederei of Bremen, Germany, not Clipper Cruise Line.
It is marketed in North America by Clipper Adventure Cruises, a subsidiary of Clipper Cruise Line.


In Penny Stocks The Brokers Make Big Bucks
BEING a penny-stock investigator for the Securities and Exchange Commission is a bit like being a vice cop in New York.
There is no shortage of possible cases to bring, but even after you win a big one you have to wonder if you're having much impact.
Consider the case of Stratton Oakmont, the Long Island penny stock firm that settled S.E.C. charges this year by paying big fines and allowing two of its founders to be banished from the securities business.


Reality Check
To the Editor:
As disturbing as it may be, many of the greatest artistic creations are tainted with values we find deplorable, from Assyrian reliefs that celebrate slaughter and enslavement to the medieval depiction of Synagoge as a beautiful but stubbornly self-blindfolded woman.
Now Mr.
Taruskin claims that if I regard such works as inviolable (presumably meaning that I should be upset if statues were pulled down and chiseled into rubble) I am guilty of "antihumanitarian blasphemy." In this he is like the iconoclasts of the past, who always had their eye on something "higher" than art.
Well-meaning as they may have been, they were falsifiers, and we are the poorer for what they have taken from us.
LAURENCE DANKEL  Brooklyn, N.Y.


This Nanny's Life
SHE seems like the dream nanny.
She has 10 years of experience, a sturdy and serene manner and a spotless record (always punctual, never been dismissed, never had an emergency on the job).
She can monitor a carriage-bound infant, riffle through the racks in a clothing store and carry on a coherent conversation at the same time.
She knows the playground circuit, the American Museum of Natural History and the pizza parlors on Broadway like the back of her hand.
She wants to be paid on the books.
And yet, come September, Jan S. will be looking for a job.


Kimberly Paige-Stein, Patrick Fleming
Kimberly Paige-Stein, the daughter of Barbara Baldwin of Short Hills, N.J., and Dr.
Martin F. Stein Jr. of Bronxville, N.Y., was married yesterday to Patrick Dinneen Fleming, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert Fleming of Cheyenne, Wyo.
The Rev.
Gary P. Fertig performed the Episcopal ceremony at St.
Thomas' Church in New York.
Mrs.
Fleming, 31, is a former actress known as Kimberly Paige.
She graduated from the New York School of Interior Design.
Her father is the director of medicine and the chief of nephrology at St.
Joseph's Medical Center in Yonkers.


Those Reaching Shore Gain a Legal Advantage
After years of waiting and hoping, three friends from Matanzas, Cuba, savored one day of freedom.
They had spent 15 hours in a 32-foot boat with a good engine that carried them and 35 others across the Straits of Florida until the bow nudged into a muddy shore in darkness near Islamorada, midway up the Florida Keys.
Then they tensely waited for dawn to walk to a highway and find a friendly local who spoke Spanish and asked him to call the police.


Paige N. Tobias, Timothy Button
Paige Noelle Tobias, the daughter of Randall L. Tobias of Indianapolis and the late Marilyn J. Tobias, was married yesterday to Timothy Hemenway Button, a son of Evelyn and Thomas Button of Columbus, Ohio.
The Rev.
Dr.
William G. Enright performed the ceremony at the Second Presbyterian Church in Indianapolis.
Mrs.
Tobias-Button, 26, graduated from Duke University, from which she also received a law degree.
She is an associate at Baker &amp; Daniels, a law firm in Indianapolis.
Her father, a former vice chairman of the AT&amp;T Corporation in New York, is the chairman and chief executive of Eli Lilly &amp; Company, the pharmaceuticals concern in Indianapolis.


SUNDAY, August 28, 1994; Grain by Grain by Grain
As it turns out, building sand castles is no day at the beach.
"Until you start sculpting, it's backbreaking work," says Rolland Gray, who helps run the annual United States Open Championship in Imperial Beach, Calif., just south of San Diego.
The first step for the teams of contestants is to "lug a ton of water up the beach," Gray says.
Then it's pressing, patting, kneading the gritty dough into such things as a 12-step pyramid, created by an Alcoholics Anonymous chapter, and Matt Groening's Simpsons, created by a team from Great Western Bank.
In late afternoon, after the judges have judged, the crowds whomp the entrants' work into powder.


The Top 20
The top 20 rankings were prepared by Malcolm Moran.
The graduation percentage rate, from a National Collegiate Athletic Association report released this summer, includes scholarship athletes entering school from 1984 through 1987.
The figure in parenthesis is the change from the 1993 N.C.A.A. report, which covered players entering from 1983 through 1986. 1.
NEBRASKA: GRADUATION RATE47 (0) 1993 TIMES RANK5 REASONS TO BELIEVE: The narrow Orange Bowl loss to Florida State reaffirmed the conviction and imagination of Tom Osborne's program and demonstrated how close Nebraska is to the top.
Quarterback Tommie Frazier has emerged as a complete player, and four returning starters in the offensive line provide continuity.
POTENTIAL ROADBLOCK:: Two new starters in the secondary, a game against U.C.L.A. on Sept. 17 and a path to the Orange Bowl that goes through Norman, Okla., on Nov. 25. 2.
ARIZONA: GRADUATION RATE48 (-1) 1993 TIMES RANK 15 (tie) REASONS TO BELIEVE: Quarterback Dan White and returning offensive linemen, including guard Warner Smith, could be in a better position to support a dominant defense.
POTENTIAL ROADBLOCK:: If the Wildcats reach their first Rose Bowl, meeting a relatively low-ranked opponent could direct the attention of pollsters elsewhere. 3.
FLORIDA: GRADUATION RATE 45 (+4) 1993 TIMES RANK 2 REASONS TO BELIEVE: A new 4-3-4 defensive approach should provide assistance for a maligned defensive backfield and strengthen a unit that returns 18 of 22 players.
Terry Dean's strong finish last season made him the No. 1 quarterback.
POTENTIAL ROADBLOCK:: The new status as a preseason No. 1 has played mind-games elsewhere in the past.
A recent history of road disappointments will become an issue when the Gators begin an imposing late-season challenge -- a grudge game at Florida State and a possible Southeastern Conference championship game within an eight-day period. 4.
MAIMI: GRADUATION RATE 53 (+2) 1993 TIMES RANK 15 (tie) REASONS TO BELIEVE: Fiesta Bowl humiliation to Arizona, one very bad day without any incentive, made Hurricanes' decline seem worse than it was.
Defensive end Rusty Medearis, who may start two years after a severe knee injury, will add an emotional boost.
POTENTIAL ROADBLOCK: There may not be enough time to allow quarterback Frank Costa to reestablish his leadership.
Games against Washington and Florida State could threaten what by then should be the longest home-field winning streak in college football. 5.
FLORIDA STATE: GRADUATION RATE 40 (-1) 1993 TIMES RANK 1 REASONS TO BELIEVE: A continuing collection of talent should compensate for the losses from a championship unit.
But a No. 1-ranking has little margin for error, and the transition at several positions might require one.
Sophomore tailback Warrick Dunn could one day hold a Heisman.
Quarterback Danny Kanell, once a prized recruit, will take over the offense.
POTENTIAL ROADBLOCK: The fallout from the off-season scandal may be far from complete.
What little dropoff between Charlie Ward as a finished product at quarterback and Kanell in the early stages could become the difference between a champion and challenger. 6.
PENN STATE: GRADUATION RATE 72 (+6) 1993 TIMES RANK 6 (tie) REASONS TO BELIEVE: Seven returning offensive starters will include tailback Ki-Jana Carter and quarterback Kerry Collins.
Carter averaged 6.6 yards a carry, and Collins threw two interceptions in the last three games, including the Florida Citrus Bowl victory over Tennessee.
POTENTIAL ROADBLOCK: Eight new defensive starters and an unsettling reality that is new for Penn State but old for other Big Ten members: A New Year's trip to Pasadena must be preceded by a game at Michigan. 7.
ALABAMA: GRADUATION RATE 40 (+5) 1993 TIMES RANK 23 REASONS TO BELIEVE: The Tide has lost just 2 of the 26 games Jay Barker has started as quarterback.
In his senior year, Barker will have the help of the offensive coordinator Homer Smith, who has returned to Alabama.
Six returning defensive starters include linebacker Michael Rogers, safety Sam Shade and cornerback Tommy Johnson.
Punter Bryne Diehl and place-kicker Michael Proctor give the Tide outstanding special-teams play.
POTENTIAL ROADBLOCK: Jon Stevenson is the only returning starter in the offensive line.
But another soft non-conference schedule should delay any serious challenge until the Tide travels to Knoxville on the third Saturday in October. 8.
NOTRE DAME: GRADUATION RATE 82 (-3) 1993 TIMES RANK 4 REASONS TO BELIEVE: This should be the season for tailback Lee Becton to become appreciated as the player he has already become.
A relatively simple early schedule could leave the Irish 8-0 going into the Florida State game at Orlando.
POTENTIAL ROADBLOCK: A defense with four returning starters, including outstanding free safety Bobby Taylor, will have just one of the top six tacklers from a year ago.
The attention inspired by Ron Powlus, the gifted first-year quarterback, conceals a potentially dangerous problem: Notre Dame does not have a quarterback who has taken a snap in a game. 9.
MICHIGAN: GRADUATION RATE 68 (+3) 1993 TIMES RANK 13 (tie) REASONS TO BELIEVE: Tyrone Wheatley's power and reliability.
POTENTIAL ROADBLOCK: Tyrone Wheatley's separated right shoulder. 10.
WISCONSIN: GRADUATION RATE 71 (+3) 1993 TIMES RANK 11 REASONS TO BELIEVE: Tailbacks Brent Moss and Terrell Fletcher combined for over 2,400 yards in 1993.
Quarterback Darrell Bevell leads an offense with nine returning starters.
POTENTIAL ROADBLOCK: Eight days that should help determine the Big Ten race: Oct. 29 at Michigan, Nov. 5 at Ohio State. 11.
COLORADO: GRADUATION RATE 55 (-5) 1993 TIMES RANK 17 REASONS TO BELIEVE: Nine returning offensive starters include the entire interior line.
POTENTIAL ROADBLOCK: The defensive secondary, a major problem last year, will be tested in non-conference games against Wisconsin, Michigan and Texas. 12.
AUBURN: GRADUATION RATE 35 (+1) 1993 TIMES RANK 3 REASONS TO BELIEVE: A soft early schedule, with non-league games against Northeast Louisiana and East Tennessee State, should help ease the transition for offense.
POTENTIAL ROADBLOCK: The surprise factor is gone following last year's undefeated season, and N.C.A.A. probation remains. 13.
VIRGINIA TECH: GRADUATION RATE42 (+6) 1993 TIMES RANK18 REASONS TO BELIEVE: Maurice DeShazo, who directed an option offense last year, threw for 2,080 yards and finished fifth in the nation in passing efficiency.
POTENTIAL ROADBLOCK: Two starters in a readjusted offensive line must advance quickly. 14.
OKLAHOMA: GRADUATION RATE 48 (+3) 1993 TIMES RANK 12 REASONS TO BELIEVE: Running back James Allen leads eight returning offensive starters.
POTENTIAL ROADBLOCK: Quarterback Garrick McGee, a junior-college transfer once at Arizona State, leads team that opens at Syracuse and Texas A&amp;M. 15.
TENNESSEE: GRADUATION RATE 46 (-1) 1993 TIMES RANK8 REASONS TO BELIEVE: A deep offensive line, led by guard Jeff Smith, should help quarterback Jerry Colquitt in his first season as a starter.
POTENTIAL ROADBLOCK: Opener at U.C.L.A. and Sept. 17 game against Florida. 16.
U.C.L.A.: GRADUATION RATE 60 (+4) 1993 TIMES RANK 19 REASONS TO BELIEVE: J. J. Stokes is considered the best receiver in the nation.
Quarterback Wayne Cook provides reliability.
POTENTIAL ROADBLOCK: With early games against Tennessee and Nebraska, the work of a rebuilt offensive line will become essential. 17.
NORTH CAROLINA: GRADUATION RATE 68 (+1) 1993 TIMES RANK 25 REASONS TO BELIEVE: Jason Stanicek threw for 1,874 yards in 1993.
POTENTIAL ROADBLOCK: The offensive line has one returning starter -- center Pat Conneely. 18.
SOUTHERN CAL: GRADUATION RATE 52 (+1) 1993 TIMES RANK 21 REASONS TO BELIEVE: Rob Johnson, who completed 68.6 percent of his passes last season, could introduce a quarterback to the quartet of Heisman-winning runners within Heritage Hall.
POTENTIAL ROADBLOCK: Only four returning defensive starters and opening games against Washington and Penn State. 19.
TEXAS: GRADUATION RATE 44 (+9) 1993 TIMES RANK31 REASONS TO BELIEVE: Quarterback Shea Morenz will lead an offense with nine returning starters.
POTENTIAL ROADBLOCK: A rushing game must develop for the Longhorns to achieve offensive balance in John Mackovic's third year as head coach. 20.
TEXAS A&amp;M: GRADUATION RATE 37 (+2) 1993 TIMES RANK 9 REASONS TO BELIEVE: Running backs Rodney Thomas and Leeland McElroy will give the Aggies a chance to extend S.W.C. record of 22 consecutive league victories.
POTENTIAL ROADBLOCK: If streak ends, being on probation may remove late-season incentive.


Rwanda Villagers Fear Politicians, Not Neighbors
Just below the dirt road, on a small piece of flat land that drops quickly into a lush hillside of banana plants, workmen are busy slapping mortar between red bricks as the corners of a new structure begin to rise.
The work is supervised by Celestin Ngangura, an accountant and owner of 12 acres of tea bushes.
He is building a six-room house for his wife and four children, and the floor plan is already visible in the dirt, where concrete has been poured into straight shallow trenches.


SUNDAY, August 28, 1994; Philosophy in Transit
The advice riders get from official signs in the New York City subways tends to the utilitarian -- "No Smoking," "No Littering" and "Riding Between Cars Prohibited," for example.
It's no place to look for inspiration.
So imagine the pleasant surprise for riders on the 1 and 9 lines.
Every now and again, they find the blandishments covered over with advice of a more philosophical disposition.
"I realized after about five minutes that it wasn't the usual sign," says one rider.
"And this was so perfect an imitation. It was witty and precise and wonderful. When I saw the symbol for 'Strive to be happy,' I actually felt better."


Will No. 1 Priority for Democrats Become No. 1 Liability?
In a memorandum to Democratic candidates earlier this summer, Representative Vic Fazio, chairman of the Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee, could not have been clearer: "Health care will be the key to the '94 elections."
But now that the White House and Congressional leaders have essentially abandoned their push for universal health insurance before November, Democrats are confronted with a far more delicate challenge: preventing health care from becoming the key to their defeat.


Business Diary: August 21-26
THE ECONOMY Just When No One Was Looking, a Stock Rally  Investors often act as if stocks had a mind of their own, rising and falling to their own peculiar drummer, instead of just reflecting the sum of investor whims.
Just look: On Wednesday afternoon traders suddenly scratched their collective head and said, "My heavens! It's a rally!" Indeed it was, as, out of the blue, the Dow soared 70 points (give or take the usual hundredths), the year's second-biggest gain.
Soon the wonder ceased and everyone rounded up the usual reasons: bond prices up, dollar stronger, earnings high.
And by one theory, a lone money manager had devised a complex bet that backfired, sending the whole market up.
Some proclaimed the end of summer's doldrums, others saw a short-lived rally.
But by Friday the doubters were scarcer: after slipping on Thursday, the Dow sped ahead again, prompted in part by a moderate G.D.P. report, bringing the week's gain to 125, the year's highest.


Dead Moms, Flawed Dads, Perfect Pets, Happy Endings
TWO AND A HALF MONTHS after the opening of "The Lion King," it may be difficult to find an American child who can't say at least one phrase in Swahili (hakuna matata, roughly "no worries").
But then, the big screen has always been educational, often in ways the film makers never particularly intended.
For children willing to sit still at the movies this summer, there have been lessons galore, many of them about human relations, values and the American family.
Here are a few of them.
The only good mom is a dead mom.
In "Corrina, Corrina," a mother has died recently and suddenly (we don't know just how) and the daughter's grief is intense.
One of the teen-age boys in "Milk Money," which opens on Wednesday, never knew his mother at all (she died at his birth).
Both mothers favored 1950's-style fashions (floral prints and orange polka dot sundresses), which is natural enough for the mother in "Corrina, Corrina," since it is the 50's but odd for the mother who died in the 80's (even if she did remind her husband of Grace Kelly).
Maybe the subliminal point is that the last time there were really good mothers was 40 years ago.
In "Lassie" and "Angels in the Outfield," the mothers are also long departed.
Living mothers don't fare quite as well.
The mother (and to be fair, the father) in "North" are bad enough to make their child consider divorce.
They manage to squabble with each other throughout one dinner without even acknowledging little North's presence at the table.
Nannies are more loving than parents, but they don't really count.
The mother in "Baby's Day Out" doesn't even know what her infant's favorite picture book is; she has to get that information from the nanny. (Although the baby is preverbal, he indicates his preference with sounds and the nanny, clearly sick of this one selection, says to him, "Couldn't we read another book?") After the baby escapes from his kidnappers, it's the nanny who knows him well enough to figure out where he has now crawled to.
Ditto for Whoopi Goldberg, playing the nanny in "Corrina, Corrina," who rescues her young charge from grief-related mutism.
But there is an equally relevant message: you can love your nanny just so much and no more.
Molly is hooted at by her peers at school.
"What a dodo!" one shrieks when Molly presents the family portrait she has drawn.
"She drew her maid instead of her mommy." Most dads are psychologically absent -- or worse.
The best father of all is Mufasa in "The Lion King," but maybe that's because he is fated to die.
Living fathers ignore you, a la "North." The biker father in "Angels" gives his child up for adoption.
The businessman dad in "Baby's Day Out" can't remember to say goodbye to his son without repeated prodding, and he doesn't hold the child once during the entire movie.
The wetlands-preservation-advocate widower father in "Milk Money" -- an otherwise nice guy -- is willing to go to jail for his principles but doesn't seem to have considered who will take care of his son while he's there.
Meanwhile, with the exception of the earnest father, who has remarried and moved to the farm since his first wife's death, in "Lassie," not a dad in sight can deal with grief.
Could it be that dads are just big children?
The father in "Andre" calls his wife "the only real grown-up" in the family.
With only good dead mothers and flawed fathers in sight, maybe kids are learning that they have to be as independently invincible as Baby Bink and the Little Rascals.
Animals are a child's best friend, and not a bad parent substitute.
The best parent in a summer movie may have been Lassie.
She helps her boy mourn his dead mother, stop moping around the house and start a sheep business.
Eventually she saves his life.
A close second is the gorilla in "Baby's Day Out," who does more than any other human (even the nanny) to protect the baby from the bad guys.
Milo, the dog in "The Mask," steals the key that gets Stanley Ipkiss (Jim Carrey) out of jail.
Petey, the dog in "The Little Rascals," is just one of the gang.
Andre the seal dances, paints and plays dress-up; he does, however, watch entirely too much television.
Rich is bad.
When Fred Flintstone gets a big promotion and a raise in "The Flintstones," he treats his best friend, Barney Rubble (who is actually responsible for Fred's new success), badly.
At a cookout, when the family's pet dinosaur grabs Barney's steak from the grill, Fred makes no effort to replace or retrieve it.
He just says, "You'll have to fight Dino for your dinner." Waldo in "The Little Rascals" is born rich, so he never had any friends in the first place.
The rich people in "Black Beauty" make their horses wear a bearing rein, which forces them to hold their heads unnaturally high. (In the syntax of children's movies, hurting an animal is an extreme sign of depravity. Consider Willy's owners in last year's "Free Willy"; they wanted to do in the whale to collect his life insurance.) Girls are a mystery to boys.
Girls are so threatening or yucky or divine that boys have to band together in formal alliances like the He-Man Womun Haters Club of "The Little Rascals" or in informal hordes just to maintain their equilibrium.
In "Milk Money," three preadolescent boys raise $100 as a group to pay a prostitute to expose her breasts.
At a treehouse slumber party, when they all bring objects that mystify them, the collection includes a diaphragm and an eyelash curler.
The hippest of the three explains his world view: "It's a battle of the sexes and believe me, we are way behind."
Children are likely to note, however, that no matter what happens before, the movies' endings are politically correct, pulled like a rabbit from a hat.
Girls get into Spanky and Alfalfa's club because "things have to change sometime." The prostitute in "Milk Money" becomes rich and independent.
Fred Flintstone shakes off his contaminated wealth and renews his friendship with Barney.
Black Beauty lives into retirement, Lassie gets her sheep farm, and Andre the seal returns to the wilds.
Shortly after Lassie had gone over the falls and the family presumed her dead, I overheard two young companions discussing the turn of events.
"It's obvious she's not dead," said the 8-year-old.
The 11-year-old agreed: "Yeah. She's the star, and the stars never die."
That's what they learned at the movies.


For the Cornhuskers, 'Unfinished Business'
It's an old plot line, Tommie Frazier knows: impressionable youth has dream.
In it, he sprints to midfield, index finger held high.
Stadium rocks with noise.
Kid leads team to national championship.
Roll the credits.
Any late-sleeping kid from Bradenton, Fla., could dream that dream.
But how many actually lived it, only to have their undefeated happy ending edited out on national television?


Deborah Moss, Jerry Crute Jr.
Deborah Ashby Moss, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Simeon F. Moss Sr. of South Orange, N.J., was married yesterday to Jerry Crute Jr., the son of Peggy Jackson-Crute of Baltimore and Mr.
Crute Sr. of Woodlawn, Md.
The Rev.
John E. White performed the Presbyterian ceremony at the Princeton University Chapel in Princeton, N.J.
Mrs.
Crute, 29, graduated from Princeton and received a law degree from Georgetown University.
She is a lawyer, in Washington, for the Consumers Power Company, a Michigan-based utility company.
Her father, who retired as the superintendent of the Essex County public schools in Newark, is a partner in Metro Educational Services, educational consultants in South Orange, N.J.
Her mother, Edith Moss, retired as a special-education teacher in the South Orange-Maplewood schools.


Dazzling Jewelry From Peru's Mystery People
THE LORD OF SIPAN, A FIERCE warrior in third-century Peru, wore gilded armor, feathered headdresses and dazzling jewelry.
As part of his glittering garb he had back flaps, metal decorations shaped like ax heads, hanging from his belt to impress observers and protect his rear.
"When he walked, they resounded like rattles," says Craig Morris, curator for South American archeology at the American Museum of Natural History.
"And all those round things he wore on his chest and his head were fitted with bells."


Exhibit Plans On Hiroshima Stir a Debate
The decision by the United States to drop an atomic bomb on Hiroshima was one of such great historical importance -- taking the lives of an estimated 150,000 people and directly leading to the end of World War II -- that it cannot stop causing controversy.
Veterans have long wanted to memorialize the war by displaying the B-29 Superfortress that delivered the bomb on Aug. 6, 1945, and they are about to get their wish.
The National Air and Space Museum plans to put the bomber, the Enola Gay, on display in May.


Top-Secret Plum I. Beckons Public
THE director of scientific research at Plum Island, an object of suspicion, derision and outright hostility, is opening the island to the public for the first time.
He is also cooperating with nearby communities on safety and establishing scholarships and internships for high school and college students interested in pursuing careers in science.


Something Familiar To Slip Into: Glamour
IT was glamour with a capital G. An hourglass figure, with tiny waist and uplifted bosom.
High, high heels.
And enough feathers to furnish a Cecil B. DeMille movie.
Nothing expressed more clearly the arrival of post-grunge glamour than the feathers fluttering through the couture shows here in July.
Silver plumes sprouted from Claudia Schiffer's golden locks.
A Chanel muff was a puff of pink and yellow marabou.
Feathers wafted round shoulders, necklines, hems and even ankle boots.


Farewell to the Working Life
GQ magazine's retirement party for Nonnie Moore, its fashion director, at the Museum of Modern Art, Aug. 3.


Miss Chatelaine


Mr. Clinton: Break the Logjam
George Mitchell, the majority leader, could not ram his health care bill through the Senate so he reversed himself and sent members home without voting on health care reform.
That was a retreat in the face of overwhelming political reality, but it does not mean that reform is dead.
Mr.
Mitchell simultaneously began negotiations with John Chafee, the Rhode Island Republican who heads a bipartisan coalition that backs incremental reform.
The coalition proposal fails miserably to achieve universal coverage.
But it would help the poor buy coverage and substantially protect the chronically ill who insurers now shun or charge prohibitively high rates.
The coalition's proposal is the only one that could lead to a bill that passes the Senate anytime soon.


THE WORLD: Best of Enemies; Castro, the Man With Few Cards, Always Winds Up the Dealer
HIS country may be crumbling around him, its economy reduced to ruins and its people so disgusted with their situation that some have marched in the streets of Havana this month, openly demanding his ouster.
But for all his problems at home, Fidel Castro still retains a remarkable ability to bedevil the United States and to transfer the burden of his own domestic failings to the adversary he has fought with such gusto and relish for more than 35 years.
In what has become a rite of passage for every American President since Eisenhower, Bill Clinton is now learning that lesson the hard way.
The internal crisis that began less than a month ago with boat hijackings and a riot in Havana has quickly been transformed into a crisis of American foreign and immigration policy, with the United States now forced to provide temporary refuge at places like the Guantanamo Bay naval base for the more than 16,000 disenchanted Cubans intercepted as they headed for Florida aboard rickety rafts.
As was the case during the 1980 exodus from the port of Mariel, Mr.
Castro, playing a weak hand with consummate skill, is now dictating the course and tempo of events while Washington, with far more resources at its disposal, struggles to respond.


Corrections
An illustration in the Postings report last Sunday of proposed renovations of the interior of Grand Central Terminal carried an erroneous credit.
The renderer was Architectural Delineator: Porto Folio Inc.


Votes in Congress
Tally Last Week in Connecticut, New Jersey and New York
House
1.
Crime: Procedural vote to move a $30.2 billion crime bill to the House floor for consideration.
Approved 239 to 189, Aug. 21.
2.
Crime: Vote on passage of a revised $30.2 billion anti-crime package.
Approved 235 to 195, Aug. 21.
Connecticut
1. Kennelly (D) . . . Y. . . Y
2. Gejdenson (D) . . . Y. . . Y
3. DeLauro (D) . . . Y. . . Y
4. Shays (R) . . . Y. . . Y
5. Franks (R) . . . Y. . . Y
6. Johnson (R) . . . Y. . . Y  New Jersey  1. Andrews (D) . . . Y. . . Y
2. Hughes (D) . . . Y. . . Y
3. Saxton (R) . . . Y. . . Y
4. Smith (R) . . . Y. . . Y
5. Roukema (R) . . . Y. . . Y
6. Pallone (D) . . . Y. . . Y
7. Franks (R) . . . Y. . . Y
8. Klein (D) . . . Y. . . Y
9.
Torricelli (D) . . .
Y. . .
Y  10.
Payne (D) . . .
Y. . .
N  11.
Gallo (R) . . .
A. . .
N  12.
Zimmer (R) . . .
Y. . .
Y  13.
Menendez (D) . . .
Y. . .
Y  New York  1.
Hochbrueckner (D) . . .
Y. . .
Y
2. Lazio (R) . . . Y. . . Y
3. King (R) . . . Y. . . Y
4. Levy (R) . . . Y. . . Y
5. Ackerman (D) . . . Y. . . Y
6. Flake (D) . . . Y. . . Y
7. Manton (D) . . . Y. . . Y
8. Nadler (D) . . . Y. . . N
9.
Schumer (D) . . .
Y. . .
Y  10.
Towns (D) . . .
Y. . .
Y  11.
Owens (D) . . .
Y. . .
Y  12.
Velazquez (D) . . .
Y. . .
Y  13.
Molinari (R) . . .
Y. . .
Y  14.
Maloney (D) . . .
Y. . .
Y  15.
Rangel (D) . . .
Y. . .
N  16.
Serrano (D) . . .
Y. . .
Y  17.
Engel (D) . . .
Y. . .
Y  18.
Lowey (D) . . .
Y. . .
Y  19.
Fish (R) . . .
N. . .
N  20.
Gilman (R) . . .
N. . .
N  21.
McNulty (D) . . .
Y. . .
Y  22.
Solomon (R) . . .
N. . .
N  23.
Boehlert (R) . . .
Y. . .
Y  24.
McHugh (R) . . .
N. . .
N  25.
Walsh (R) . . .
Y. . .
Y  26.
Hinchey (D) . . .
Y. . .
Y  27.
Paxon (R) . . .
N. . .
N  28.
Slaughter (D) . . .
Y. . .
Y  29.
LaFalce (D) . . .
Y. . .
Y  30.
Quinn (R) . . .
Y. . .
Y  31.
Houghton (R) . . .
Y. . .
Y  KEY: Y Yea; N Nay; (A) Absent or did not vote; (P) Present.
Senate
1.
Crime: Vote to kill a Republican attempt to open up a major anti-crime bill for amendments.
Approved 61 to 39, Aug. 25.
2.
Crime: Vote on passage of a $30.2 billion anti-crime package.
Approved 61 to 38, Aug. 25.
Connecticut  Dodd (D) . . .
Y. . .
Y  Lieberman (D) . . .
Y. . .
Y  New Jersey  Bradley (D) . . .
Y. . .
Y  Lautenberg (D) . . .
Y. . .
Y  New York  D'Amato (R) . . .
N. . .
N  Moynihan (D) . . .
Y. . .
Y  KEY: Y Yea; N Nay; (A) Absent or did not vote; (P) Present.


Crisis Looms As Big Insurer Keeps Sliding
Even though Empire Blue Cross and Blue Shield has begun to repair its troubled finances, state and health care industry officials say the giant insurer is still on a slide that could disrupt coverage for millions of people in New York and beyond.
Industry executives said the crisis point would come within six months unless legislators in Albany can be persuaded that Empire is dealing vigorously enough with its problems to make a new round of rescue measures politically palatable.


Vancouver
To the Editor: We clip your articles and use them, often when they are yellowed with age because of our travel schedule!
As our good fortune had it, however, Bryan Miller's "Vancouver's Diverse Dining," (May 29) fit right into our departure for Vancouver in early July.
His tip about the Raincity Grill was especially good.
We would like to add two more spots, one for superb dim sum, Park Lock Seafood Restaurant, 544 Main Street in Chinatown, and Mescalero on Bidwell Street, a kind of hip Northwestern tapas-grill spot.
By 11:30 A.M., Park Lock was filled with family groups but we decided to wait, and felt well rewarded with quality, variety and size of sim sum portions.
About $12 in American currency fed two hungry and determined adults.


Taking Advantage of a Bumper Crop of Tomatoes
I am not trying to scold you," the owner of my local nursery said as he looked around for some six-foot stakes. "But next year put your tomatoes in a cage.
They will do much better that way."
Almost overnight, it seemed that the tomatoes in our garden had grown twice their height and were falling all over the place.
The hot weather and heavy rainfalls have not only produced a bountiful crop this year but the tomatoes also seem particularly fragrant and juicy.


Catherine Cotins, Brian R. Harris
Catherine Agnes Cotins, the director of M.B.A. program management at Harvard University in Cambridge, Mass., is to be married today to Brian Richard Harris, a consulting manager at the Oracle Corporation, the computer software company in Boston.
Cantor William Wood is to officiate at the Old Field Club in Old Field, L.I.
The bride, 30, graduated from Wesleyan University and received an M.B.A. from Harvard.
She is a daughter of Carroll and Arthur Cotins of St.
James, L.I.
Her father retired as the manager of international operations for the Eaton Corporation, a supplier of automotive parts and electronics systems.
Her mother, now retired, taught the first grade at the Stagecoach Elementary School in Centereach, L.I.


BEST SELLERS: August 28, 1994
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
5
THE GIFT, by Danielle Steel. (Delacorte, $15.) A woman's visit to a small town changes many lives.
2
2
26
THE CELESTINE PROPHECY, by James Redfield. (Warner, $17.95.) An ancient manuscript, found in Peru, provides insights into achieving a fulfilling life.
3
3
12
THE CHAMBER, by John Grisham. (Doubleday, $24.95.) A lawyer represents a racist who is on death row for his part in a 1967 bombing in Mississippi.
4
4
10
POLITICALLY CORRECT BEDTIME STORIES, by James Finn Garner. (Macmillan, $8.95.) Classic tales respun to avoid offending current sensibilities.
5
5
107
THE BRIDGES OF MADISON COUNTY, by Robert James Waller. (Warner, $16.95.) A photographer and a farmer's lonely wife in Iowa.
6
12
2
UNTIL YOU, by Judith McNaught. (Pocket, $22.) An American woman's role as a chaperone in Georgian England brings her a surprising romance.
7
8
4
DISNEY'S THE LION KING, adapted by Don Ferguson. (Mouse Works, $6.98.) The coming of age of animal royalty, told in words and pictures.
8
1
THE HIDDEN CITY, by David Eddings. (Ballantine/Del Rey, $23.) In the "Tamuli" fantasy series, heroes and gods confront the forces that shape destiny.
9
6
20
THE ALIENIST, by Caleb Carr. (Random House, $22.) A journalist and a psychologist track down a murderer in turn-of-the-century Manhattan.
10
9
5
UNDUE INFLUENCE, by Steve Martini. (Putnam, $22.95.) A defense attorney finds himself caught in a web of murder and deceit within his own family.
11
7
6
EVERYTHING TO GAIN, by Barbara Taylor Bradford. (HarperCollins, $24.) A woman tries to cope after an act of violence destroys her perfect family life.
12
10
10
THE CROSSING, by Cormac McCarthy. (Knopf, $23.) A young American comes of age traveling with a she-wolf into Mexico's mythic sierra.
13
11
2
DIXIE CITY JAM, by James Lee Burke. (Hyperion, $22.95.) The search for a sunken Nazi submarine stirs up trouble for a New Orleans detective.
14
1
THE SEVENTH GATE, by Margaret Weis and Tracy Hickman. (Bantam, $22.95.) A titanic struggle between good and evil is staged in the final volume of the "Death Gate" cycle.
15
17
REMEMBER ME, by Mary Higgins Clark. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $23.50.) A couple find themselves haunted by a mysterious force.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Nonfiction
1
1
68
EMBRACED BY THE LIGHT, by Betty J. Eadie with Curtis Taylor. (Gold Leaf Press, $16.95.) A woman's near-death experience.
2
3
25
MIDNIGHT IN THE GARDEN OF GOOD AND EVIL, by John Berendt. (Random House, $23.) The mysterious death of a young man in Savannah, Ga.
3
2
10
THE AGENDA, by Bob Woodward. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $24.) The inner workings of the White House during the first year of the Clinton Administration.
4
4
36
THE BOOK OF VIRTUES, by William J. Bennett. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $27.50.) Moral stories adapted from the Greeks, the Bible, folklore and elsewhere.
5
5
5
MOTHERLESS DAUGHTERS, by Hope Edelman. (Addison-Wesley, $23.) The experiences of women after the deaths of their mothers.
6
6
7
MOON SHOT, by Alan Shepard and Deke Slayton with Jay Barbree and Howard Benedict. (Turner, $21.95.) How Americans reached the moon in July 1969.
7
10
2
OCTOBER 1964, by David Halberstam. (Villard, $24.) The season in which the Cardinals beat the Yankees, reflecting great changes in baseball and society.
8
7
3
THE CATCHER WAS A SPY, by Nicholas Dawidoff. (Pantheon, $24.) The life of Moe Berg, big-league catcher, O.S.S. agent, lady's man and freeloader.
9
12
3
THE TRIBE OF TIGER, by Elizabeth Marshall Thomas. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $20.) The nature and culture of cats.
10
15
2
THE KENNEDY WOMEN, by Laurence Leamer. (Villard, $27.50.) Five generations of an American family.
11
11
19
SAVED BY THE LIGHT, by Dannion Brinkley with Paul Perry. (Villard, $16.) An account of two near-death experiences by a South Carolina businessman.
12*
8
11
LIFE OF THE PARTY, by Christopher Ogden. (Little, Brown, $24.95.) A biography of Pamela Harriman, the United States Ambassador to France.
13
14
4
GAL: A True Life, by Ruthie Bolton. (Harcourt Brace, $19.95.) A black woman recalls her troubled childhood in Charleston, S.C.
14
9
2
FEAR OF FIFTY, by Erica Jong. (HarperCollins, $24.) A "midlife memoir" by the novelist, poet, essayist and feminist.
15
99
WOMEN WHO RUN WITH THE WOLVES, by Clarissa Pinkola Estes. (Ballantine, $23.) How myths and folk tales can enable women to understand their psyches.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous
1
1
18
IN THE KITCHEN WITH ROSIE, by Rosie Daley. (Knopf, $14.95.) Recipes by Oprah Winfrey's cook.
2
2
66
MEN ARE FROM MARS, WOMEN ARE FROM VENUS, by John Gray. (HarperCollins, $23.) Ways to improve communication and relationships between the sexes.
3
3
18
MAGIC EYE II, by N.E.
Thing Enterprises. (Andrews &amp; McMeel, $12.95.) A second collection of designs.
4
4
32
MAGIC EYE, by N.E.
Thing Enterprises. (Andrews &amp; McMeel, $12.95.) Designs in color that take on new qualities when scrutinized at length.
Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending Aug. 13, at 3,050 bookstores plus wholesalers serving 28,000 other retailers (gift shops, department stores, newsstands, supermarkets), statistically weighted to represent sales in all such outlets nationwide.
An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
And Bear in Mind (Editor's Choices of other recent books of particular interest) THE BIRD ARTIST, by Howard Norman. (Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, $20.) An adulterous affair and a murder propel this tragic novel of a hamlet in Newfoundland, where everybody knows everybody and the weather is unspeakable.
CAPONE: The Man and the Era, by Laurence Bergreen. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $30.) A massive, thoroughly researched examination of the most celebrated mobster of the Prohibition era, who attained dominance in his field at the age of 28.
DAISY BATES IN THE DESERT, by Julia Blackburn. (Pantheon, $22.) A bold biography whose author risks identifying with the consciousness of her subject, an adventurer, a self-taught anthropologist who studied the Australian aborigines, and a liar who invented her past anew at every turning of her life.
THE EVOLUTION OF RACISM: Human Differences and the Use and Abuse of Science, by Pat Shipman. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $23.) A thoughtful study of evolution's employment to abet or oppose racism; not all the bad guys meant ill, and the good guys sometimes fought dirty.
JOE PAPP: An American Life, by Helen Epstein. (Little, Brown, $24.95.) This biography of the fabulously energetic, effective theatrical producer depicts a New Yorker whose street-fighting skills lent authority to his art.
A PASSAGE TO EGYPT: The Life of Lucie Duff Gordon, by Katherine Frank. (Houghton Mifflin, $27.50.) An engaging life of a clever valetudinarian from Britain's upper crust, whose letters from Egypt in 1865 were instrumental in the creation of Britain's interest in that country.
THE RAPE OF EUROPA: The Fate of Europe's Treasures in the Third Reich and the Second World War, by Lynn H. Nicholas. (Knopf, $27.50.) A hair-raising account of the Nazis' megalomaniac looting of Europe's artistic treasures, the perils undergone by the artworks themselves, and the Allies' strivings to find the stuff, save it and bring it back.
RARE &amp; ENDANGERED SPECIES: A Novella &amp; Stories, by Richard Bausch. (Seymour Lawrence/Houghton Mifflin, $22.95.) Mr.
Bausch's third fiction collection faithfully explores the territory he knows best: long marriages, old grudges, unforgotten injuries.
SHEAR, by Tim Parks. (Grove, $21.) An eerie, engrossing suspense novel about responsibility; its hero, a smug geological consultant, tragically complicates his life through sexual adventure.
A STRANGER IN THIS WORLD, by Kevin Canty. (Doubleday, $20.) A debut collection of sharp, smart short stories about people caught at the intersection between what they know they should do and what they can't help doing.
THESE SAME LONG BONES, by Gwendolyn M. Parker. (Houghton Mifflin, $21.95.) With an unusual combination of lush metaphor and narrative restraint, this first novel spins a tale of race and power as a black businessman struggles to transcend his daughter's death.


Already the Latest Star for the Irish Before Even Playing for Them
His jersey is already for sale.
Not just in the bookstore across campus from Notre Dame Stadium, where long lines form on those autumn Saturdays, where parents buy blue, gold and white mesh shirts so huge that the bottoms flop to the shoe tops of their children.
The place Ron Powlus has already reached as one of the most anticipated players in the history of Notre Dame football, can be found on page 4 of the university's glossy catalog, the Gameday Collection.
"Authentic Notre Dame Football Jersey. Number 3 jersey on gold suede mat framed in rosewood. Etched plate below jersey in mat lists the eleven years of ND National Championships. Title: 'The Tradition Lives On' . . . $650.00."


'Diary of a Scoundrel'
SO you've never seen a play by Alexander Ostrovsky (1823-1886). Well, who has?
Operagoers, perhaps, only indirectly.
Two of the approximately 50 works by Russia's once-leading, still popular playwright gave way to opera librettos (Rimsky-Korsakov's "Snow Maiden" and Janacek's "Katia Kabanova," after Ostrovsky's "Storm").
Other music lovers may tell you of Ostrovsky-inspired Tchaikovsky compositions.


Why Pay To Insure A Rental?
RENTERS, including the thousands of students going back to school these days, should be aware that one of the classic mistakes is to discount the importance of household insurance.
O.K., so they don't have Aubusson rugs or Cartier jewelry.
But they may have expensive computer and other electronic equipment, VCR's, boom boxes, sports gear and so forth, which together may also be worth thousands of dollars.


Election Race On in France, Before Anyone Says He'll Run
The 50th anniversary of the liberation of Paris this week was meant to be an occasion for looking back.
Instead, abruptly ending the political doldrums of France's annual summer break, it has marked the start of the campaign for presidential elections next spring.
That no one has actually declared his candidacy to succeed President Francois Mitterrand appears to have no relevance.
Between now and the first round of voting next April, every political speech, every decision, every maneuver will be viewed through the prism of the presidential race.


We Shouldn't Phase Out Medical Specialists
To the Editor:
In "Swamped With Specialists" (Op-Ed, Aug. 23), Lambert N. King argues for the Administration position that the Federal Government should decree 55 percent of medical residents in American hospitals to be generalists, as against 35 percent now, and only 45 percent specialists.
Further, the Administration would have a proposed board determine which specialties.


THE EXTINCT CHARM OF THE BOURGEOISIE
The opulent rooms are vacant now, but the sense of what life was like persists.
One can almost hear the tinkle of wineglasses, the animated conversations.
One can still imagine the kitchen, now antiseptic and silent, as a hub of activity.
With its scrubbed floors and simple white furniture, it is as evocative of its day as the much grander salons.
Palazzo Morpurgo is a kind of residence in amber.
It preserves that brief moment at the turn of the century when the city of Trieste flourished as a major port on the Adriatic.
Then part of the Austro-Hungarian Empire, it would eventually be annexed by Italy, but not before a powerful bourgeoisie grew up around it, their wealth supporting a rarefied life style of culture and sport, of opera and balls and taking the waters at Carlsbad.


TODAY'S SECTIONS
Special Today: Fashions of the Times  Magazine Part 2
At last! Clothes you have to have.


Elana S. Drell, Claude G. Szyfer
Elana Simone Drell, a daughter of Stuart and Renee Drell of Watchung, N.J., was married last evening to Claude Gabriel Szyfer, the son of Jack and Anita Szyfer of Ronkonkoma, L.I.
Rabbi Brooks Sussman performed the ceremony at Temple Israel in Lawrence, L.I.
Mrs.
Szyfer, 25, is a financial assistant at Cosmair Inc., a cosmetics company in New York.
She graduated from Columbia University.
Her father is the executive vice president of the Grand Group, a toy company in New York.
Her mother is the executive director of the Jewish Community Center in Bayonne, N.J.


Keeping a Close Eye On D.W.I. Offenders
A WOMAN walked out of her Irvington home at 9 o'clock on a recent morning, got behind the wheel of her car and drove off.
She didn't notice the two men who had been sitting in a car across the street since 7 A.M.
The men pulled out and followed her.
After about a block, the driver of the second car turned on a portable flashing light and pulled the woman over.
Within minutes, the woman was under arrest and in handcuffs.
But the arresting officers, Marc E. Friedberg and Larry Candarelli, were with the Probation Department, not the police.
The woman was arrested for a misdemeanor: "Aggravated unlicensed operation" of a vehicle.
Because she was on probation for drunken driving, her driver's license was suspended.


Wall Street; Penny-Stock Brokers' Nine Lives
WHEN a controversial brokerage firm is shut down or sold, only some of the brokers go back to selling used cars.
Most simply find a new home at other securities firms.
But who would take in a salesperson from a dubious brokerage house?
On Wall Street, it seems, there's always room to spare for a homeless broker, no matter his or her pedigree.


Turner Being Treated for Skin Cancer
TED TURNER announced at a graduation ceremony yesterday that he has skin cancer, then left, saying he was scheduled for surgery.
Turner, 55, was to give the keynote address at Georgia State University's commencement in Atlanta, but he spoke for less than five minutes.
"I'm scared to death," Turner said.
"The one piece of advice I can give you is put on sunscreen and wear a hat." Turner delayed the surgery four days so he could attend the graduation, where his daughter JENNIE graduated cum laude with a bachelor's degree in film and video.
A Turner spokesman, MICHAEL OGLESBY, said: "A minor skin cancer is being removed from his lip. Prognosis is for a complete recovery." (AP)


Newton And His Apple
To the Editor:
There has long been little doubt that Schumann's mental illness may be reflected in his music  [ "Though This Were Madness, Was There Yet Method in 't?" Aug. 7 ] .
But Roland Barthes's "analysis" of "Carnaval" is nothing more than impressionistic narrative and not a terribly coherent one at that (the "pure element" of pain "occasionally breaks through" -- breaks through what? -- even though "pain cannot be expressed musically").


Perhaps the Biggest Problem Is That the Owners Don't Trust One Another
During the 50-day strike in 1981, Raymond Grebey, the owners' chief negotiator, adopted a mantra to try to show how foolish the owners believed the players were in not accepting their proposal.
"We now have a strike over the rights of 11 players," Grebey would say, reducing the number every few days.
Thirteen years later, baseball may have a strike because the owners don't trust one another.


Letters Are Acts of Faith
To the Editor:
As I write to you, my phone has been broken for five days.
How heartened I was to open the Book Review and find Vivian Gornick's essay.
Yes!
I told myself.
Quit sulking, girl, and start writing.


A Religious Tome Is Summer Reading
WHAT: The summer's publishing phenomenon, wrapped in an unassuming tan cover, is neither a horror novel nor a celebrity cookbook.
In just two months, the new catechism of the Catholic Church, the first comprehensive statement of doctrine issued by the church in 400 years, has sold most of the 2.1 million copies now in print in the United States.
Booksellers are routinely sold out of it and hope to sell another two million by Christmas if the printer can keep pace.
WHO'S BUYING: Mostly Catholics, of course, but bookstores also report surprisingly strong sales to non-Catholics and even non-Christians curious about the teachings of one of the world's most widespread and most mysterious faiths.
Church leaders last codified their beliefs in a catechism published in 1566.
That document had a hard time keeping up with the 20th century.
"Whether they call themselves traditionalists or progressivists, everyone welcomes the fact that, doggone it, now at least we have one place where you can go and look it up," said the Rev.
Richard John Neuhaus, the director of the Institute on Religion and Public Life in New York.
"It's the baseline of authentic Catholic teaching."


Jill Rosenberg, Michael Dresner
Jill Hope Rosenberg, an advertising account manager at MTV, the cable television network, was married last evening to Michael Brian Dresner, the vice president of media programs at the National Basketball Association.
Both work in New York.
Rabbi Jerome Davidson officiated in the Pegasus Suites at the Rainbow Room in New York.
Mrs.
Dresner, 31, graduated from Tufts University and received an M.B.A. degree from Columbia University.
She is the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Alan S. Rosenberg of Great Neck, L.I.
Her father is an internist and cardiologist and is also a clinical associate professor of medicine at North Shore-Cornell Medical College, both in Great Neck.


; Melissa D. Kern, W. F. Deegan 3d
Dr.
Melissa Dee Kern, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Arthur S. Kern of Short Hills, N.J., was married last evening to Dr.
William Francis Deegan 3d, a son of Elizabeth M. Deegan of Bridgewater, N.J., and the late Mr.
Deegan Jr.
Cantor Alex Zimmer officiated at the Harvard Memorial Chapel in Cambridge, Mass.
Dr.
Kern, who is keeping her name, is a clinical instructor in pediatric ophthalmology at Children's Hospital in Los Angeles.
She graduated from Harvard University and received her medical degree from Tulane University.
Her father is an ophthalmologist in Millburn, N.J.
Her mother, Ruth E. Kern, is an ophthalmic technician in her husband's office.


Booted Up
ONE OF THE BIGGEST LEAPS IN STYLE FOR FALL IS THE TALL, SLEEK, SLENDER BOOT.
BOOTS CAN PULL ON LIKE STOCKINGS AND GO JUST AS HIGH.


Laura D. Neff, John A. Reaper
Laura Dowd Neff, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
W.
Perry Neff of Weston, Vt., was married yesterday to John Anthony Reaper, a son of Mrs.
Thomas A. Reaper of Tuckerstown, Bermuda, and the late Mr.
Reaper.
The Rev.
Daniel R. Greenwood, an Episcopal priest, performed the ceremony in the chapel of St.
George's School in Newport, R.I.
Mrs.
Reaper, 29, is the president of Auklet Inc., a clothing design company in Newport.
Her father, who retired as an executive vice president at Chemical Bank in New York, is a financial consultant in Weston.
Her mother, Mimi Neff, manages a Holstein dairy farm in Weston.


Euro Style and Charm on the Saugatuck
BRIDGE CAFE in Westport is an example of like at first sight, so pleasing to the eye it easily charms its guests.
The charm comes from the vibrantly bold mural and stylish paintings by Valentino Cortazar, rustic overhead beams, skylight, wooden tables and rush-seated, colorfully painted ladder-back chairs.
A decorative faux balcony also helps, as does an outdoor dining terrace surrounded by a black wrought-iron fence that overlooks the Saugatuck River.
Bridge Cafe's daily menu, with printed specials, follows the trend toward light, informal dishes, many in the Italian style.


U.C.L.A.'s Stokes, the Man With Good Hands
No matter where J. J. Stokes went this summer, he was always hit with the same question: What are you still doing here?
Fellow students, other athletes, people from all walks of life wanted to know why he was still in school at U.C.L.A. instead of catching passes for big money in the National Football League.


Prisons, Privatization and Profits
To the Editor:
Your article on privatizing prisons satisfies one of my old debureaucratization dreams.
After all, in the age of private overnight mail, why not private jails?
Aren't private hospitals run more efficiently than similar public establishments?
Why are millions of children in private schools?


A Graffiti Artist Called the City of New York
They are scrawled on the streets and sidewalks like hieroglyphics -- straight lines, letters, arrows that seem to point to nowhere.
They could be called "official graffiti," but Department of Transportation officials say that the markings are necessary guides for utility workers who must navigate the complex network of fiber optic and other wires underneath the streets.


A Pest In Budapest
UNDER THE FROG A Black Comedy. By Tibor Fischer. 250 pp. New York: The New Press. $17.


IN SHORT: FICTION
SHORT STORIES  MENDOCINO  And Other Stories. By Ann Packer. Chronicle, paper, $9.95.


More Than Friendship
SAME-SEX UNIONS IN PREMODERN EUROPE By John Boswell.
Illustrated. 412 pp.
New York: Villard Books. $25.


THE NEWEST MOYNIHAN
Senator Moynihan has been one of my heroes for decades, but the usually clear-thinking and clear-speaking senator seems to get muddled when describing "the dangers of growing illegitimacy."
Although Senator Moynihan does know firsthand about the impact of disruption and instability on families, he erroneously seems to be equating single-parent families with unstable families.
I fail to see the connection between the marital status of the mother and family stability.
Is he suggesting that single-mother families are unstable?


The Executive Computer; Hardware as a Status Symbol: What's in a Notebook?
IN the status-conscious world of corporate computing, where prestige attaches to the number of dots in an Internet address, Dell Computer has made a fashion statement with its new line of Latitude notebooks.
After abruptly withdrawing from the notebook race last summer when it introduced and subsequently withdrew notebook computers that were behind the technology curve, Dell this month jumped back into the fray with a new line of computers.
And from all appearances, the high-performance Latitude XP's are at least as status-worthy as the competition.


A Word of Praise
To the Editor: There are good people around, I found out recently when I lost my purse in Prague.
After three wonderful days we were ready to leave the city.
I had put the necessary items in my light shoulder purse: passport, airline tickets, travelers' checks and some Czech coins.
With a little time to spare, my husband and I walked to nearby St.
Margaret's Monastery.
Returning to the hotel I realized my purse was missing.
After a frantic, futile search we somehow managed to get another passport, bought another airline ticket and made our flight home.
I was sure I had not been robbed, but never expected to see that purse again.


Aug. 21-27: From East to West; How the World Is Learning To Keep Worrying About the Bomb
Tension and uncertainty over nuclear proliferation deepened last week, on several fronts.
North Korea stirred renewed concern as reports indicated that Kim Jong Il, son of the country's late dictator, Kim Il Sung, is not clearly in charge.
A power struggle in that secretive state could slow or derail talks with the United States aimed at curbing the North's nuclear ambitions.
Creating further concern, North Korea's Foreign Ministry said it will never permit inspections of two waste sites believed to contain evidence that it diverted plutonium to build a bomb.


New Jersey Auctions State-Owned Cars


Amid the Houses, Bodegas Grow in Queens
In the city's quieter neighborhoods, entrepreneurship often spills over into residential streets.
Amid row houses and single-family homes, a bodega or auto-repair shop appears suddenly, peeking out of an illegally converted garage.
The unauthorized conversion of houses into businesses is a particular problem in neighborhoods with high concentrations of recent immigrants from countries where setting up shop at home is common practice.


Better Days
To the Sports Editor:
Baseball!!
America personified?
It's about healthy competitive spirit, nurtured in the hearts of our children, and the seasoned sandlots of our fathers.
It's not about collective bargaining, or salary caps, or revenue sharing.
It's not about Fehr or Ravitch.
It's not about ballplayers' agents and their financial portfolios.


Letters Are Acts of Faith
To the Editor:
Three weeks before reading Vivian Gornick's essay, I wrote, in a letter to my father: "Out of all the people I write to, you are the only one who writes me back. I could easily do without a phone and rely on the written word. But the art of letter writing, like so many things I love, belongs to another era." Those lines have echoed in my mind since, not from a sense of self-pity -- the people to whom I write call me -- but from a sense of loss.
I don't know what my friends think in quiet moments.
K.
B.
WINSHIP  New York


Johnny, We Hardly Knew Ye
Is New York O.K. with this? John Kelly is leaving the 15th Precinct.
David Caruso, unhappy with his salary, will leave "N.Y.P.D. Blue" after four episodes this fall.
The critically acclaimed show was last season's highest-rated new drama, an accomplishment due in no small part to Mr.
Caruso's portrayal.
Kelly has been the show's ethos, its dramatic center, and his subtle gestures and self-conscious mannerisms have been pivotal in establishing its identity.


Corrections
A listing in the Playing in the Neighborhood column last Sunday misstated the date for a picnic and concert at Fort Tilden in Breezy Point, Queens.
It was held last Sunday, not today.


The Circus Goes to Jamaica, Queens


Mexico Votes for the Status Quo
BY 9 o'clock last Sunday morning, the sun was pouring through the leafy canopy over the town plaza of Jiutepec and the voters wound back from a corner in long lines, impatient to figure in what they had been told would be the cleanest presidential election in their history.
From all the growling about the Government, it might have seemed an ominous day for the party that has run Mexico for 65 years.
But one of the most vocal of the critics, Genaro Tellez, suggested otherwise.
"All of this is part of a plot between the Government and the society," the potbellied 57-year-old bus driver, who was poll-watching for the leftist Democratic Revolutionary Party, said of the election.
"People either have not been given the education to see what is going on, or they simply let it go on."


Commercial Property/The Multilevel Concept; New Stores Make Shopping A Many-Tiered Experience
NEARLY 20 years ago, Selma Weiser, who owns the Charivari apparel chain, was walking down a Paris street and fell in love with a store.
"It had mezzanines and staircases, lots of different selling levels that you could see from the street," recalled Jon Weiser, Mrs.
Weiser's son and now Charivari's president.
"Mom thought the store was a visual kick."


On-the-Cover Coup
If the road to supermodeldom is paved with prominent covers from Vogue, Elle and Harper's Bazaar, then Nadja Auermann seems well on her way.
With her face currently on the covers of both Vogue's and Bazaar's super-thick fall fashion issues, she has achieved a triumph akin to winning two legs of the Triple Crown. (Cindy Crawford won the Elle.)


Mary Perillo, Paul Provenzano
PAUL PROVENZANO and Mary Perillo met 11 years ago, shortly after he moved to Manhattan from Ohio, his home state.
He called her at the suggestion of a mutual friend, hoping Ms.
Perillo, a video and film director, could help him get a start making music videos and short films.
When she opened her apartment door, it was as if he had walked into a scene from "After Hours," Martin Scorsese's 1985 movie about a conservative uptown guy who stumbles upon one eccentric, artsy woman after another while lost downtown.


Chairs, Not Always With Comfort in Mind
COMFORT counts when it comes to picking a new chair.
Today, no one would even consider buying one without first sitting down to see how it feels.
By contrast, formal styles were the primary consideration in antique American furniture.
The 18th- and 19th-century varnished chairs lined up along the four walls of a gallery in the New Jersey State Museum don't look comfortable.
Considering the pristine condition of the elaborate, decorative details, they must have received only upright individuals who never scratched or marred their glistening surfaces.


EQUIPMENT
The blade bag: Instead of lugging their in-line skates in ill-fitting backpacks and briefcases, more and more bladers are turning to the variety of sleek new carrying bags designed for the purpose.


In Virginia, Gun Buyers See Danger In Crime Bill
On the morning after the Senate passed President Clinton's crime bill, the phone at Clark Brothers Gun Shop here was ringing with calls from customers wanting to know if their assault rifles were worth more now that they are about to be banned.
Although many customers said they feared that the law would erode their liberty, even more seemed mystified by all the big-city commotion about firearms.


Eugene Matthews
IN HANOI, WHERE THE EXPATRIATES GATHER on Friday nights for happy hour at the Australian Embassy, Eugene Matthews stands apart.
He works his way to the bar, orders a double vodka with soda and lemon juice and finds a place where he will be noticed but not bothered.
He lets people come to him, and when they do, he offers thin smiles and perfunctory handshakes, except to those who, like him, remember a time when only a handful of foreigners gathered on Friday nights.
Matthews, who is 35, is prickly about his position as the American businessman with the longest tenure -- four years -- in Hanoi.
He insists that he does not fear competition.
What troubles him is the gnawing sense that all the others who have followed -- and the many others who have arrived since February, when President Clinton lifted the 19-year American trade embargo -- have cluttered Hanoi.
So he avoids the company of the newcomers.


SUNDAY, August 28, 1994; Reborn to Shop
There was a time when a spiritual journey involved hardship and travail.
Dante had to negotiate nine circles of hell.
Siddhartha had to renounce his princely life to become the Buddha.
But pilgrims of the New Age can choose a posher route.
Power Places Tours and Conferences of Laguna Beach, Calif., will arrange only the best hotels and cruise ships for such trips as a channeling conference in Macchu Picchu, a sacred Inca site in Peru; a Healing and Rejuvenation trip to Tuscany; and a swim in the Red Sea with those New Age favorites, the dolphins.
The Past Lives trip to Egypt ("Experience the Great Pyramid -- Again") includes a Reborn to Shop side trip to the stores.
Prices range from $949 for the intuition cruise to $4,999 for Forbidden Tibet.


Along Tobacco Road, a Way of Life Withers
It's a drippy 92-degree afternoon at Shackelford's Grocery, which sells Coke in old green bottles and pickled pigs feet from gallon jars.
Two barefoot boys, 11 and 12, bound in, carrying primitive fishing poles and exulting over six bass and one bream they caught in Mr.
Tyson's pond.
At the four-stool counter, James Shackelford Jr., the store's owner and the son and son-in-law of tobacco farmers, lights a Winston and talks about a friend who lit up at an auto dealership.
When the man was told that smoking was not allowed, he tore up his check for a pickup truck and walked out, Mr.
Shackelford says.
A customer in the store, Bruce Wells, who tended tobacco for years, waves his Cambridge cigarette in the air.
"I bought this thing," Mr.
Wells says, "so I can still smoke it."


In Gambia, New Coup Follows Old Pattern
When Lieut.
Yahya Jammeh seized power in this West African country in a bloodless coup last month, breaking one of the continent's longest traditions of electoral democracy, he joined the increasingly crowded ranks of soldiers who have risen to power in Africa.
From the start, Lieutenant Jammeh, 29 years old, fresh from a military-police training course in the United States, has promised that his would be a "coup with a difference." He has vowed that he and his fellow soldiers are "not here to perpetuate ourselves," and will return to the barracks "as soon as we have set things right."


Connections, Connections
IT'S just after 10 A.M. and John R. Fratianni and his team are brainstorming.
Their client is an independent filmmaker, Ayoka Chenzira, whose movie, "Alma's Rainbow," will soon be released on video.
The problem: how to draw attention to her film, which has been showing at one small Harlem theater since June.


An Ecosystem By a Developer
Right now they look like scraggly slopes that got in the way of a tornado.
But next year, the landscape architects promise, they will be flowering meadows.
Handsome green signs proclaim the three fenced lots just south of Stuyvesant High School "a natural ecosystem," part of the "beautification" of the north end of Battery Park City between Vesey and Chambers Streets.


K. W. Philbrick, Michael Vorenberg
Katherine Ward Philbrick, a daughter of Margaret Philbrick-Epstein of Brookline, Mass., and John W. Philbrick Sr. of Portland, Me., was married yesterday to Michael Vorenberg, a son of Martha S. Vorenberg of Lexington, Mass., and Dr.
John Vorenberg of Waltham, Mass.
James Vorenberg, the bridegroom's uncle and a justice of the peace in Cambridge, Mass., officiated at the World Trade Center in Boston.
Mrs.
Vorenberg, 31, is an associate product manager, in East Longmeadow, Mass., with Milton Bradley, the board-game company.
She graduated from Bowdoin College and received a master's degree in management from the American Graduate School of International Management.
Her father is an associate at Lowry &amp; Associates, a Portland law firm.
Her mother is a development officer at Boston University.


Will Kmart Be Godzilla?
It has been a hot summer in the city, but people in Park Slope are not worrying much about the open fire hydrants.
They are concerned about something else: Kmart is coming.
Well, probably coming.
Kmart officials say it is not yet a certainty that they will open a store here.
They are still negotiating with the Federal government to lease a 9.5-acre property, the site of a closed post office on Second Avenue between 10th and 12th Streets.


The Many Screen Ethnicities of Mira Sorvino
HER COMBAT BOOTS, FISH-NET stockings and cut-off jeans freshly packed, Mira Sorvino arrives at the bar of the Royalton Hotel elegantly dressed in black.
The teen-age-punk attire she folded away was for an afternoon audition; the bags she carries are for an evening flight to Los Angeles.
In heels she is just shy of six feet tall and stands in that private orbit inhabited by long, lean women, already contemplating her next costume change.
"You caught me in the middle of three screen tests," Ms.
Sorvino explains.
After her recent appearance as a free-spirited woman who speaks with a perfect Catalan accent and pokes the mores and beliefs of two conventional American men in "Barcelona," directed by Whit Stillman, Ms.
Sorvino is beginning her move from short films and independents to more visible work and major studio productions.
Four years after graduating from Harvard (she won't give her exact age in print because she still plays 17-year-olds), she is also taking on a variety of personas with remarkable ease.


THE ROOTS PEOPLE
Martha Lear's "Roots People" moved me to tears (July 31).
It brought back memories of the stories my parents told of how they fled from the pogroms and were packed on to a crowded ship with hardly enought room to move about.
The sanitary conditions on the ship were horrendous, but somehow they survived and arrived at Ellis Island only to be greeted by hostile immigration officers.
The Golden Land, to which they looked forward, was not as inviting as they had expected.


Listening To Prozac . . . Er, Mozart
BEETHOVEN IS NO LONGER THE WORLD'S greatest composer.
He still glowers from the pantheons of our older concert halls, but he hasn't been the greatest for more than a decade.
His place has been taken by the one beloved of God, the supreme artificer of music, the sublime Mozart, who was also a more reliable worker and a nicer guy.
If there was still doubt in anyone's mind, researchers at the Center for the Neurobiology of Learning and Memory at the University of California, Irvine, have determined that listening to Mozart actually makes you smarter.
Last October, in the pages of Nature, they revealed that I.Q. scores of college students rose nine points after exposure to 10 minutes of Mozart.
Now they have shown that Mozart assists in the solution of spatial puzzles involving folded cutout shapes.
Undergraduates listening to Philip Glass's "Music in Changing Parts" did not perform as well.


Taking Advantage of a Bumper Crop of Tomatoes
I am not trying to scold you," the owner of my local nursery said as he looked around for some six-foot stakes. "But next year put your tomatoes in a cage.
They will do much better that way."
Almost overnight, it seemed that the tomatoes in our garden had grown twice their height and were falling all over the place.
The hot weather and heavy rainfalls have not only produced a bountiful crop this year but the tomatoes also seem particularly fragrant and juicy.


For 75th Anniversary, There Is No Namath On the All-Time Team
The National Football League will announce its 75th anniversary all-time team on Tuesday afternoon at Radio City Music Hall.
The team was selected by a 15-member panel made up of former N.F.L. players, officials from the Pro Football Hall of Fame and members of the news media and includes five players who are currently active in the league -- receiver Jerry Rice, cornerback Rod Woodson, defensive end Reggie White and safety Ronnie Lott.
Although the team is loaded with Hall of Famers, there will be plenty of room for argument from football fans as to why their favorite player was left off.
Jets fans will make a case for quarterback Joe Namath.


Cass S. Gunther, Jason T. Adelman
Cass Sidlett Gunther, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Samuel P. Gunther of New York, was married on Thursday to Jason Theodore Adelman, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Richard Adelman of Northfield, N.J.
Rabbi Solomon Kahane officiated at the Pierre in New York.
Mrs.
Adelman, 23, and her husband, 25, graduated from the University of Pennsylvania, she magna cum laude and he cum laude.
She is a third-year law student at New York University.
Her father is a lawyer and certified public accountant in New York.
Her mother, Sheila A. Gunther, is a professor of foreign languages at the C. W. Post Campus of Long Island University in Greenvale.


'Follies' And Two Stages
"WILL ROGERS FOLLIES" is now playing at Gateway's Candlewood Playhouse in New Fairfield.
"Best Little Whorehouse in Texas" is not.
Here's why.
The Gateway Playhouse in Bellport, L.I., and Candlewood are sibling theaters.
When things go right, a production is trucked from one to the other, giving it three to five extra weeks of life.
That means the two theaters have the same summer lineup, only dates are different.


Summer Rites in the Queyras and Ubaye
THE Queyras is the kind of region the French call "La France Profonde," traditional, rural France.
Encircled by the Alps of southeastern France, this rugged upland is a pocket of geologic and historical curiosities.
Its southern neighbor, tucked into a fold between mountain ridges, is the Ubaye, whose few remaining inhabitants consider their valley even wilder, more "perdu" -- the literal translation is "lost," but a more apt one may be "out of the way" -- than theQueyras.
As in Appalachia, old customs linger among the mountain people.
The annual Queyrassin harvest pilgrimages are thought to be a vestige of Ambarvales, the cult of Ceres, Roman goddess of grain and the harvest, or may have an even older, Celtic origin, transmuted by centuries into a Christian festival.


How Tyson Became the Chicken King
Don Tyson, the chairman of Tyson Foods and America's chicken king, had the flushed look of a kid caught sneaking a peek at an X-rated videotape.
Two other company executives also appeared mildly embarrassed to be discovered huddled around a television at the sleek headquarters building, where Andy Warhol competes for wall space with mounted marlins.
"Oh, uh, we're just watching a commercial for, uh, Butterball turkeys," muttered Mr.
Tyson as one of the other men reached quickly to shut off the television.
"Gotta be going anyway."


H. K. Thompson And Jed Davies
Heather Kelly Thompson, the daughter of Helen Kelly Thompson of New York and the late Charles A. Thompson, was married yesterday to James Edward Davies, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Edward A. Davies of New York.
The Rev.
Leslie Merlin performed the ceremony in New York at the Brick Presbyterian Church.
Mrs.
Davies, 26, is an assistant buyer at Domestications, a decorative accessories catalogue in Weehawken, N.J.
She graduated from Marymount University in Arlington, Va.
Her father was a vice president of the Lennen &amp; Newell Advertising Agency, formerly in New York.
Her mother is an administrative assistant at the Salant Corporation, a maker of men's wear accessories, in New York.


Forming Earthly Alliances to Defend God's Kingdom
THE divisions among the world's religions are certainly well enough known, but they usually become newsworthy only when war erupts or a public dispute breaks out among their chief clergy.
But what of that seemingly rarer occurrence, an unexpected collaboration across religious boundaries, when old public differences -- even hatreds -- are suddenly put aside and people rarely seen together are all smiles and handshakes?
It seems to be happening quite a bit lately.
A few months back, conservative Roman Catholic and evangelical leaders pledged to work more closely on certain social issues and, during much of this summer, Pope John Paul II and various Islamic theologians have spoken in the same deeply critical tones about the alleged moral dangers posed by an international conference on population growth.


What's New, Pussycat?
THE TRIBE OF TIGER Cats and Their Culture.
By Elizabeth Marshall Thomas.
Illustrated by Jared Taylor Williams. 240 pp.
New York: Simon &amp; Schuster. $20.


Leading the Way in Cutting Health Costs
THERE is a marquee outside the Open Door Family Health Center that at first glance makes it look like a movie theater.
If it were, the promotion might read, "Now playing in an extended run -- the type of preventive, affordable health care for the uninsured that Congress is still only talking about."


CONFERENCE ROUNDUP
Atlantic Coast  CONTENDERFlorida State and that's all.
Seminoles are 16-0 in A.C.C. games after two seasons.
LONG SHOTNorth Carolina, which has an ace option quarterback, Jason Stanicek, and two 1,000-yard runners named Johnson, Curtis and Leon.
KEY OFFENSIVE PLAYERSQB Scott Milanovich will keep Maryland scoring.
WR Kez McCorvey is Seminoles' big-play guy.
WR Eddie Goines plays same role for N.C.
State.
KEY DEFENSIVE PLAYERSFlorida State has so many: LB Derrick Brooks, DE Derrick Alexander, CB Clifton Abraham.
ILB Tim Jones leads formidable Clemson group.
PIVOTAL GAMESSeminoles play Notre Dame at Orlando Nov. 12 and are at North Carolina Nov. 19.
KEY QUESTIONFla.
State's average score against A.C.C. foes last season was 49-6.
How long can this keep up?


Visions in an Arcade; Sculpture in a Park
AS architectural developments go, the arcade in Landmark Square in Stamford, known locally as "The Shops at Old Main," is snug and, given its low ceiling and "ye olde" storefronts, almost picturesque.
A barbershop and a dark bar enhance the effect but the star that shines brightest is the Sound Shore Gallery with two storefronts where currently "Four Artists: Four Visions" is on view.
One space is occupied by the paintings of Susan Anderson and Larry Schulte, the other by the photographs of Dan Udell and the small painted terra cottas that Dorothy Mayhall produces when not acting as director of art at the Stamford Museum and Nature Center.


2-Character Play by a New Jersey Writer
WHO is New Jersey's indigenous contemporary playwright?
If your answer is not William Mastrosimone, come forward and state your case.
The plays of Mr.
Mastrosimone, who was born in Lawrenceville, have been rooted in the blue-collar environs of Trenton, if not in setting, at least in sensibility.
The best-known, "Extremities," produced in 1983, takes place in an isolated farmhouse between Lawrenceville and Trenton "where the cornfields meet the highway."


Diamond Rules
To the Sports Editor:
It has become obvious that baseball is no longer a sport.
Baseball is polluted with greed and the incessant thought of money.


Letters Are Acts of Faith
To the Editor:
Recently I shared my reactions to the same television broadcasts about D-Day in Normandy with a friend in Paris, both of us weeping with emotion and faxing back and forth some six times in short spontaneous notes, at the reasonable rate of 53 cents per transmission. (Imagine what that would cost in wordy phone conversations.) Frequent fax communications have deepened intimate relationships among friends much more than mailed correspondence ever could.
HELENA KOLDA  Kent, Conn.


Car Agencies Are Sued Over Rental Policy
Saying it is against the law for car rental agencies to turn away customers under 25 years old, State Attorney General G. Oliver Koppell said yesterday that he has sued Avis, Dollar, Enterprise and Thrifty.
This spring, his office filed similar lawsuits against Hertz, National, Budget, Alamo and Ameri-Car.
New York State law says that companies may not refuse to rent to drivers as young as 18.
But the companies have resisted complying with the law because younger drivers tend to be greater insurance risks.
In New York, a rental car agency, as the owner of the vehicle, is liable for damage caused by the driver.


So, You Want to Be a Critic?
HAVEN'T you ever thought that you could do as good a job as most of those professional critics out there?
Well, the Bronx Council on the Arts wants to give you a chance to prove it.
The council is looking for volunteers to critique plays, concerts, dance performances, poetry readings and art exhibitions.
No experience necessary.


Aug. 21-27: Subway Chaos; Cop Shoots Cop, Prompting Questions of Racism
It all took just 15 seconds, and when the shooting on a New York subway platform died down last week urban America found itself once again confronting its seething racial tensions.
In a case of mistaken identity, two police officers were felled by gunshots fired by fellow officers in the chaos that ensued after a teen-ager being chased by the police dropped his shotgun and it misfired.
Some witnesses said Officer Peter Del-Debbio had shot Transit Officer Desmond Robinson, who is black, at least two times in the back at close range.
Officials were left to answer troubling questions touching on police procedures and race.


South African Runner Reaches a Milestone
A long history of sports racism came to an end on Friday, when HEZEKIEL SEPENG accepted the silver medal in the men's 800 meters at the Commonwealth Games in Victoria, British Columbia.
Sepeng, a 20-year-old student, became the first black South African athlete to win a medal in any major international games. (AP)


Bachelor Father


Tech Notes; 'CAT Scans' for Heavy Industry
COMPUTERIZED tomography, the "CAT scan" technology that doctors use to take pictures of the interior of the human body, is finding its way into heavy industry.
Just as these scans can find the hidden source of life-threatening diseases, they can also detect unseen flaws in complex equipment before they cause costly failures.
Among the potential applications is finding cracks in the high-pressure steam pipes of electric power plants without shutting down a generator and removing the insulation from the pipes.
Early research in this field was done at Lawrence Livermore and Los Alamos national laboratories to inspect nuclear bombs without having to dismantle them.
About seven years ago, a private company, the Integrated Diagnostic Measurement Corporation of Austin, Tex., adapted the techniques for civilian use.
The company is now known as Arkwright Technical Services and is owned by a subsidiary of the Arkwright Mutual Insurance Company of Waltham, Mass.


Correction
A front-page article on Aug. 7 about museums making their art collections available on computers and compact disks misidentified two officials of the National Gallery in Washington.
Vicki Porter is the curator of its Micro Gallery, not the director of the National Gallery; Ruth Perlin is head of educational resources for the gallery, not head of its educational department.
The article also misstated several details about the gallery's use of technology.
It is the first major American art museum to make its entire collection of works on view available to visitors on computer screens, not the first to use computers.
Its first laser disk was produced in 1983, not 1988, and it plans to produce a third sometime, but not necessarily this year.


Prisons, Privatization and Profits
To the Editor:
The privatizing of America's prisons seems altogether appropriate to the trend of our economic activity.
The next stage would be to link the solution to crime and the North American Free Trade Agreement to achieve a lower cost basis by transferring the plant facilities to Mexico, where prisons could be built and maintained for less than half the expense.
There might be a slight resulting increase to our unemployment figures, which could create a climate for slightly more crime, but this would be more than offset by the savings.


Spies &amp; Thrillers
SAND BLIND, by Julian Rathbone (Serpent's Tail, paper, $12.99), is not your everyday thriller.
If nothing else, it is too well written for that.
Mr.
Rathbone, a British novelist whose other books include "Lying in State" and "Watching the Detectives," is a superior stylist with a world view that is refreshingly cynical.
One section of Mr.
Rathbone's novel purports to be the secret diary of an Iraqi archeologist and archivist who winds up in the inner circles of Saddam Hussein's Cabinet in the days leading up to the Persian Gulf war: "Unfortunately not only am I an assistant professor of archeology, it is also my fate to be an Official Recorder of the Acts and Say ings of the Arab Redeemer."


Crackdown on Vandalism Raises Parking Revenues
An undercover surveillance operation by the City Department of Transportation has led to 17 arrests in the last five months in a program to stem a record level of parking-meter vandalism.
From 1987 to 1993, the number of vandalism-related repairs on the city's 68,000 meters increased from 266,000 to 490,000, Lawrence Berman, the department's executive director for parking, said yesterday.
In some areas of the city, fewer than a fifth of their parking meters are operating, he said.
He estimated that meter vandalism cost the city $5 million last year in repairs and lost revenue.


Paula A. Baraona, Owen G. Wallace
Paula Andrea Baraona, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Enrique Baraona of Tenafly, N.J., was married yesterday to Owen Gorham Wallace, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert G. Wallace of Annapolis, Md.
The Rev.
Dennis Leder performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at the Blessed Sacrament Church in New York.
Mrs.
Wallace, 25, teaches kindergarten at the Marymount School in New York.
She and the bridegroom graduated from the University of Maryland.
Her father, a gastroenterologist, is a professor at the Mount Sinai School of Medicine in New York.


THE NEWEST MOYNIHAN
Is it any wonder that Senator Moynihan needs an occasional drink to survive the collective mediocrity of those who accuse him of having "many problems" and of raising controversy when he attempts through his writings to enlighten us and his colleagues about what's wrong with our world and why our social fabric is falling apart?
As the article points out, he has been right more than he has been wrong.
But why, then, is "the smartest guy in town" with such a distinguished track record so little heeded by way of public debate and the development of public policy?
LOUIS B. ZIMMER Upper Montclair, N.J.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-16 U.S.
They might never have met, had it not been for a chilling misunderstanding.  1  MADISON SQUARE GARDEN SOLD  Cablevision Systems and ITT emerged as the winners in the bidding for the Madison Square Garden sports and entertainment properties, according to executives of the rival bidder, Liberty Media.  1  POLITICS AND INCUMBENCY  It was billed by Governor Cuomo's office as a ground-breaking ceremony for a state-financed housing project.
But it felt like an old-fashioned political rally, and that's one of the advantages of incumbency.  31  BLUE CROSS'S TROUBLES LINGER  Even though Empire Blue Cross and Blue Shield has begun to repair its troubled finances, state and health care industry officials say the insurer is still on a dangerous slide.  31  A TRANSIT NAME CHANGE  Would New York City's transit system by any other name still be the same confusing tangle of rail and bus lines in the eyes of riders?
The Metropolitan Transit Authority thinks not.  31  Obituaries 37


After the Closing, Surprises
AN inspector can check for termite damage, an engineer can tell you that a dishwasher won't fit and an accountant can check for financial problems.
But then there are the surprises -- some pleasant, some not -- about a new house, a new street or a new neighborhood that defy detection.
Some of these discoveries are funny and some are infuriating, and they all show that there is only way to avoid the unexpected: Stay put.


The Wilder Side of Style
ONE SURE SIGN OF THE NEW SEASON IS RED, RED LIPS.
GOING TO EXTREMES: KOHL-RIMMED EYES, COILED HAIR.


Claire Hsiang and Christopher Marx
Claire Bing-Yuan Hsiang, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Harry C. Hsiang of New York and Taipei, Taiwan, was married yesterday to Christopher William Marx, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
William B. Marx Jr. of Chatham, N.J.
The Rev.
Richard Leonard officiated at the Unitarian Church of All Souls in New York.
Mrs.
Marx, 28, graduated from Williams College and received a master's degree in creative writing from the University of Michigan.
She is a development consultant to the Asian American Legal Defense and Education Fund in New York and a writer.


The 40's Redux?
Fashion keeps on recycling ideas from past eras.
Here are some 40's notions now surfacing.


Pamela Machnits and James Duquette
Pamela Joan Machnits, an account executive at McCaw Communications in Stuart, Fla., and James Robert Duquette, the assistant director of minor league operations and scouting for the New York Mets in Port St.
Lucie, Fla., were married yesterday at the Thompson Memorial Chapel in Williamstown, Mass.
The Rev.
Don Bosco Duquette, an uncle of the bridegroom, performed the Roman Catholic ceremony.
Mrs.
Duquette, 27, graduated from Hamilton College.
She is a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Ernest J. Machnits of Harrison, N.Y.
Her father retired as the principal of Quaker Ridge Elementary School in Scarsdale, N.Y.
Her Mother, Margaret Machnits, retired as a teacher of gifted children at White Plains Middle School in White Plains.


Miss Webb, Mr. Kendall
Kendall Ann Webb, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Jack F. Webb of New Canaan, Conn., was married there yesterday to Donald McIntosh Kendall Jr., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Kendall of Greenwich, Conn.
The Rev.
Lidabell L. Pollard performed the ceremony at the Congregational Church.
Mrs.
Kendall was until recently a manager at William Kent International, a consulting company in Washington.
She graduated cum laude from Harvard University.
Her father retired as a vice president at Citicorp in New York.
Her mother, Ann Webb, owns the Light Touch, a design and lighting store in Greenwich.


Florida Looks For Its Place In Sunshine
In town after town, as Steve Spurrier stood before group after group of expectant supporters to talk about a Florida Gator football season that could surpass all the others, he understood that a simple rundown of the depth charts will carry you only so far.
Especially now, now that the Gators had at last achieved the status of equals with the University of Miami, winners of four national championships in the nine seasons from 1983 through 1991, and Florida State, which won its initial championship last season.


Mexican Chief Sees No Rebel Solution
With political conflict brewing again in the southern state of Chiapas, President Carlos Salinas de Gortari says he has given up hope of a political settlement to the peasant rebellion there before he leaves office in December.
"I would say that being a problem that was so many years in gestation, it would be very difficult to resolve in a few months," Mr.
Salinas said in an interview on Friday.
"The important thing is to lay the foundation for a political solution."


Letters Are Acts of Faith
To the Editor:
Vivian Gornick's article ignores a rapidly growing form of literate communication: electronic mail.
After only six months on line, I have found myself writing more letters than ever before.
Perhaps some of the novelty will wear off, but much of the excitement and thoughtfulness of letter writing is being experienced by millions via the very same telephone lines that Ms.
Gornick blames for the decline of letters.


Deep in the Heart of Mississippi, a Halo Glows Over Alcorn State
Highway 552 here is a winding, twisting, two-lane road dotted on both sides with lush green trees and roaming beds of ivy.
Tucked back off this highway is Alcorn State, a predominantly black school founded in 1871.
This college was America's first black land-grant institution and first black state-supported school.
It also offered the National Football League Mississippi's first black player, fullback Jack Spinks, drafted by the Pittsburgh Steelers in 1952.
In 1995, Alcorn State will offer another first -- the first black quarterback to enter the N.F.L. draft with absolutely no strings attached.


What Piano Did Beethoven Hear In His Dreams?
WHEN BEETHOVEN dreamed his piano sonatas, or so one theory goes, he dreamed them on instruments that had not yet been invented.
By this thinking, the "Appassionata" and the "Hammer klavier" are conceptions bigger in size and resonance than the relatively small-scale pianos he himself had played on.
Beethoven, the thought continues, had invited the modern piano into being as early as 1800, but rather rudely it did not bother to show up for another half-century.
Since then the Steinway and its colleagues -- ironclad, cross-strung, long-sustaining and evenly textured -- have made amends, eager to convert sounds heard only in Beethoven's head to hard facts for our ears.


Grand Central Drought
To the Editor:
As a lifelong resident and defender of Manhattan, I am pleased by the new plans to restore Grand Central Terminal.


Speed Inc.: Lewis Joins The Club
When the Giants drafted receiver Thomas Lewis, they did so because the team desperately needed speed at the position.
Well, they got it.
The first-round draft pick had a good game against the Chicago Bears, showing flashes of the kind of speed he had as a track star at Indiana.
It seems that Lewis will be able to make contributions this season that will make the wide receiver position one of the strongest on the team.
Everyone knows the kind of talent Mike Sherrard has, and wide receiver Chris Calloway, who had two touchdowns against the Bears, has quietly had a tremendous preseason.


U.S. Puts Off Any Decision On Haiti Issue
The Clinton Administration's plans for a possible invasion of Haiti have been put on a slower track by the Cuban refugee crisis and a myriad of diplomatic doubts and problems.
But the preparations for a showdown with Haiti's military rulers continue, senior Administration officials say.
An invasion to restore the exiled President, the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide, would not take place until after the Cuban crisis is resolved and perhaps not until after the November elections in the United States, some Administration officials say.


State Officials Split on Antitrust Aspects of Garden's Sale
Two of New York State's highest officials reacted in sharply different manners yesterday to the announcement that the ITT Corporation and Cablevision Systems had agreed to buy Madison Square Garden.
Where one saw antitrust concerns, the other saw secure local ownership.
While Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo praised the deal, New York State Attorney General G. Oliver Koppell immediately pronounced it flawed.
He said that because Cablevision would gain sweeping control over television sports coverage in the New York market, there were significant antitrust concerns, and he announced that he planned to open an antitrust investigation.


Papal Award to Waldheim Insults Us All; Vatican Diplomacy
To the Editor:
Many Roman Catholics share A. M. Rosenthal's distaste for Kurt Waldheim (columns, Aug. 12 and 19), but Mr.
Rosenthal misunderstands the workings of the Vatican.


For Nonmusicals, New York Is Still The Field of Dreams
Robert Falls, the artistic director at the Goodman Theater here, was talking about New York and its current, difficult-to-define place in the American theater universe.
"There's no doubt the whole romantic notion of Broadway as a place to open a play does not apply anymore," he said, giving voice to a widely held view that the most glamorous commercial-theater venue in the world is no longer hospitable to nonmusical dramas.
"It's been completely usurped by the regionals."


INSIDE
U.S. Agents Missing in Peru
A plane crashed carrying five agents of the Drug Enforcement Administration who had been on a mission to combat the flow of cocaine.
Page A3.
Scrambling the Dial
Thanks to Fox's raid on network affiliates, nearly everything about broadcast television in Phoenix is about to turn upside down.
Page D1.
Newcomer Gains Ground
Michael Huffington is seeking Dianne Feinstein's Senate seat in California, spending $8 million of his own and almost overtaking her.
Page A8.
A Quiet Tennis Champ
The United States Open begins today with Conchita Martinez of Spain acting like a most humble Wimbledon champion.
SportsMonday, page C1.


It's Sanchez Vicario, Ivanisevic and Agassi, for Openers
While top-seeded Steffi Graf and Pete Sampras have been given a little extra time to heal injuries, today's spectators at the United States Open still have a more star-studded lineup to watch than last year's ticket-holders did.
After being criticized for fielding a weak opening-day lineup in 1993, Open officials have 12 seeded players in action today or tonight in addition to two other players whose followings exceed their rankings, Andre Agassi and Ivan Lendl.


Looking at Joe Papp in a Shakespearean Context
Joe Papp  An American Life  By Helen Epstein  Illustrated. 554 pages.
Little, Brown. $24.95.
Joseph Papp, the fabled founder of the New York Shakespeare Festival, wasn't a man to worry about what makes Iago evil.


Britten's Ghosts on a Budget in the Berkshires
For the musical traveler, Tanglewood is the obvious attraction hereabouts, but just up the road the Berkshire Opera Company works miracles in a converted Jesuit chapel, now called the Cranwell Opera House.
Economy is everything for this troupe.
Its founder, Rex Hearn, started out in 1985 with $60,000 and dreams of a Glyndebourne in the Berkshires.
He engaged an enterprising artistic director and conductor, Joel Revzen, an inventive stage director, Mary Duncan, and a board so committed to the company's mission that its chairman and president, Robin G. Holloway, doubles as its publicity director.


'Your Beer Is Getting Warm!'


Change Begins at Home In Hamilton Fish District
For as long as anyone can remember, a Hamilton Fish has represented the mid-Hudson River region in Congress.
The family traces its conservative roots to the nation's birth.
This year, with the incumbent Hamilton Fish having decided not to seek a 14th term in the House of Representatives because of poor health, the dynasty may end.
If it does not, there will still be a major change.
The Hamilton Fish currently seeking the seat, the incumbent's son, is a Democrat.


A Tinderbox in Gaza: Migrant Labor
Mohammed Naban, clutching the hand of his 11-year-old son, walked toward a crowded corridor lined with huge concrete blocks and surrounded by barbed wire.
The father and son pressed themselves against the mass of bodies and inched down the 500-yard chute.
Diesel trucks a few feet away spewed exhaust.
Powerful spotlights bleached patches of the asphalt and sand.
Soldiers armed with automatic weapons and wearing flak jackets barked orders in primitive Arabic as they herded thousands of workers to form 20 lines at plywood booths.


THE HEALTH CARE DEBATE: What Went Wrong? How the Health Care Campaign Collapsed -- A special report.; For Health Care, Times Was A Killer
This article was reported and written by Adam Clymer, Robert Pear and Robin Toner.
In March 1993, two months after his inauguration, President Clinton appealed to Robert C. Byrd, the presiding officer of the Senate, to let national health insurance legislation be considered as part of that summer's budget bill.


A Split Over Fed's Role; Clashes Seen After Vice Chairman Says Job Creation Should Also Be a Policy Goal
By publicly challenging the views of his boss on the mission of the Federal Reserve Bank, the agency's vice chairman, Alan S. Blinder, touched off a dispute that could lead to clashes over policy on interest rates, many economists said over the weekend.
Speaking at the Federal Reserve's annual conference here on Saturday, Mr.
Blinder called for central banks around the world, including the Fed, to set interest rates so as to pursue low inflation and low unemployment.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-7  NO RIGHTS SHIFT IN CHINA
China has taken few steps to improve its human rights policies even though President Clinton went out on a limb to separate rights from trade and to renew its trade status.
A1


Patents
THE Arab oil embargo of the early 1970's forced auto manufacturers for the first time to make fuel efficiency a priority in car design.
It also marked the beginning of Mark Egyed's lifelong fascination with automotive engineering.
"I was 13 years old, pumping gas at a gas station," Mr.
Egyed remembered, "and I saw how people almost came to blows over fuel."


Law Firm's Offer Perplexes Prudential Investors
At first blush, the offer sounded like a perfect deal: Baker &amp; McKenzie, the giant international law firm, would represent investors in a failed limited partnership sold by Prudential Securities and try to recover their money.
Even better, the investors were told in letters this month, they would have to pay a fee only if the lawyers were successful.
But some investors in the partnership, Madison Plaza Associates, were perplexed by the offer's terms.
Part of any recovery won by the lawyers had to be reinvested in the troubled partnership and at least 10 percent had to be turned over to Madison Plaza's general partner -- a Baker &amp; McKenzie client whom many of the same investors have accused in a class-action lawsuit of fraudulent dealings with the partnership.


PENSION CHANGES RAISING CONCERNS
American businesses in increasing numbers are turning away from the pension plans that have provided retirement income for millions since the Depression.
Instead, they are asking workers to pay for and manage their own retirement plans -- and, left on their own, Americans are not doing a very good job of it.
For decades, the American private pension system has been dominated by plans that promise a steady benefit check from the company to the worker from retirement to death.
But, with astonishing swiftness, these plans are being overtaken by 401(k) plans, which require workers to put in their own money for retirement and make their own decisions on how to invest it.


Georgia Races Look Ominous for Southern Democrats
A few years back, Charles Norwood, a folksy dentist who has never before run for political office, would have looked like a typical Republican sacrificial lamb in this most Democratic state in the South.
But as Congressional campaigning begins in earnest, no state represents the Democrats' sagging fortunes more than Georgia.
And that is why Dr.
Norwood, who is challenging Representative Don Johnson, a freshman Democrat, in the 10th Congressional District, talks like a man who already has his bags packed for Washington.


A Champion Without Chutzpah
Unknown, underestimated and too shy to speak up about it, Conchita Martinez, something of a national afterthought to the ubiquitous Arantxa Sanchez Vicario, didn't exactly plot to overthrow her lack of reputation by winning Wimbledon this year.
The mere thought of having to curtsey to royalty was enough to make the Spaniard forget what a backhand was.
Plus, there was the problem of the serve-and-volley activists who tend to paralyze baseliners like her.


Cablevision's Craving for Sports
Although he is nowhere near as famous -- or as noisy -- as cable television impresarios like Ted Turner, there is little mystery about why Charles F. Dolan was so intent on acquiring Madison Square Garden.
As the chairman and chief executive of the Cablevision Systems Corporation, the nation's fourth-largest cable operator, Mr.
Dolan has made sports programming -- particularly of New York sports -- a central pillar of his company's growth for nearly three decades.


Partner at Chiat/Day To Join Hill, Holliday
Bob Zach, a partner at Chiat/Day who is the media director of the agency's New York office, is leaving to join Hill, Holliday, Connors, Cosmopulos in Boston as an executive vice president and head of that agency's media department, effective on Sept. 15.
Mr.
Zach, 47, who has been at Chiat/Day for the last 10 years, is known for his expertise in print media.
He will succeed Rowena Alston, who left to join Houston, Effler &amp; Partners in Boston as senior vice president and media director.


North Korea May Rebuff South's Reactor Offer
In a potential setback to efforts to resolve the North Korean nuclear crisis, North Korea has suggested that it will reject South Korea's offer to provide it with modern reactors, officials in Seoul said today.
A North Korean radio broadcast on Saturday monitored in Seoul said the reactor issue should be settled by the United States and North Korea, without interference by South Korea.


With Face-Off at a Fete, Peru's Election Race Begins
What promises to be a long and bitter battle to be the next President of Peru began in earnest here today with rival campaign visits by President Alberto K. Fujimori and Javier Perez de Cuellar, the former Secretary General of the United Nations.
While both men have yet to declare their candidacy for the election in April, Mr.
Perez de Cuellar, who returned to Peru this month from retirement in Paris, has been barnstorming the country's poor and rural areas.


Miscellany
*
The singer Gladys Knight has been named the national spokeswoman for Aunt Jemima products.
She will appear in a fall campaign by Jordan, McGrath, Case &amp; Taylor, New York. *
Griffin Bacal and BKG Youth, both of New York, formed a strategic alliance on marketing to children, teen-agers and families.


Undercover Police Ride Wide Range of Emotion
They prowl subway platforms and the parks outside the stations.
Sometimes they pose as blind people, or as homeless people.
Other times they appear to be wealthy pedestrians wearing expensive jewelry conspicuously around their necks.
They are undercover transit police officers -- 200 or so rough-and-ready groundhogs who try to blend into the subterranean landscape.
Their objective is to follow potential victims to see that they travel safely, or spot fare-beaters and pickpockets in the act, sometimes as the victims.


New Wave From Southeast Asia Is Hitting New York Real Estate
They seemed to come out of nowhere -- a powerful group of Hong Kong billionaires who appeared in June to revive Donald J. Trump's troubled Riverside South project with millions in cash and a promise to finance the multibillion-dollar development.
But while the names of the new investors were largely unknown here, the size and power of their move into New York came as no surprise to brokers familiar with the recent influx of overseas investment.


Foley Makes the Cut, Just as Blake Predicted
From the day the Jets drafted Glenn Foley, a nervy, strong-armed quarterback out of Boston College, Jeff Blake knew his days as a Jets backup were over.
Blake, who has said throughout the exhibition season that "there's politics" involved, was the only Jet cut yesterday whose name may be familiar.
And Foley stayed, making the 53-man final squad as the Jets begin preparing for their season opener Sunday against Buffalo.


Montreal Red's Streak Upended at Saratoga
This is what they mean when they call Saratoga the house of racing upsets: Montreal Red, undefeated in his first three races, poised to sweep three stakes in 38 days, already hailed as the leading candidate for next year's Kentucky Derby -- with all this going, Montreal Red was outrun by five lengths today by a 32-1 shot named Wild Escapade.
Now, that's an upset, and it came in the race appropriately known for the last 90 years as the Hopeful.


Booming Success For Losers
What was a miserable day for West Virginia became a record-setting day for Mountaineer punter Todd Sauerbrun.
That is because Sauerbrun and his snapper, Scott Bailey, were the only bright spots in a game West Virginia lost to Nebraska by 31-0.
Sauerbrun punted a team and Kickoff Classic record nine times, and one of those included another Classic record, a 90-yard boot in the first quarter that "hit the sweet spot" of his right foot.


Watching People React To the News of the Day
Talk shows have a variety of appeals.
From some you can learn about this and that by listening to people with more information than you possess.
Others offer the satisfaction of feeling superior to vox populi.
And there are those that just provide the pleasure of watching one's peers mix it up on matters of moment.
"Talk Back Live," the "daily, live, interactive town meeting," to quote the press release, which joined the CNN lineup last week, is in the mix-it-up mode.
Susan Rook, presiding, is all bustle-bustle as she fields the opinions not only of a dozen or so audience members but also of callers, faxers and computerniks, all of whom she greets by first name. (Given her constant bending on the first show to put the microphone in the face of participants seated at this studio in the round, one feared for Ms. Rook's knees. Perhaps at her joint specialist's advice, on the second show her guests rose. On Wednesday she stood for some and bent to others; very risky.)


CHRONICLE
The son and daughter of the late John F. Kennedy, JOHN F. KENNEDY JR.  and CAROLINE KENNEDY SCHLOSSBERG , were best man and maid of honor at a cousin's wedding, which was also billed as a memorial.
TONY RADZIWILL was married to a fellow ABC producer, CAROLE ANN DIFALCO , on Saturday at Most Holy Trinity Church in East Hampton, The Daily News reported yesterday.


Britain Indicates Flexibility On End to Ireland Partition
With expectations rising here and in Northern Ireland that the outlawed Irish Republican Army is about to announce a cease-fire in the North, the British Government indicated flexibility this weekend on the I.R.A.'s basic demand: an end to the partition of Ireland.
On Saturday the Northern Ireland Office, the seat of British authority in the province, said that the section of the Northern Ireland Act of 1920 that established partition is now irrelevant and "pretty much a red herring."


Papal Award to Waldheim Insults Us All
To The Editor:
The papal knighthood awarded to former President Kurt Waldheim of Austria this month was a bad enough joke; to compound it by giving an additional papal award to his wife (news article, Aug. 22) is like trying to explain a bad joke to someone who doesn't even speak the language.


Maine Law Says Doctor Doesn't Know Best
To the Editor:
Physicians in Maine have a new tool designed to ward off malpractice lawsuits -- the simple affirmative defense that "I followed the clinical practice guidelines of my state." I have read the Maine law; others like it are sure to follow.


Defensive Shakeup Looms For Giants
His defense has been struggling, and that is obviously frustrating Mike Nolan.
The Giants' defensive coordinator is a good teacher who prepares his team well, but his players, for whatever reason, haven't been responding.
Nolan can't tackle for them, can't make them remember calls and plays, can't make them flow to the right gap and can't help them shed a blocker.
But as the coordinator, he can make changes.
Though no one will say so publicly, there are indications the Giants are about to make some major ones.


U.S. Promises to Respond If Castro Offers Reforms
Seeking to defuse the refugee crisis with Cuba, the Clinton Administration offered some carrots to Fidel Castro today to encourage him to undertake democratic reforms.
Secretary of State Warren Christopher said that if Mr.
Castro took meaningful steps like allowing free elections, the Administration would respond in a positive way.


No Mines Near Yellowstone
A calamity threatens Yellowstone, the crown jewel of the American park system.
Administration officials say their hands are tied by archaic laws and that there is nothing they can do.
But if people like Secretary of the Interior Bruce Babbitt and Vice President Al Gore genuinely wish to be remembered as aggressive and caring stewards of the country's environment, they will quickly seek ways to stop this threat in its tracks -- beginning with a summit conference of all inter ested parties and including, if necessary, special legislation.
The threat arises from a Canadian conglomerate, Noranda Inc., which plans to hollow out a mountain that sits above Yellowstone, a scant three miles from the park's border.
The mountain is said to contain $500 million in gold, silver and copper.
The company promises that poisonous wastes from the mine will not seep into the surrounding streams and the park.
But the troubled history of Western mining sends a different message entirely: This project poses a clear long-term threat to the water, wildlife and general sanctity of the 2.2 million acre preserve.


Bosnian Serbs Cast Ballots on Peace Plan
Bosnian Serbs voting in a referendum today appeared certain to confirm their rejection of an international peace plan for Bosnia that their leadership has portrayed as a recipe for military defeat and economic ruin.
Diplomats and United Nations officials said that a relentless campaign by the Bosnian Serb news media seemed to have assured an overwhelming defeat for the plan.
The proposal, drawn up by the United States, Russia, Britain, France and Germany, would require the Serbs to give up about a third of the territory they hold in Bosnia and Herzegovina.


People
Ric Anello, senior vice president and group creative director at D'Arcy Masius Benton &amp; Bowles, St.
Louis, was promoted to assume additional creative responsibilities on the Budweiser, O'Doul's and Natural Light brands accounts.
He succeeds Mark Choate, who left to join Foote, Cone &amp; Belding's Orange County office in Santa Ana, Calif., as executive vice president and executive creative director. *
David Brown was named senior vice president and director of media services at Adler Boschetto Peebles &amp; Partners, New York, succeeding Carol Karpa, who left.
Mr.
Brown previously served in a similar capacity at Merkley Newman Harty, New York.


What Money Can Buy in California
A wealthy political novice, first-term Representative Michael Huffington, has spent $8 million of his own money, with millions more to come, in an advertising assault meant to unseat Senator Dianne Feinstein.
And in just six months, Mr.
Huffington's cannonade of commercials has narrowed Ms.
Feinstein's huge lead to single digits.
Effective?
Yes.
Risk-free?
No, say political experts of all persuasions, who are asking if Mr.
Huffington, a Republican, has come too far, too fast for his own good.


Krystal to Select A New Agency
The Krystal Company, a fast-food chain in Chattanooga, Tenn., has ended its relationship with Publicis/ Bloom in Dallas after four years.
As a result, the account, with billings estimated at $7 million, has been placed in review.


Cubans' Kin Are Anxious In Union City
The Union of Cubans in Exile here is swamped.
The phones ring nonstop, people are always coming in, and half the callers and drop-ins are beside themselves, crying over relatives they cannot trace to the Guantanamo Bay Naval Base or worrying about those detained there.
This is life in the Second City of Cuban exiles -- frantic and frustrating -- as the drama of the Cuban refugees and the political maneuvering between Washington and Havana unfolds.


TRANSACTIONS
Football  National Football League
ARIZONA CARDINALS -- Waived Perry Carter and Mose Richardson, cornerbacks; Chris Swartz, quarterback; Darryl Hardy, linebacker; and David Wilkins defensive end.
Signed Karl Dunbar, defensive end.
Placed Garrison Hearst, running back, on the physically-unable-to-perform list.


World Economies


Paper magazine, a hip harbinger of change, begins a trade campaign with ever-shifting themes.
A QUIRKY magazine that prides itself on covering an unconventional melange of subjects will seek to entice advertisers into its pages with an unconventional melange of images.
The first trade campaign for Paper, scheduled to begin this week, presents the magazine as a medium of many identities.
Even the theme line changes from one advertisement to the next.


Market Place; The Mood Improves On Wall St.
Alan Greenspan is not going to be mean to investors anymore.
Or so much of Wall Street now believes.
And if that belief persists, and if confidence grows that the economy and corporate profits will not suffer greatly at the current level of interest rates, the stock rally that surprised Wall Street last week could have a considerable way to go.


Police Arrest 27 Drivers in Crackdown on Street Racing in Queens
On weekend nights this summer, scores of cars with souped-up engines raced along Francis Lewis Boulevard in Bayside, Queens, at speeds up to 125 miles an hour, turning the expansive thoroughfare into an illegal speedway.
Alarmed by the danger and by heightened complaints from neighbors, the Queens District Attorney's Office and police officials teamed up and sent undercover officers to attack the racers during the last two months.


Young Golfer Makes History With a Flourish
Playing with the steadfast persistence of a man many years his senior, 18-year-old Tiger Woods fought his way into the record books today, defeating Trip Kuehne, 22, in the United States Amateur Golf Championship to become the youngest winner in the 99-year history of the event.
Woods, the first black man to win the world's most prestigious amateur tournament, battled back from the abyss.
His charge from six holes down to a 1-up victory is, according to the United States Golf Association, the greatest comeback in United States Amateur history.
It also was the most dramatic.
Woods played the last 12 holes of the 36-hole match in four-under par, making pars from the trees with the virtuosity of a young Seve Ballesteros.


Health Maintenance Organizations
The popularity of health maintenance organizations, or H.M.O.'s, has been growing for a decade, as their costs have increased at a slower rate than other health-care programs.
Nationwide, enrollment rose by 38.4 percent from 1988 through 1993.
The number enrolled in New York, New Jersey and Connecticut grew by 55 percent in those years.
Monthly premiums for H.M.O.'s are lower than those for fee-for-service plans -- $157 vs. $175 nationwide for individual subscribers in 1993.
But critics say that while H.M.O.'s are cheaper, their cost-cutting can compromise medical care.


No Headline
"For many retirees, the money won't be there, and this will have a direct effect on most Americans' standard of living. A lot of participants in 401(k) plans are not doing a good job. They are not investing well and leagues of them may be retiring at subsistence levels." -- J. CARTER BEESE JR., a Security and Exchange Commissioner.  [ A1:1. ]


Stamford's Elderly Keep Fighting for a Center
Most communities in Connecticut have senior citizen centers, but this Gold Coast city, headquarters to many international corporations, is not one of them.
For more than a decade, older residents have been fighting for a center, and even though the city has agreed to provide a former Board of Education building as a site and has set aside $1 million for renovations, the fight continues.


U S West Puts Account in Review
U S West Inc. has placed in review its corporate advertising account, which has been handled by Grey Advertising in Los Angeles since 1988.
Though billings were not disclosed, Adweek estimated them at $8 million to $10 million.


Speak Louder on Rights in China
Commerce Secretary Ron Brown, now in China with an entourage of U.S. executives, is being spared the personal humiliations showered on his Cabinet colleague, Warren Christopher, last March.
Those spring tantrums achieved their goal of convincing the Clinton Administration to drop all human rights conditions for China's tariff privileges.
Though Mr.
Brown yesterday promised to raise human rights concerns with his hosts, he has made it clear that commerce is his priority.
Beijing is showing its appreciation by upgrading the Commerce Secretary's protocol status to "Presidential envoy." But on matters of substance, China has given the Administration little to show for its human rights retreat.


5 U.S. Agents Missing After Crash in Peru
Five agents from the Drug Enforcement Administration are missing after their twin-engine jet crashed in Peru, the agency said today.
The plane, carrying two pilots and three enforcement officers, disappeared Saturday after leaving an air base in Santa Lucia, a United States-financed installation in the upper Huallaga Valley, where most of the world's cocaine originates.


Essay; Cuban Overture
Will the principle that guides Clinton Administration domestic policy also be applied to foreign affairs?
The bedrock principle, as it has evolved from Bunker Hill to the White House bunker, is this: Don't run until you see the whites of their eyes.


No Headline
New York's troubled racing scene claimed its biggest victim today when Jerry Lawrence was forced to resign as executive vice president and general manager of the New York Racing Association, which operates racing at Belmont Park, Aqueduct and Saratoga.
Lawrence announced he was resigning immediately "because of differences I have had with the leadership of N.Y.R.A." He would not elaborate on the exact differences, but acknowledged that they had been building for months.
And he said that he had been asked to leave during a meeting on Friday with the two top leaders of the association, Allan R. Dragone, the chairman, and Gerard McKeon, the president.


Next 2 Weeks Critical For Salvaging Season
Negotiators for striking players and the owners are expected to return to the bargaining table this week, but their presence there won't be what's important.
It's what they bring with them that will count.
Federal mediators, who recessed talks last Thursday when they began evoking harsh retorts, will most likely contact both sides today, the 18th day of the baseball strike, and try to arrange a bargaining session for the middle of the week, probably Wednesday.
Along with the parties in the labor dispute, they know that the next two weeks will be critical if any more baseball is to be played in this interrupted season.


Microsoft Winning Fight Over 'Windows'
When it comes to the Microsoft Corporation these days, the Government giveth and the Government giveth.
In a well-publicized accord last month, the Justice Department settled a four-year investigation against the company in an agreement that many computer industry executives regard as favorable to the software giant.


At Hampton Classic, the Talk Is of Horse Abuse Case


Sunday Morning, and a Pastor Is Found Slain in Queens
It was not unusual for the Rev.
Jong Kyu Kim to stay overnight to conduct a solitary prayer vigil in his humble Presbyterian church in Queens where he was the new pastor.
But when he had not come home by early yesterday morning, his wife, Kyo Yea Kim, started to worry.
She and her brother, Kyo Chang Chee, arrived shortly after 7:30 A.M. at the squat, two-story concrete block building at 133-06 35th Avenue in an area of light industries in Flushing that houses the Sung Lim Presbyterian Church.
The door was closed but not locked.


Addenda Ortho's Account Placed in Review
The Solaris Group division of the Monsanto Company has placed in review its Ortho lawn and garden products account after three years at J. Walter Thompson San Francisco.
Billings were estimated at $8 million to $10 million.
On Friday, the client and agency disputed the events preceding the review.
Aly Johnsen, a spokeswoman for Solaris in San Ramon, Calif., said that Thompson had declined to participate in the review last month and then resigned last week.
Michael White, senior vice president of marketing services at Thompson San Francisco, said the account was not in review when it was resigned, but acknowledged that the agency believed a review was a possibility.


Channel Executive Seeks to Build Showtime's Slate of Original Fare
It's not easy competing with HBO, the cable colossus that perennially boasts the most subscribers, critical acclaim and Emmy Awards among premium channels.
But Steven Hewitt says he intends to have fun trying.
Mr.
Hewitt was promoted in May to executive vice president of the Showtime Entertainment Group, the original-programming unit of Showtime Networks Inc.
While the channel's staples will continue to be theatrical movies, shown without commercials, Mr.
Hewitt's mandate is to raise the channel's profile as a producer of "made for Showtime" films.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Garden Sale
Viacom agreed to sell its Madison Square Garden sports and entertainment empire to a partnership of Cablevision Systems and ITT, but many analysts said the purchase price of $1.075 billion in cash would far exceed what the Garden properties -- including the New York Knicks, New York Rangers and MSG cable network -- are actually worth.  [ Page A1. ]


Move to Oust 2 From Board of Olympia's U.S. Unit
The struggle for control of the American subsidiary of the real estate company Olympia &amp; York Developments grew more heated late Friday when the administrator for the bankrupt Canadian parent company ordered the removal of two prominent executives from the nine-member board of the American company, including its chairman.
The two board members -- Richard R. Shinn, its chairman, and Willard C. Butcher -- are part of a board assembled last year on the orders of an American bankruptcy court judge.
Mr.
Shinn is a former chief executive at the Metropolitan Life Insurance Company and Mr.
Butcher is former chief executive of Chase Manhattan Bank.


Madison Sq. Garden Deal Is a Victory for Viacom
Viacom Inc. announced yesterday that it had agreed to sell its Madison Square Garden sports and entertainment empire to a partnership of the Cablevision Systems Corporation and the ITT Corporation, but many analysts said the purchase price of $1.075 billion in cash would far exceed the Garden's actual worth.
And so it may be months or even years before the long-term winners and losers can be identified in the battle for a package that includes the Madison Square Garden arena, the New York Knicks and New York Rangers, and the MSG Network.
The Liberty Media Corporation, the other bidder, dropped out after declining to raise its $1 billion offer.


Dividend Meetings
Following is a partial list of dividend meetings this week: MONDAY  Bre Pptys Inc TUESDAY  Burnham Pac Ptys Inc DQE Inc Ipalco Entrps West Inc WEDNESDAY  Deere &amp; Co Oneida Ltd Stanley Wks THURSDAY  Chrysler Corp Engelhard Corp LG&amp;E Energy Corp Witco Corp Wyle Labs FRIDAY  Sysco Corp


From Out of Nowhere With So Much to Say
Lisa Loeb, a singer and songwriter whose girlish wail and tricky lyrics suggest a precociously wise child shouting out the answers to knotty psychological questions, came out of nowhere this year with the biggest hit from the "Reality Bites" movie soundtrack.
That spunky but heartfelt original song, "Stay," evoked the emotional tug of war between characters played by Ethan Hawke and Winona Ryder in language that seemed to speak for both.
The success of "Stay" prompted a bidding war between several record labels for Ms.
Loeb's services.
She ended up on Geffen, for whom she has yet to make her first album.
And at the Bottom Line on Friday evening, where she appeared with her band, Nine Stories, Ms.
Loeb proved that the excitement was justified.
In song after original song, she demonstrated a highly developed talent for writing breezy pop tunes that are catchy but redeemed from cliche by unexpected rhythmic shifts and small harmonic quirks.


In Virginia, a Child's Illness Quiets a Congressional Campaign
Two years ago, Representative James P. Moran and Kyle E. McSlarrow snarled and jeered at each other throughout their Congressional campaign.
When Mr.
Moran denounced Mr.
McSlarrow, a conservative Republican, for experimenting with marijuana and cocaine as a teen-ager, Mr.
McSlarrow called Mr.
Moran "slimy" and badgered him into admitting that he had also tried marijuana.
Mr.
McSlarrow's supporters screamed "baby killer" at Mr.
Moran, a Democrat who supports abortion rights, as he arrived at debates.
Mr.
Moran's supporters called Mr.
McSlarrow, who opposes gun control, a "Bambi blaster."


Mutual Funds Provide Too Little Information
To the Editor:
Under the drooping eyelids of the Securities and Exchange Commission, the mutual funds industry has adopted an advertising and marketing approach to disclosure.


U.S. Sets Bills Auction
The Treasury's schedule of financings this week is confined to the bills market, beginning with today's regular weekly auction of new three- and six-month bills.
On Wednesday, the Government will auction 16-day cash management bills.
According to traders, by the close of the New York cash market on Friday, the rate on the outstanding three-month bill was 4.54 percent and the six-month bill was at 4.85 percent.


Infighting at Garden May Have Begun
The acquisition of Madison Square Garden from Viacom by Cablevision Systems and ITT is not bound to elate Bob Gutkowski, the Garden's president.
An advocate of keeping the Garden's properties intact, Gutkowski is bound to be dismayed that his high-profile stewardship of the arena, the Knicks, the Rangers and the MSG Network may indeed be over.


Pesticides Pose a Lifelong Threat
To the Editor:
"Pesticides May Leave Legacy of Hormonal Chaos" (Science Times, Aug. 23) implies that evidence on the endocrine disruptive effects of some synthetic pollutants is recent, and you cite claims that such effects are exaggerated.


Murdoch's Raid Brings a Shuffling of TV Stations in Phoenix
What hath Rupert Murdoch wrought?
In May, when Fox Broadcasting snatched 12 television stations from CBS, NBC and ABC, industry analysts theorized tirelessly about how Mr.
Murdoch's move would affect local television markets and the relationship between networks and their affiliated stations.
Such questions are no longer theoretical in this sprawling desert region of 2.2 million viewers.
Virtually everything about broadcast television here is about to be turned upside down.


Sports of The Times; Yesterday Was Just Perfect for a Ball Game
YANKEE STADIUM was like a morgue yesterday.
The sun was shining brightly, the field was gorgeous with the manicured grass as green as a pool table, the tan infield dirt was smartly raked.
It was a perfect day for a ball game.
The first-place Yankees, according to the schedule, were supposed to be playing the Texas Rangers, in the heat of a pennant race.
But Yankee Stadium yesterday was as silent as a cadaver.
Except for the soft whir sprinkler system that is run by computers in the stadium basement and which pop up for a time first in right field, and then behind third base, and somewhere else after that, the playing field, the broad, wondrous sweeping diamond, was empty.
No runners, no hitters, no one to err.


Frankly My Dear, Russians Do Give a Damn
American fans of Margaret Mitchell's classic novel, "Gone With the Wind," had to content themselves with one authorized sequel, Alexandra Ripley's 1991 best seller, "Scarlett." But at almost any Moscow bookstand, Russian readers can buy such tantalizing offerings as "We Call Her Scarlett," "The Secret of Scarlett O'Hara," "Rhett Butler," "The Secret of Rhett Butler" and "The Last Love of Scarlett."
Most of these sequels are attributed to a writer named Yuliya Hilpatrik, but there is something singularly gloomy and Slavic about many of the plot lines.
In "The Last Love of Scarlett," for example, almost everybody dies, including Scarlett and Rhett.


Ashe Event: Many Stars, One Cause
There was Bill Cosby, but you weren't watching the Huxtables.
Attending was Nick Lowery, without a goal post in sight.
Charlie Ward was present, but he put aside his basketball and football.
Such a diverse gathering could only be inspired by one man: Arthur Ashe.


CHRONICLE
ELIZABETH TAYLOR and Gov.
CHRISTINE TODD WHITMAN of New Jersey have agreed to help manage a charitable organization set up by Doris Duke, the late tobacco heiress, who died last October at age 80.
Two others, Duke University's president, NANNERL KEOHANE , and a former National Gallery of Art director, J. CARTER BROWN , have also agreed to help oversee the proposed $1 billion foundation, representatives of Duke's estate told The Associated Press on Friday.


Katlehong Journal; A Post-Apartheid Nightmare: Hospitals Swamped
Standing at the cusp of South Africa's two most battle-racked black townships, Natalspruit Hospital has long been an urban sanctuary.
It binds the wounds of political wars and lets refugees camp in the courtyard.
It opens its taps for thirsty neighbors when the local water supply breaks down.
It was a voting station in the country's first free elections.
It has never, doctors say, turned away a patient who could not pay.


Lesbians March in Tokyo


Fast-Food Tax Will Boomerang
To the Editor:
It is unfortunate that a German court decision now allows cities and towns to tax disposable packaging and utensils used at fast-food restaurants (Business Day, Aug. 22).
Taxation to eliminate or reduce the use of fast-food packaging, utensils and containers is not a quick-fix environmental solution.
It has unforeseen consequences for the environment and public health.


East Harlem Man Picked in 22 Lineups By Robbery Victims
A man arrested yesterday for robbing two women at gunpoint in an East Harlem housing project was linked to 22 other robberies in the neighborhood, the police said.
The police said the man, whom they identified as Quique Rohena, 38, of 1990 Lexington Avenue, was picked out of 22 lineups by victims.
"The number of lineups was quite large," said Detective Charles Freitag of the 23d Precinct robbery squad, which handled the case.
"It was the most I have seen since I've been here, which is five years."


ABUSES OF RIGHTS PERSIST IN CHINA DESPITE U.S. PLEAS
In the three months since President Clinton renewed Beijing's "most favored nation" trade status, human-rights conditions in China have continued to deteriorate and relations with Washington remain mired in mistrust and contentiousness.
Before Commerce Secretary Ronald H. Brown arrived this weekend to seek more constructive relations, the Chinese authorities ordered another clampdown on dissidents, placing many under effective house arrest.


No Shock As Teams Cut Their Rosters
National Football League teams trimmed the fat yesterday and reduced their rosters to the regular-season limit of 53.
A few big names were cut loose, but the carnage was much gentler than in years past.
John Offerdahl, the Miami Dolphins' five-time Pro Bowl linebacker, retired after eight seasons of endless injuries.
Among the veterans waived were running back Cleveland Gary of the Los Angeles Rams, wide receiver Eric Martin of the New Orleans Saints and a 13th-year linebacker, Jimmy Williams of the Tampa Bay Buccaneers.
One rookie of note also was cut -- Bruce Walker, the 324-pound defensive tackle drafted on this year's second round by the Philadelphia Eagles.


The Rescue of Amelia
It was a daring rescue mission: a police officer lowered himself into a 40-foot pit below a SoHo apartment, left to dangle in the darkness on the end of a rope in a perilous attempt to accomplish what four other officers could not.
In the end and under the glare of television lights, the officer had accomplished what four hours of aborted rescue attempts had failed to do.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  VIACOM CONFIRMS DEAL FOR GARDEN
Viacom Inc. confirmed that it had agreed to sell its Madison Square Garden sports and entertainment empire to a partnership of the Cablevision Systems Corporation and the ITT Corporation for $1.075 billion in cash, a price far exceeding what many analysts say the Garden is worth.
The bidding for the package, which includes the Madison Square Garden arena, the New York Knicks and New York Rangers, and the MSG Network, was apparently too rich for the other suitor, Liberty Media Inc.
A1.


And Baby Makes Freedom for Mother
The littlest refugee today returned a favor to the Cuban mother who gave her the gift of life.
She helped win freedom for her mother.


Weather Slows Exodus From Cuba
The flow of Cuban refugees toward Florida all but stopped today, with the Coast Guard picking up just 84 people from seven vessels by 10 P.M.
Bad weather has kept Cubans at home during the past few days, but Coast Guard officials said they expected that more would try the crossing as conditions improved in the Straits of Florida.


Television
WHEN it comes to finishing a season as No. 1, the only people who care more deeply than college football coaches are television producers.
They have more at stake.
Millions and millions more.
That is certainly the view held by the producers of "Home Improvement," which was the top-rated show on television last season.


Economic Calendar
Listed below are the scheduled release dates for major economic indicators this week.
Monday  Personal Income . . .
July  Tuesday  New-Home Sales . . .
July  Wednesday  Leading Indicators . . .
July  Factory Orders . . .
July  Thursday  Construction Spending . . .
July  Retail Sales . . .
August  Weekly Jobless Claims  Friday  Employment . . .
August


Pioline Is Foiled in Yet Another Final Episode
Cedric Pioline must be wondering what he has to do to finally win a tournament.
The 25-year-old Frenchman, playing in his seventh career final, won his first set against Yevgeny Kafelnikov this afternoon.


Paying Grandmas To Keep Kids in Limbo
The kinship foster care program, created in 1986 to rescue New York City's struggling foster care system, has become a big business that has fallen short of expectations and is draining our financial and social resources.
Of the more than 45,000 children in foster care, 20,000 are in the program.
They live with relatives, usually grandmothers or aunts, who are paid $400 to $1,100 a month per child, plus a clothing allowance and medical coverage. (These same sums are paid to foster parents who are not relatives.) Add these outlays to administrative costs, and the program's price tag approaches $400 million a year.


N.C.A.A.'s Two Aces Set Goal: Survival
Angela Lettiere and Mark Merklein have that look on their faces -- the one of hopeful confusion shared by all recent college graduates.
The one that asks, "What have I gotten myself into?" And in these particular cases, the one that says, "I'm playing in the United States Open next week, and I don't know a thing about who I'm playing."
Things were a lot simpler as undergraduates, when they marched out and won the National Collegiate Athletic Association singles championships, Lettiere for Georgia and Merklein for Florida.
They played for team, school and coach.
And they did it well enough to be honored as the men's and women's players of the year yesterday at the West Side Tennis Club, joining 18 players on the Rolex collegiate all-star team.


Letter: On Sex Offenders; New York, Too, Needs Registration Law
To the Editor:
As chairman of the New York State Assembly Committee on Correction and sponsor of a sex offender registration bill, I welcome your discussion of the issue in "Dealing With Sex Offenders" (editorial, Aug. 15).


ITT Focusing on Long Term
Analysts and investors have been scratching their heads ever since the ITT Corporation was identified as a serious bidder for one of the entertainment world's most glamorous properties.
But to many, ITT's deal, announced yesterday, to buy Madison Square Garden in conjunction with the Cablevision Systems Corporation clouds the vision of ITT's future.


Insurance Scandal Sits a Pale Horse at Hampton Classic
"This is a sport that can involve a lot of money," said Sandra Carter, who rode horses when she was young and was now telling her two young daughters the proper way to sit a horse.
They were in the stands today at the opening of the Hampton Classic, Long Island's premier equestrian event and, for many, the perfect way to end a perfect summer.
But the weeklong event will be without some of its regular riders, trainers and owners, barred because of their connection with what prosecutors say was a plot to kill show horses for insurance money.


Accounts
*
Advance Auto Stores, Roanoke, Va., to the Martin Agency, Richmond, to handle the automotive retail chain's account, previously at Arnold Finnegan Martin, Richmond.
Billings were estimated at $6 million to $10 million. *
Crowley, Milner &amp; Co., Detroit, to W. B. Doner &amp; Co., Southfield, Mich., to handle its broadcast advertising account, previously at Kolon, Bittker &amp; Desmond, Troy, Mich.
Billings were not disclosed.


Whitman Starts Four-State Campaign for G.O.P.
Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman held more than her share of the spotlight this weekend as she began her first major political tour outside New Jersey.
While she was preparing to try to boost the campaigns of Republican candidates in four states, she heard herself being praised as a possible Vice Presidential candidate on the Republican ticket in 1996.
Mrs.
Whitman's tour was intended to offer testimony that cutting taxes and reducing the size of government were good politics as well as good business.
She added that she wanted to see Republicans pick up the seven seats needed to take control of the United States Senate, a change she said would protect states like New Jersey from expensive Federal mandates.


Pesticides Pose a Lifelong Threat; Experts for Hire?
To the Editor:
In "Pesticides May Leave Legacy of Hormonal Chaos" (Science Times, Aug. 23), you present a member of the American Council on Science and Health as an expert on the issue of whether or not chemicals in the environment harm wildlife and humans.


CHRONICLE
The romance, relationship or call-it-what-you-will between GRETA GARBO and CECIL BEATON has been the subject of a few books over the years, but the latest has hit a snag.
"Greta and Cecil," by DIANA SOUHAMI , scheduled to be published in England next week, has been withdrawn.
The author uses sources including diaries, letters, photographs and films in writing of the private life of Garbo and Beaton, who met in Hollywood in 1932.


Clintons at Play Among Celebrities
As the saying goes, opposites attract.
The corollary taught by the first days of President Clinton's vacation here is just how quickly celebrities bond.
First it was golf with a few new friends, like William Gates Jr., the founder of Microsoft; Warren E. Buffett, the financier, and George Stevens Jr., the producer-director.
Then it was dinner at the summer home of Katharine Graham of The Washington Post Company.
The party on Saturday night was so private that no one would say who else was there.


DOCTORS, PATIENTS AND TRUSTSection B; Page 1; Column 1; Metropolitan Desk
YOU'RE perched on a stool or a table in a drafty cubicle, draped in a flimsy gown - waiting.
That wait, whether it's 5 or 25 minutes and depending on how worried you are, is either annoying or anguishing.
It is symptomatic of situations that trouble the physician-patient relationship.
But what patients do, and fail to do, can also create problems.
Moreover, the growth of the consumer movement is changing the nature of the relationship: doctors are adjusting to a new assertiveness in a more well-informed clientele, and patients are less likely to consider the doctor all-powerful and all-knowing.


Nebraska Is Talented, Even on Defense
Kevin Steele, Nebraska's linebacker coach, burst into a defensive linemen meeting recently to inform a certain gruff nose guard -- the one with the crew cut and wearing a Peterbilt tattoo on his left bicep -- that he planned to name a new defensive adjustment after him.
"Ugly," said the 6-foot-2-inch, 285-pound (and tattooed) Christian Peter of Nebraska.
"It's a check call on the line we designed just for West Virginia. Nice name, huh?"


Appetites Of the Music From Brazil
Brazilian music evolves through cannibalism, swallowing and digesting whatever regional and foreign styles it happens to meet.
The Brazilian quadruple bill on Friday night at Damrosch Park, which was part of Lincoln Center Out of Doors, showed the process in action: Brazilian rhythms and melodies engulfing rock and jazz.
Three of the performers -- Lygya Barreto, Claudio Roditi and Leny Andrade -- appear regularly in New York; one, Vinicius Cantuaria, does not.
Mr.
Cantuaria, born in 1951, is part of Brazil's rock generation, and he arrived on stage wearing blue jeans, a white T-shirt and a punky crew cut.
In Brazil, he started out as a drummer, backing up prominent songwriters including Gilberto Gil and Caetano Veloso.
He wrote a hit song, "Lua e Estrella," for Mr.
Veloso, then began leading his own groups, switching from drums to guitar.


Favorite in Cane Pace Runs Far From Perfect
Cam's Card Shark, this year's superstar 3-year-old colt, was second to none entering Saturday night's $391,780 Cane Pace at Yonkers Raceway.
But in a shocking finish to the second leg of pacing's triple crown, the overwhelming favorite ended up second to last.
Falcon's Future, the 2-1 second choice, went wire to wire for the victory, dashing Cam's Card Shark's dreams of triple crown glory, ending his seven-race winning streak and putting on hold his bid to become the richest single-season money horse in harness history.


RESULTS PLUS
AUTO RACING  Schumacher Disqualified After Victory  Michael Schumacher, the apparent runaway winner of the Belgian Grand Prix in Spa-Francorchamps yesterday, was disqualified when race stewards found that a speed-limitation device on his car did not meet requirements.
The ruling gave the victory to Britain's Damon Hill.
Race stewards ruled that a mandatory wooden plank under Schumacher's car, recently required by Formula One and aimed at slowing down drivers, did not meet legal measurement requirements.
It was either too thin or too light, giving him an advantage over his competitors.
The incident is the third this year to jeopardize Schumacher's dominance, which once seemed vulnerable only to the guardians of Formula One racing.
Schumacher, who could have won his eighth title, is already driving under an appeal of a two-race suspension for disregarding a black flag at the British Grand Prix.
The German so dominated Sunday's race that even a sloppy spin in the 18th lap failed to allow the competition within striking distance.
He finished 13.663 seconds ahead of Hill, his closest challenger in the title chase.
The spin could have shaved some wood off the board, which is 30 centimeters wide, one centimeter thick and runs the length of the car.
The car is allowed to lose only one millimeter during the race, but the ruling report said up to 2.6 millimeters were missing. (AP) TRACK AND FIELD  Drummond Stuns Christie in 100 Meters  Jon Drummond upset Linford Christie, the Olympic and world champion, in the 100-meter dash yesterday at the Rieti Invitational in Italy.
Drummond's meet-record time of 9.99 seconds matched his personal best and easily outpaced Christie, who finished in 10.06.
The world record-holder, Colin Jackson of Britain, pulled away with two barriers left to win the 110-meter hurdles in 13.07 seconds.
Americans Alan Johnson and Anthony Dees were second and third, respectively. (AP) Sprinter Stripped of Medal: Horace Dove-Edwin, the Sierra Leone sprinter whose stunning second-place finish in the 100 meters was one of the biggest surprises of the Commonwealth Games, has tested positive for anabolic steroids.
Dove-Edwin has been stripped of his silver medal and banned from the games, the Commonwealth Games Federation said yesterday. (AP) GYMNASTICS  Dawes Sweeps All Five Events  Dominique Dawes added four individual gold medals Saturday night to the all-around title she won 24 hours earlier in the national gymnastics championships in Memphis, becoming the first gymnast to sweep all five events since Joyce Schroeder in the Amateur Athletic Union nationals in 1969.
Dawes, 17, beat the two-time world champion Shannon Miller at every turn.
In another unprecedented occurrence, Miller won silver medals in each individual event after finishing second in the all-around.
Dawes and Miller were 1-2 in the vault, uneven bars and balance beam, then completed their respective sweeps in the floor exercise. (AP) YACHT RACING  Maclean's S-Boat Named Overall Winner  The 75th anniversary of the S Class, the sailboat design of the late Nathanael Herreshoff, drew more than 30 of the 27-foot sailboats to Rhode Island for regattas over the last two weekends.
In the final races yesterday on Narragansett Bay, Teaticket, the S-boat owned by Willie Maclean of Jamestown, R.I., was named overall winner.
At the helm of Teaticket was Bill Beebe of Warwick, R.I.


Cuba Patrolling Beaches to Keep Children Off Unseaworthy Rafts
For the first time since thousands of Cubans began to flee the country by boat more than two weeks ago, President Fidel Castro's security forces were patrolling the beach today, warning departing Cubans not to take children aboard their rickety boats.
The order to keep children from risk came in a message from Mr.
Castro published today in Juventud Rebelde, Cuba's only Sunday newspaper.


Equity Issues This Week
The following equity and convertible-debt offerings are expected this week:
Mountbatten Inc., Bala-Cynwyd, Pa., an initial public offering of 1 million shares.
D.
H.
Blair &amp; Co.


Dept. of Aging Budget Protects Senior Centers
To the Editor:
A letter Aug. 22 from Ruth Rossini, director of the Washington Heights and Inwood Council on Aging, contains many inaccuracies about the Department for the Aging.
To set the record straight:


Bridge
Bridge now, for the first time, has a Europe-United States equivalent of golf's Ryder Cup.
The Americans won the Generali Two Worlds Trophy on Saturday following six days of play at the Bridge Village in San Nicola Arcella, Italy.
The margin of victory was 48 imps, relatively small after 144 deals with four invited pairs on each team.
The American team consisted of two regular partnerships, Jeff Meckstroth and Eric Rodwell, and Bobby Levin and Peter Weichsel, and two irregular ones, Bob Wolff and Alan Sontag, and Larry Cohen and Zia Mahmood.
The European team included Enri Leufkens and Berri Westra of the Netherlands, Bermuda Bowl winners in Chile a year ago, and Geir Helgemo and Tor Helness of Norway, who were runners-up then.
The other European pairs were Tony Forrester and Andrew Robson of Britain, who might conceivably be representing the United States next time around, and Lorenzo Lauria and Alfredo Versace of Italy.


Contemplative, Stormy, Calm, With a Touch of the Literary
Stephen Pelton has been choreographing for 10 years and has some impressive training and performing credits both in New York and in San Francisco, where he is now based.
There was widespread praise for a piece Mr.
Pelton created at the American Dance Festival this summer.
But a program he presented on Friday night at the Merce Cunningham Studio was a disappointment.
"Boat Song (Barcarole)," the festival dance, was the best of the dances he presented.
Set to a score by Robert Maggio that incorporated one of Mendelssohn's "Songs Without Words," the dance built from a contemplative solo for the choreographer to a stormy then calmer quartet to match its apparent inspiration, a quotation from Stephen Crane's "Open Boat." It was performed by a cast that also included Jesselito Cocjin Bie, Susannah May, Katie Moremen and Vong Phrommala, all likable and full of pizazz.


Crime Fighters Draw A Line in the Grass
What convinced Deborah Forde was her scar, the one left by muggers who violently ripped a gold chain from her neck while she was jogging in Prospect Park last year.
For Dante Jordan, it was the memory of having his bike stolen at knife-point.
Suzann Bassil simply wanted a little independence.
She likes to cycle and does not want to wait for her boyfriend to get off work to accompany her.


Researchers Find a Diverse Face On the Poverty in New York City
Challenging the stereotype of the poor as single mothers on welfare who soak up more and more tax dollars, a new study has found that only one in four poor households in New York City is headed by a single parent and that spending on welfare in the city, when adjusted for inflation, has declined by 20 percent since 1975.
In fact, the report, released yesterday by the Citizens Budget Commission, found that Medicaid, not welfare, had been the prime engine of growth in public spending on the poor in the city, particularly in the exploding costs of medical care for the disabled and the elderly poor.


For Ex-Judge Wachtler, Real Estate by Day, Card Games and Meatloaf at Night
During the day, Sol Wachtler will broker real-estate deals from a glass high-rise in an affluent section of Long Island.
At night, he will head home to Myrtle Avenue in Bedford-Stuyvesant for a dinner of meatloaf, and maybe an evening of television or cards with the other inmates.
Mr.
Wachtler, the former Chief Judge of New York State, yesterday became a resident of the Brooklyn Community Correction Center, a halfway house at which he is to spend the next 30 to 60 days before being released on probation.


New Feet Aflutter in 'Company B'
Role debuts and casting changes are generally more newsworthy in ballet than in modern dance.
Some modern-dance choreographers and companies do not even announce new casting.
But given Paul Taylor's quirky impulses and his somewhat teasing delight in his dancers, "Company B" as danced by an entirely new cast promised to be interesting.
And it was, in a performance by the Paul Taylor Dance Company on Saturday night at the Damrosch Park Band Shell, presented by the Lincoln Center Out of Doors festival.
One revelation of the performance was how quickly one begins to associate individual dancers with specific roles.
When "Company B" was first presented in 1991, the stars of the dance seemed to be the Andrews Sisters, to whose songs the piece was set.
As the high of that nutty music wore off, Mr.
Taylor stepped into the star role, pouring dance out onto the stage that captured the war years of the 1940's and made subtle use of period social dances but also revealed, even more subtly, the dark subtext of many of the songs.
Bobby-soxers and their boys next door kick up their heels with abandon in "Company B." But every so often a dancer drops to the floor and lies still as the dance goes on.
And from time to time men move slowly across the back in single file, a frieze of young ghosts.


Eckerd Corp.(ECK,N) reports earnings for Qtr to July 30


Review/Fashion; With Galanos, The Glamour Is in the Details
Glamour is returning to fashion, James Galanos says confidently.
So the designer from Los Angeles filled his fall collection with sequins, feathers, metallic brocades and laces.
He balanced these glittering dresses with quiet tie-dyed velvet sheaths and long, clingy styles in black crepe or crushed velvet.
But this is only part of the message of the new 125-piece collection he is showing to store buyers in New York this week.
He is also emphasizing fitted clothes for day as well as evening.


Engle Homes Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Dominicans Resent Criticism of Election
To the Editor:
Re "Time for Mr. Balaguer to Let Go" (editorial, Aug. 22):


Blue Monday Closes Out Mixed Season at Saratoga
The 126th season at Saratoga ended in negative tones today with no replacement for the departed general manager of New York racing, Jerry Lawrence, no political peace with Albany and declines of 11.8 percent in attendance and 14.1 percent in betting handle.
The season also ended with Jerry Bailey beating out Mike Smith for leading jockey, Shug McGaughey beating out Gasper Moschera for leading trainer and one more upset in a long line of them.


How U.S. and Russia Can Reduce Nuclear Peril
To the Editor:
Although the United States is critical of Russia's plans to burn its plutonium from dismantled nuclear weapons in power reactors, the Department of Energy is itself considering this option for its excess plutonium.


Muslim's Ordeal Shows How Ethnic Lines Harden
For more than two years, a Muslim woman named Vahida Kartal tried to live in Serbian-occupied Bosnia.
Recently, her attempt ended.
She trudged across Sarajevo's Bridge of Brotherhood and Unity from a Serbian section of town into one held by the Muslim-led Government.
For this 22-year-old woman from the village of Osave in eastern Bosnia, it was the end of a long road that led from hope through steadily increasing terror to eviction, imprisonment and ultimate dispatch across the lines of Europe's new divided city.


12 Deaths Linked To Tainted Heroin On Lower East Side
After finding 12 people dead of drug overdoses in Manhattan in the last 5 days, the police said last night that the deaths may have been caused by contaminated heroin sold on the Lower East Side.
While the matter is still under investigation, the police said, they decided to warn users to stay away from a variety of heroin sold near Clinton and Rivington Streets under the name China Cat because it may be lethal.


Cuban Refugees Resume Exodus Despite Warnings
After a lull over the weekend, scores of Cubans launched fragile boats and rafts from beaches along the coast today, heading for international waters in spite of American warnings that they would not be permitted to enter the United States.
One after another, and then by the dozens, rafts began appearing in the water in front of Havana's oceanfront, known as the Malecon, and a few miles east at Cojimar, which has become the main launching point for those who want to escape from Cuba.
Many of the Cubans had been camping on the beaches for days, waiting for the weather to improve.
Trucks also began arriving, depositing people who had come from Alamar in the east and Pinar del Rio in the west, 120 miles away.
The trucks carried boats that the refugees had been building at their homes.
Because of the current in the Florida Straits, the coast around Havana is the best launching area for the mostly unpowered boats.
Hundreds of well-wishers lined the beaches near Havana as the exodus resumed.
A Weather Predicter
No one has been able to predict the flow of refugees, but the weather has been one prognosticator, even better than pleas by Fidel Castro or President Clinton.
Indeed, there has been less science and method involved in how many people have left than there has been strong emotion, including anger at Cuba's economic deterioration and impatience to get on with what everyone knows is a perilous journey.
[ Despite the ample evidence that the number of Cubans leaving was rising sharply, relatively few were picked up by the Coast Guard.
As of 10 P.M.
Monday, 253 Cubans had been intercepted, up from 84 on Sunday.
Last week, in the first rush, the Coast Guard picked up 13,600. ]
"Tell my mother that I have gone and that I am very happy," Marbel Betancourt Gonzalez said just before she jumped into the turquoise waters of Cojimar to scramble onto a rubber and wooden raft with 10 others.
Miss Betancourt, who had slept on the beach for nine days waiting for her journey, turned to face the crowd of hundreds of people piled on a crumbling sea wall, and with tears in her eyes she waved and blew kisses.
It is impossible to predict how many Cubans will leave in this wave, but today's activity indicates that the United States policy to deny them automatic asylum will not keep many people at home.
In fact, some of the Cubans say there is an urgency about leaving now.
Two brothers, Felipe and Jesus, came from Pinar del Rio, about 125 miles west of Cojimar, to leave from Cuba in a boat that they had assembled by soldering together pieces of aluminum, then painting it over with tar and padding the inside with plastic foam.
"We're afraid Mr. Castro is going to say, 'No more,' so we have to leave now," Jesus said.
"We came here because this is the closest point to the United States, and it is a good place to launch a boat."
The brothers also said that on their stretch of the coast the Government's coast guards still seemed to be patrolling the waters.
At Cojimar, there were only a few soldiers in camouflage uniforms, and they did not seem to bother the people leaving.
First Boat Leaves
The first boat to leave this morning from Cojimar was a tidy contraption of rubber and wood.
It, too, had come on a truck, and it had a wooden rudder and a bow made of aluminum, with lines of thin rope on its perimeter for its passengers to hold onto and a jaunty red yachting flag atop its rough-hewn mast.
One by one people boarded the boat, as hundreds of well-wishers gathered on the littered beach to see them off.
A festive atmosphere pervailed.
Vendors were selling tamales and guanabo turnovers.
The only ones not laughing were the six women and nine men who pushed off, rowing at the direction of an older man who was clearly their captain.
Some people were dispensing advice.
One man told a would-be refugee how to judge how far his raft was from tankers that navigate the straits.
He told him to hold his hand out in front of him in a fist, with his thumb sticking skyward, and to close one eye.
"If your thumb covers the whole tanker, then he's 10 miles away," the older man told the younger one.
Some carried good-luck charms on board.
One boat had the Virgin of Charity on its bow.
One refugee tried to take his dog on the raft, but the animal ran down a dock away from him.
Ramon Perez Lara, who is 61, was at the beach helping his son Sergio, who would be making about his 30th attempt to leave.
The two men personify the debate about whether it is better to abandon Cuba or to stay and make it better.
Mr.
Perez fought in the revolution.
His family grew tobacco and corn on their small parcel of land, but the inequities of life before Castro's rule left the countryside poor of many things Cubans now have, he said.
"I learned to read and write after the revolution," he said proudly.
But his son, Sergio Lara Caras, has felt let down by the revolution.
He made his first attempt to try to leave Cuba on a home-made boat five years ago, when he was 29, and he has been trying ever since.
Twice he was picked up by Soviet tankers and turned over to the Cuban authorities.
He has been in prison three times for his so-called treasonous crimes, and has served as long as eight months.
He has gotten as far as 35 miles out to sea, far short of the 90 miles to Florida.
"Castro has turned my struggle into something political by saying I am betraying the country," Mr.
Lara said.
"But it is only economic. This country does not have opportunities for me anymore. Because I have been arrested for trying to leave, I cannot get the kind of work that will help me have a life."
With tears streaming down her face, Berta Serrano Belot waved from the beach to a raft carrying her oldest daughter, 30, and her youngest son, 18.
"For a mother this is the biggest pain in my entire life, to see my children leaving," said Mrs.
Serrano, holding a granddaughter's hand.
Another daughter's husband was also on the boat, along with others from their town of San Miguel del Padron, about a three-hour bus ride from here.
They had come to Cojimar as a family 12 days ago, and had camped on the beach.
They spent their days scavenging for bits of lumber and other material to build their boat.
They bought what they needed with the money they got from selling many of their possessions back home.
They had only a few pesos each day to buy bread.
But finally today, those who wanted to go were on their way.
"I never thought my children would abandon me, but the ruin this country has fallen into has created such misery and hunger that it has forced them to go," Mrs.
Serrano said, her voice trembling.


Honors
*
Linda Taber, president at Linda Taber &amp; Co., New York, was named 1994-95 president of the Women Executives in Public Relations.
Marilyn Castaldi, a senior vice president at Fleishman-Hillard, New York, was named president-elect. *
Richard Lipman, president at Lipman, Richmond Greene Advertising, New York, has been elected president of the League of Advertising Agencies.
Also, the league named Joseph M. Dietz, president at J.M.
Kesslinger &amp; Associates, Union, N.J., as its Adperson of the Year.


Accounts
*
Sputnik Entertainment, New York, was named to handle two accounts with combined billings of $1.2 million: the Encore Shoe Corporation, Rochester, N.H., for its Zodiac brand footwear, and I.G.
Design, New York, for its Boss jeans and sportswear. *
Insta-Foam Products Inc., Joliet, Ill., to Tucker Chicago, Schaumburg, Ill., to handle the account of the manufacturer of polyurethane foam, previously in-house.
Billings were not disclosed.


WTD Industries Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Sentencing in Shooting of Kim Williams
A man accused of firing the shot that wounded the golfer KIM WILLIAMS pleaded no contest to disorderly conduct yesterday in Niles, Ohio.
GARY SWANEY, 35, of Howland, Ohio, entered the plea before Niles Municipal Judge THOMAS TOWNLEY and was sentenced to 30 days in jail and fined $250 plus court costs.


Chemists Make Rings Of Interlocked Atoms, A Clue to Life's Origin
CAPPING a decade of intense research, a team of British chemists has created a molecule consisting of five interlocked rings of atoms, a tiny replica of the symbol of the Olympic games.
The molecule is probably useless in itself, but the techniques devised to create it may shed light on the process by which life arose from relatively simple chemicals.
The synthesis of this new molecule, technically called a linear pentacatenane and familiarly named "olympiadane" (pronounced "olympiad-ane) was hailed by chemists as an important step toward understanding how components of a complex molecule can spontaneously join together. An ability to assemble themselves from simple precursors is one of the requisites of prebiotic molecules -- the nonliving building blocks from which the proteins, genetic codes and cellular complexity of living organisms arise.


Redlining Under Attack
While the Justice Department's settlement with the Chevy Chase Federal Savings Bank of Maryland was the first of the Clinton Administration's attacks on redlining to gain wide notice, it represents only an early salvo in a multifronted assault.
Both the Department of Housing and Urban Development and an interagency committee of banking regulators are working on broad new Federal requirements for more lending to minorities, and the costs will likely be spread among all borrowers, banking specialists say.
A stricter regime on mortgage discrimination has long been a goal of many Congressional Democrats, and Clinton Administration officials have called for progress, not paperwork, on the issue.
But the pragmatic case for an aggressive approach hinges on the assumption that mortgage discrimination is widespread.
And on this point, some economists are raising serious questions.


Israel and P.L.O.: A Question of Manners
With Prime Minister Benazir Bhutto of Pakistan in the middle, Israel and the Palestinian Authority wrestled one another today over who has the final say on which outsiders may enter the autonomous Gaza Strip and Jericho.
Far from being a diplomatic trifle, the dispute went to the heart of delicate sovereignty questions that are almost certain to keep hovering over the Palestinian self-rule, which began nearly four months ago in Gaza and Jericho, in the West Bank.


First-and-10: Fox Readies Football Tradition Nine Months in the Planning
For Fox Sports, nine months of planning and practice are over.
Any shock that Rupert Murdoch is paying $1.58 billion for National Football Conference television rights is past.
Fox aired its final preseason game -- and final dress rehearsal -- from here Saturday night.
Judgment day is Sunday, when Fox starts its hourlong studio show followed by six games announced by a vocal blend of old (the CBS veterans John Madden, Pat Summerall and Terry Bradshaw) and new (Joe Buck, the son of Jack; Kenny Albert, the son of Marv, and Anthony Munoz, the former Cincinnati Bengal).


Piedmont Natural Gas Co.  (PNY,N) reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt *
Associates Corp. of North America, Dallas, a financing arm of Ford Motor Co., is selling $300 million of notes due in 1999 at 100 to yield 7.25 percent through CS First Boston.
The noncallable issue is rated A-1 by Moody's Investors Service and AA- by Standard &amp; Poor's Corp. and Duff &amp; Phelps.


Don't Judge New York Subway Fare Card After Only 3 Months; Swiping Once, Twice
To the Editor:
Half the time I use my Metrocard it is rejected, and the message "please swipe again" appears.
Sometimes I have to run my card through three or four times; sometimes I just switch to another turnstile.
It is particularly frustrating to stand at a recalcitrant turnstile swiping again and again as an uptown express train pulls into the Chambers Street station!


New Ideas on Mystery Of How Anesthetics Work
ANESTHESIA is one of the most effective medical interventions yet one of the least understood.
Since the nature of consciousness is a fundamental mystery, perhaps it is not surprising that the art of rendering people unconscious also defies exact understanding.
These gaps in knowledge mean that anesthesiologists have no reliable ways to gauge when a person is unconscious.
On rare occasions patients wake up during surgery.
"I came out of the anesthetic and couldn't understand why I wasn't in the ward," said one patient who was undergoing surgery in a British hospital, quoted in a recent book on anesthesia.
"I could see the surgeons at the end of the operating table and I thought, 'Oh, my God, they're going to operate on me and I'm awake.' I tried to tell them, but I couldn't speak -- couldn't move. It was the worst experience of my life."


Toronto Domn Bank reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Landscaper Charged in Girlfriend's Killing
A 20-year-old landscaper was arraigned today and ordered held on $1 million bail on a charge of murdering his pregnant, 17-year-old girlfriend during an argument last Wednesday night.
The suspect, James E. Stuart, the son of a retired police officer, confessed on Saturday to the slaying of Tarah M. Galfo, of Rochelle Park, N.J., the authorities said.
He had spent the two previous days helping to distribute missing-person fliers bearing Miss Galfo's photograph and appeals for help in finding her.


Koor Industries Ltd. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Times Picks Business Editor
John M. Geddes, a former national news editor of The Wall Street Journal, has been named the business editor of The New York Times, Joseph Lelyveld, the executive editor, announced yesterday.
Mr.
Geddes, 42, will preside over a planned expansion of The Times's business news coverage.


Esiason Isn't Worried by Preseason Problems
So why was Boomer Esiason smiling today while some people were wondering whether he is washed up with the season about to start?
"Hey, I'm a New Yorker," he said of the attention, the headlines, the speculation.
"I'm no dummy."


Buckeyes Bully Fresno State, 34-10


Handleman Co. (HDL,N) reports earnings for Qtr to July 30


Onecomm
Shares of the Onecomm Corporation, which Nextel Communications plans to buy with Nextel stock, dropped sharply yesterday in Nasdaq trading after MCI Communications and Nextel announced that they had aborted their alliance.
Like Nextel, Onecomm offers a type of mobile radio service that is similar to cellular service.


English Put Up a Reward for U.S. Team
The English Football Association yesterday offered the United States soccer team $25,000 if it beats England in their exhibition game at Wembley on Sept. 7.
The association made the move because it said it wanted to insure a competitive match as England begins its preparations for the 1996 European Championships.


A New, Wider Look for New Jersey's Route 3


Two More Seminoles Are Ruled Ineligible
Florida State officials yesterday ruled two more players ineligible for Saturday's season opener against Virginia.
MARCUS LONG, a 320-pound sophomore guard, was declared ineligible for the first two games of the season while offensive tackle FORREST CONOLY will be on an indefinite suspension, according to the school's president, TALBOT D'ALEMBERTE.


Don't Judge New York Subway Fare Card After Only 3 Months; What Needs Improving
To the Editor:
That the Metrocard has not caught on surprises only transit officials.


U.S. WILL PROPOSE REDUCING BARRIERS TO CUBA MIGRANTS
The Clinton Administration plans to ask the Cuban government to halt the exodus of boat people in return for an offer by the United States to relax its immigration rules and grant residency visas to more than 20,000 Cubans a year.
During the last year, the United States granted residence visas to only 2,700 Cubans.
The low number has caused Mr.
Castro to complain that it was far below the legal ceiling of 27,845 Cubans that the Administration is authorized to admit.


Drug Unit Being Sold By Kodak
SmithKline Beecham, the British pharmaceutical giant, said yesterday that it would buy the Sterling Winthrop over-the-counter drug business of the Eastman Kodak Company for $2.93 billion in cash.
The acquisition, SmithKline said, would make it the world's largest producer of nonprescription medicines, with annual sales of $2 billion.


Pamida Holdings Corp.(PAM,A) reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Actidev Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Buckeyes Bully Fresno State, 34-10


Bosnian Serbs, in Referendum, Reject Peace Plan
Bosnian Serb leaders said today that voters had overwhelmingly rejected an international peace plan in a referendum, setting the stage for a new phase in the Bosnian war in which President Clinton has said he will press for a lifting of the arms embargo against the Bosnian Muslims.
With about half the votes counted, Petko Cancar, a senior electoral official, said 90 percent of Bosnian Serbs had voted against a plan that was drafted over several months by the United States, Russia, Britain, France and Germany.
He did not say how many people had voted.
Referendum Is Discounted
The proposal calls on the Serbs to accept 49 percent of Bosnia and Herzegovina, meaning they would have to give up about a third of the territory they hold after 28 months of war in Bosnia, a state that has not known a day of peace since it became independent in April 1992.


Don't Judge New York Subway Fare Card After Only 3 Months
To the Editor:
Unfortunately, an Aug. 24 letter and an Aug. 17 news article on New York City's new subway fare card convey the impression that Metrocard's success should be judged by two summer months, when the initial system installation (69 of the 469 subway stations) has been in service for barely three months.
We derive more positive conclusions from the facts.


How U.S. and Russia Can Reduce Nuclear Peril
To the Editor:
Although the United States is critical of Russia's plans to burn its plutonium from dismantled nuclear weapons in power reactors, the Department of Energy is itself considering this option for its excess plutonium.


XL Foods reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Sizzler International Inc.(SZ,N) reports earnings for Qtr to July 24


Brown Group Inc.(BG,N) reports earnings for Qtr to July 30


Trio Plus One Takes On Charles Ives
Poor cranky old Charles Ives!
How could he have imagined, when he set about "making those men fiddlers get up and do something like men" in his Second String Quartet, finished in 1913, that a young, mostly female group would one day toss it off with relative ease, as the Mosaic String Quartet did on Friday evening in the Sculpture Garden of the Museum of Modern Art?
The work, Ives wrote in the 1930's, "is one of the best things I have, but the old ladies (male and female) don't like it anywhere at all."
With the composer's misogynous slights perhaps in mind, the Mosaic's three women -- Angela Ahn, violinist; Carol Rodland, violist, and Kristina Cooper, cellist -- seemed to take particular glee in ganging up on the second violinist, Michael Shih, in the middle movement, "Arguments." But in general, balances among the instruments were good, insofar as a listener could tell through the amplification.


Dole at a Familiar Crossroads for the G.O.P.
A White House aide was talking the other day about his boss, President Clinton, and the leader of the Republicans in the Senate, Bob Dole of Kansas, who is also about as close as his party comes at the moment to a national leader.
"They aren't really friends, but they aren't exactly enemies, either," the aide said.
"More like a couple of panthers, I guess you'd say, circling each other in a clearing in the jungle."


5 U.S. Agents Found Dead In Peru Crash
The United States Drug Enforcement Administration said today that searchers had found the bodies of five anti-drug agents who were aboard a plane that crashed on Saturday in the Upper Huallaga Valley, where most of the world's cocaine is produced.
The twin-engine jet, which was carrying two pilots and three enforcement agents, was on a routine reconnaissance mission when it went down.


On My Mind; For a China Boycott
On just one issue, President Clinton, American business and the Chinese Communist leadership have taught the people of the United States three nasty lessons.
The issue is human rights.
It is a pallid phrase for what it means: freedom, or at least some surcease, from torture, forced labor and deprivation of the right to speak and worship as we are moved.


B.C. Sugar reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Willis Making It Big, Rutgers Still Trying
As a freshman at Rutgers last year, Terrell Willis didn't get a chance to start until the sixth game of the season.
Yet the 6-foot, 200-pound tailback from Orange (N.J.) High School went on to have a terrific season, breaking Herschel Walker's national freshman record for all-purpose yards.
Not a bad achievement for someone who had no desire to play for the Scarlet Knights.
"I wasn't even interested in Rutgers; it was like my fifth choice," Willis said last week at a rally for the Knights, who open their 125th season of college football here on Saturday against Kent.
Back Near the Raritan
"I went to U.C.L.A., Syracuse, Iowa, Michigan, and I was going to Penn State on my last trip," Willis said.
"Rutgers just didn't seem big time. Going to Iowa, the atmosphere and the sports was incredible, and then coming here was like nothing. But after playing here and in the Big East and we're getting a new stadium, it's getting up to par."


Pro Bono Accounts
*
American Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals, New York, to D'Arcy Masius Benton &amp; Bowles, New York.


Sports of The Times; The Mystery Surrounding Monica Seles
THERE they were, five short newspaper paragraphs appropriately positioned right smack below the women's draw, on the opening day of the United States Open.
Dateline, Monte Carlo.
Headline: No Date Set for Seles Return.
Not a stroke had yet been hit, not a seed had fallen, and already we were being reminded of the gloomy prospects for this star-starved Open, baseball strike or no baseball strike.


Thomaston Mills Inc.(TMSTA,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to July 2


Amid Doubts, Schools Tackle Upgrade of Math and Science
In less than two weeks, New York City high schools will begin what may be the most ambitious undertaking by a major urban school system, raising the math and science requirements for nearly all its students.
But there are so many hurdles -- from a lack of money for books and training for teachers to concerns about the readiness of most ninth-graders for such a change -- that many parents and teachers believe the new requirements will be nearly impossible to meet.


Chess
Among the successful quarterfinalists in the International Chess Federation's championship qualification matches, the player who came through as the most tenacious was Gata Kamsky of Brooklyn.
To fall two games behind his widely favored opponent, Viswanathan Anand of India, then to fight back to a tie with victories in Games 6 and 7, and then to sweep both rapid-play tiebreak games: it was, altogether, a remarkable accomplishment.
As a result, Kamsky is the only surviving qualifier in the competing championship cycles of both the international federation, known as FIDE, and the Professional Chess Association.


Quanex Corp.(NX,N) reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Ivax to Buy Zenith Labs for $600 Million in Stock
In yet another consolidation in the pharmaceuticals industry, the Ivax Corporation said yesterday that it had agreed to buy Zenith Laboratories Inc. for about $600 million in Ivax stock.
Topping off a series of acquisitions by Ivax, the deal would create the world's largest maker of generic drugs.
A combination of the companies would have estimated sales this year of $1.2 billion, of which about half would be from generic drugs.


Jobs Versus Inflation at the Fed
Alan Blinder, recently appointed vice chairman of the Federal Reserve Board by President Clinton, called last week for the Fed to use monetary policy to bring down unemployment from temporarily high levels.
That prescription put him at odds with Chairman Alan Greenspan's testimony to Congress that the Fed cannot control employment and ought to focus only on inflation.
The difference at first blush seems stark: one man worried about jobs, the other about prices.
Mr.
Blinder's declaration may have been designed to enhance the likelihood that the White House would elevate him to the Fed chairmanship when Mr.
Greenspan's term expires in early 1996.
But the statement should have come as no surprise: he preached the same doctrine as an academic and before Congress.
Indeed, it is Mr.
Blinder's dovish stance on inflation that made him an attractive appointment to a White House that desperately seeks to create jobs.


Rare Mountain Gorillas Are Mostly Unharmed After Fears in Rwanda
Nearly all of the 60 rare mountain gorillas under daily scientific observation in Rwanda were found alive by researchers this month after fears that they might have been harmed during the civil war.
Another 60 gorillas, which have been a tourist attraction for the last 15 years, were not visited but researchers said they were fairly confident that they had survived the nearby fighting.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
7.75
7.75
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
4.00
4.00
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
4.81
4.71
3.11
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.61
4.54
3.02
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.93
4.85
3.11
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.23
7.22
5.44
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.49
7.48
6.11
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.34
8.33
7.00
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.37
6.38
5.61
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Trenton Races To Pass Bills On Sex Abuse
Rushing to vote without first holding customary hearings or even working out some details, the New Jersey Assembly today passed a package of bills aimed at cracking down on sexual offenders.
The seven bills approved by the Assembly, exactly one month after the rape and murder of a 7-year-old, Megan Kanka, now go to the Senate, whose leaders have indicated general agreement.
The Assembly bills would allow the state to register and track convicted sex offenders, and to notify residents when a convicted offender moves into their neighborhood.
The bills would also require lifetime imprisonment without parole for people convicted of a second sexual offense.


An Impatient Lawyer Charges Into State Politics; Eliot L. Spitzer and His Money Are Making and Impact on the Attorney General's Race
Eliot L. Spitzer, looking unwithered in the rain, was working the voters of the Upper East Side, handing out his fliers and hoping to chat with anyone who recognized him.
Many people did.
"Cuomo's been my man," one woman said.
Mr.
Spitzer, always earnest, explained that he was running for New York State attorney general, not governor.
"You look heavier on TV," an older man said.
Mr.
Spitzer, a 35-year-old former prosecutor with no political experience, is out shaking hands every day.
But his real campaign is on the airwaves, where his family's real-estate fortune has bought a series of punchy political advertisements, each with a tough-on-crime message.
The ads have bought this newcomer a commodity that his three Democratic rivals envy: name recognition in a race in which voters do not know who the candidates are.


Burger King's Latest Campaign
Will Burger King get its advertising dollar's worth with "Get your burger's worth"?
The Burger King Corporation is scheduled to introduce its big fall advertising campaign tomorrow.
It is the first work from Ammirati &amp; Puris/Lintas since that agency was awarded the lead national creative assignment on the account.


Varlen Corp.(VRLN,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to July 30


Mail Carriers to Go Their Own Way in Contract Negotiations
The bills will still come.
The dogs will still bark.
But for the first time in 24 years, the nation's 240,000 mail carriers will, by choice, not be negotiating their contract with the rest of the employees of the Postal Service.
"We're disappointed," said Tom Fahey, communications director for the American Postal Workers Union, which had been negotiating contracts jointly with the union representing mail carriers.
"When you split the units up, it creates an environment where management can at least attempt to whipsaw one unit against the other."


Ivanisevic in Tune With a Tradition of Failure
No sooner had the showers stopped darkening the opening-day doorstep of the United States Open than Goran Ivanisevic, the man with the blackguard humor and thundercloud temperament, put his own personal theory of negativity on display on the shade-splashed Grandstand Court.
How could a player of his unlimited ability allow his game to be reduced to just a single useful stroke, his ace?


'The Chilean Agassi' Looks to Big Leagues
He has been called the Chilean Andre Agassi, and Marcelo Rios does not shy away from the comparison.
"I like Agassi a lot, how he plays, how he is," said the slight left-hander with the two-fisted backhand, shoulder-length hair, backwards-turned cap, untucked shirt and sizable hooped ring dangling from his right ear.


Don't Judge New York Subway Fare Card After Only 3 Months
To the Editor:
Unfortunately, an Aug. 24 letter and an Aug. 17 news article on New York City's new subway fare card convey the impression that Metrocard's success should be judged by two summer months, when the initial system installation (69 of the 469 subway stations) has been in service for barely three months.
We derive more positive conclusions from the facts.


Home Health Care Is Gaining Appeal
Cheryl Corrins pulls up to the brick, split-level house of Margaret Savinis, 93 years old, a widow for 54 years and a long-retired cook.
Mrs.
Savinis waits cheerfully at the head of the dinner table in a nightgown and robe, in front of a centerpiece of daisies that a great-grandchild brought from his wedding.
"I come three times a week," Mrs.
Corrins says, "and the nurse comes the other days. I give her a shower and once a week shampoo her hair. Take her pulse and blood pressure. Change the dressing on her ear."


By Design; Mohair: Not to Be Sneezed At
If you're allergic to cats, don't even think about wearing mohair, the fuzzy yarn made from the silky hair of angora goats.
But you would be missing out on one of the biggest trends for fall and winter.
Mohair yarn is being knitted into sweaters, berets and dresses and is being woven into fabric for jackets and skirts.
Saks Fifth Avenue has a short tank dress by Parallel in pink or white ($158) and a long-sleeved featherweight tunic by Carol Horn in blue, seafoam or ivory ($152).


Farah Inc.(FRA,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 5


How U.S. and Russia Can Reduce Nuclear Peril; Steadfast on Smuggling
To the Editor:
"The Nuclear Black Market" (editorial, Aug. 22) charges that the Clinton Administration has been giving nuclear smuggling only "fitful attention." Far from it.
The Administration has identified stemming the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction as one of its key security priorities.
We have worked at the highest levels, and with our allies, to coordinate strategies for controlling the spread of nuclear material.


Ivanisevic in Tune With a Tradition of Failure
No sooner had the showers stopped darkening the opening-day doorstep of the United States Open than Goran Ivanisevic, the man with the blackguard humor and thundercloud temperament, put his own personal theory of negativity on display on the shade-splashed Grandstand Court.
How could a player of his unlimited ability allow his game to be reduced to just a single useful stroke, his ace?


Antitrust Inquiry Opens On Deal for the Garden
Following up on a threat he made after ITT and Cablevision Systems announced they would purchase Madison Square Garden from Viacom Inc., the New York State Attorney General said yesterday that he was opening an antitrust investigation of the proposed deal.
"We have not concluded we have to act on this merger for anticompetitive reasons," the Attorney General, G. Oliver Koppell, said.
"We have only concluded we need to look at it."


Now Fighting Anemia, Lemieux Shelves His Skates for the Season
As expected, Mario Lemieux announced yesterday that he will miss the entire 1994-95 hockey season.
The star center of the Pittsburgh Penguins said he hopes to use the rest period to recover from anemia that is a result of radiation treatment for Hodgkin's disease, a form of cancer that he battled two years ago.
That illness and chronic back problems limited Lemieux to part-time status over the past two seasons.
When healthy, he is among hockey's greatest players.


Eagle Hardware &amp; Garden Inc.(EAGL,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to July 29


Tempers Flare as Lawyers in the Simpson Case Raise Questions of Rac
In a heated exchange over the issue of race in the O. J. Simpson case, a defense lawyer today accused a white detective of having "repugnant" attitudes toward blacks, and the detective's lawyer accused the defense of "malicious tactics" in trying to smear the police officer.
As emotions rose and legal maneuvering intensified three weeks before the start of jury selection, Judge Lance A. Ito of Superior Court said he would strictly limit the lawyers' public statements about the case.
He also said that on Wednesday he intended to unseal an envelope containing a mysterious item of evidence submitted by the defense last month.


Court Found Tracking In Schools Did Harm
To the Editor:
Unlike Montclair, N.J., schools, those in Amherst, Mass., have been sued with some success for tracking, or grouping students by ability.
In both systems, how racism is confronted will control whether or not there will be equal-access educational opportunity for minority students.


Boyd Gaming Corp.(BYD,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Smith Expecting No Changes With Sale of the Rangers
While corporate negotiators in New York were selling the Rangers and the rest of the Madison Square Garden sports operation in a billion-dollar transaction over the weekend, the president of the hockey team was peacefully jogging near his Florida vacation home.
Those who enjoy finding omens in unrelated events will be intrigued by what happened next to Neil Smith, the executive: He lost his balance, fell down and ended up in an emergency room with a severely sprained right ankle.


Brown-Forman Corp.(BFB,N) reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


No News Is Bad News as Strike Talks Continue to Stall
The head of the Federal mediation service talked with both sides in the players' strike yesterday but found no reason to schedule a bargaining session.
That was not a good sign in the quest to end the dispute and get the baseball season going again.
Negotiators for the owners and the players haven't met since last Thursday, and the best John Calhoun Wells could do was set up separate meetings with the two sides for tomorrow.


Seaman Furniture Co. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Court Found Tracking In Schools Did Harm
To the Editor:
Unlike Montclair, N.J., schools, those in Amherst, Mass., have been sued with some success for tracking, or grouping students by ability.
In both systems, how racism is confronted will control whether or not there will be equal-access educational opportunity for minority students.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
Lockheed and Martin Marietta said they had agreed to a merger in an exchange of common stock valued in excess of $10 billion.
The combined company, to be known as Lockheed Martin, would be the largest military supplier, with combined 1993 sales of about $23 billion.  [ Page A1. ]


Inquiry Urges Crew Stand Trial In Downing of Copters Over Iraq
A senior Air Force panel has recommended that at least four crew members of an Awacs radar plane be court-martialed for their role in the accidental downing of two American helicopters over northern Iraq in April, Air Force officials said tonight.
All 26 people on board the helicopters, including 15 Americans, were killed.
The panel's recommendations now go to Lieut.
Gen.
Steve Croker, the senior investigating officer.
If General Croker, commander of the 8th Air Force at Barksdale Air Force Base, La., accepts the recommendations, which is likely, he will order the equivalent of a grand jury inquiry.
Air Force officials said the crew members would probably be tried for dereliction of duty.


Dominicans Resent Criticism of Election
To the Editor:
Re "Time for Mr. Balaguer to Let Go" (editorial, Aug. 22):


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-13  DISCONTENT AT GUANTANAMO  The once-quiet naval base at Guantanamo Bay is crowded with thousands of Cuban and Haiti refugees, all of them uncomfortable and angry that they have not made it to the United States.
A1


Petrolite Corp.(PLIT,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


A Night (Becker) and Day (Ivanisevic) of Upsets at Open
Pushed to the brink of first-round extinction by Richey Reneberg, Boris Becker conjured up his best tennis when cornered late Monday night on the Stadium Court at the United States Open only to find it was not enough.
The seventh-seeded German was trailing by two sets, both of them crammed with self-inflicted errors, when he abruptly turned the tables on his diligent challenger and pushed them both to the brink of exhaustion with a five-set comeback manifesto in which he saved five match points only to surrender on the sixth.


Market Place; The booming personal computer industry defies economic gravity.
THE personal computer boom just won't quit.
Wall Street analysts expect a new sales surge to drive up computer companies' stocks during the second half of the year.
In June a number of Silicon Valley insiders were quietly betting that Apple Computer Inc. was about to take a fall.
The rumors were that huge cutbacks in orders for disk drives signaled that the computer maker, based in Cupertino, Calif., was sitting on a sizable inventory.


Another Injury Suffered by Michigan
Michigan, already reeling from the loss of tailback TYRONE WHEATLEY, will also start the season without wide receiver WALTER SMITH.


Don't Judge New York Subway Fare Card After Only 3 Months; How About a Receipt?
To the Editor:
As an enthusiastic supporter of public transportation, I often jump on the subway 10 times a day in the conduct of my architecture practice.
From client meetings and site inspections to those dreaded Department of Buildings visits, the subway hauls me around with great efficiency.


Chideock Journal; Behold, a Bucolic England, Bumper to Bumper
From the steep hills that frame this ancient village of stone cottages, the views along the Dorset shore are among the most spectacular in England, a vast and -- up to a point -- unpsoiled panorama of sea and sky and rolling green valleys.
But these days, near the height of Britain's summer vacation season, the close-up view of the southern coast here is anything but pastoral.
From Durdle Door to the River Exe, the highways along the shore are chockablock with tourist traffic, choked with lines of overheated cars and camper vans bound for the tumble of holiday camps that crouch just above the beaches.


Guillevin International reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Officials Vow To Deliver Hispanic Vote For Sharpton
A group of Hispanic elected officials yesterday endorsed the Rev.
Al Sharpton in his campaign to unseat Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan.
With just two weeks remaining before the Democratic primary, Mr.
Sharpton is given little chance of defeating Mr.
Moynihan.
Still, Mr.
Sharpton said that the endorsements illustrated the growing appeal his candidacy has among Hispanic New Yorkers.


Ausanio Recalled With Nowhere to Go
The rookie relief pitcher JOE AUSANIO, sent to the minors a day before the baseball strike, was recalled by the Yankees from their Class AAA Columbus farm team yesterday.
The move filled the Yankees' 25-man roster and raised the total of players on strike to 761.
GENE ORZA, the No. 2 official of the Major League Baseball Players Association, has said the union may file a grievance over any players recalled from the minors during the strike.


Oshawa Group reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 6


Dow Gains 17.80 as It Strives for 3,900 Level
For a moment yesterday morning, the Dow Jones industrial average leaped nearly 30 points, before falling back and closing at 3,898.85, up 17.80 points.
The advance yesterday marked the third time in four sessions that the blue-chip index has risen, aided somewhat by stable bond prices and a steadying dollar.


Q&amp;A
Katy Did or Didn't?
Q.
An insect with papery wings is holding call-and-response sessions in my tree in New Jersey until 4 A.M.
Is it a cicada?
Or a katydid?
How can I tell?
What does it eat?


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; A Year Later, the Dave-ing of America
A year after David Letterman joined CBS and began transforming the landscape of late-night television, the success of his brand of sardonic humor is helping to reshape how consumers are being sold everything from automobiles to lingerie.
Or, as Mr.
Letterman might mockingly put it: Boys and girls, hold onto your wallets!
Lettermania is loose!


Catherines Stores (CATH,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


The Circle Is Completed: Fernandez Advances
She had to wait a year for this night, and Mary Joe Fernandez knew there was only one way to reassure herself that she hadn't waited in vain.
A year ago, Fernandez was preparing to play her first-round match at the United States Open, a night match on the spotlit Stadium Court, when a nagging abdominal pain turned so abominable she was forced to drop out of the tournament.


Boy Fatally Crushed Riding On Elevator
A boy riding atop an elevator in a Brooklyn housing project was crushed to death yesterday when the elevator reached the building's top floor, the police said.
The boy, Raheem Young, 8, was apparently 'surfing,' or riding on top of the elevator as it rose and fell in the Marlboro Houses in Coney Island, said Detective Sonia Burgos, a spokeswoman for the housing police.


Luxury Car Fight Turns Uncivilized
Some blame the sport-utility vehicles, others the higher income taxes on the very wealthy.
Some claim "90's values" have made the rich self-conscious, while still others argue that fears of health care cost-cutting have made doctors miserly.
Whatever the reason, the luxury car market, roughly defined as cars costing more than $25,000, or about 13 percent of car sales in the United States, is in turmoil, and the calfskin gloves have come off.


Cuban Refugees Resume Exodus Despite Warnings
After a lull over the weekend, scores of Cubans launched fragile boats and rafts from beaches along the coast today, heading for international waters in spite of American warnings that they would not be permitted to enter the United States.
One after another, and then by the dozens, rafts began appearing in the water in front of Havana's oceanfront, known as the Malecon, and a few miles east at Cojimar, which has become the main launching point for those who want to escape from Cuba.
Many of the Cubans had been camping on the beaches for days, waiting for the weather to improve.
Trucks also began arriving, depositing people who had come from Alamar in the east and Pinar del Rio in the west, 120 miles away.
The trucks carried boats that the refugees had been building at their homes.
Because of the current in the Florida Straits, the coast around Havana is the best launching area for the mostly unpowered boats.
Hundreds of well-wishers lined the beaches near Havana as the exodus resumed.
A Weather Predicter
No one has been able to predict the flow of refugees, but the weather has been one prognosticator, even better than pleas by Fidel Castro or President Clinton.
Indeed, there has been less science and method involved in how many people have left than there has been strong emotion, including anger at Cuba's economic deterioration and impatience to get on with what everyone knows is a perilous journey.
[ Despite the ample evidence that the number of Cubans leaving was rising sharply, relatively few were picked up by the Coast Guard.
As of 10 P.M.
Monday, 253 Cubans had been intercepted, up from 84 on Sunday.
Last week, in the first rush, the Coast Guard picked up 13,600. ]
"Tell my mother that I have gone and that I am very happy," Marbel Betancourt Gonzalez said just before she jumped into the turquoise waters of Cojimar to scramble onto a rubber and wooden raft with 10 others.
Miss Betancourt, who had slept on the beach for nine days waiting for her journey, turned to face the crowd of hundreds of people piled on a crumbling sea wall, and with tears in her eyes she waved and blew kisses.
It is impossible to predict how many Cubans will leave in this wave, but today's activity indicates that the United States policy to deny them automatic asylum will not keep many people at home.
In fact, some of the Cubans say there is an urgency about leaving now.
Two brothers, Felipe and Jesus, came from Pinar del Rio, about 125 miles west of Cojimar, to leave from Cuba in a boat that they had assembled by soldering together pieces of aluminum, then painting it over with tar and padding the inside with plastic foam.
"We're afraid Mr. Castro is going to say, 'No more,' so we have to leave now," Jesus said.
"We came here because this is the closest point to the United States, and it is a good place to launch a boat."
The brothers also said that on their stretch of the coast the Government's coast guards still seemed to be patrolling the waters.
At Cojimar, there were only a few soldiers in camouflage uniforms, and they did not seem to bother the people leaving.
First Boat Leaves
The first boat to leave this morning from Cojimar was a tidy contraption of rubber and wood.
It, too, had come on a truck, and it had a wooden rudder and a bow made of aluminum, with lines of thin rope on its perimeter for its passengers to hold onto and a jaunty red yachting flag atop its rough-hewn mast.
One by one people boarded the boat, as hundreds of well-wishers gathered on the littered beach to see them off.
A festive atmosphere pervailed.
Vendors were selling tamales and guanabo turnovers.
The only ones not laughing were the six women and nine men who pushed off, rowing at the direction of an older man who was clearly their captain.
Some people were dispensing advice.
One man told a would-be refugee how to judge how far his raft was from tankers that navigate the straits.
He told him to hold his hand out in front of him in a fist, with his thumb sticking skyward, and to close one eye.
"If your thumb covers the whole tanker, then he's 10 miles away," the older man told the younger one.
Some carried good-luck charms on board.
One boat had the Virgin of Charity on its bow.
One refugee tried to take his dog on the raft, but the animal ran down a dock away from him.
Ramon Perez Lara, who is 61, was at the beach helping his son Sergio, who would be making about his 30th attempt to leave.
The two men personify the debate about whether it is better to abandon Cuba or to stay and make it better.
Mr.
Perez fought in the revolution.
His family grew tobacco and corn on their small parcel of land, but the inequities of life before Castro's rule left the countryside poor of many things Cubans now have, he said.
"I learned to read and write after the revolution," he said proudly.
But his son, Sergio Lara Caras, has felt let down by the revolution.
He made his first attempt to try to leave Cuba on a home-made boat five years ago, when he was 29, and he has been trying ever since.
Twice he was picked up by Soviet tankers and turned over to the Cuban authorities.
He has been in prison three times for his so-called treasonous crimes, and has served as long as eight months.
He has gotten as far as 35 miles out to sea, far short of the 90 miles to Florida.
"Castro has turned my struggle into something political by saying I am betraying the country," Mr.
Lara said.
"But it is only economic. This country does not have opportunities for me anymore. Because I have been arrested for trying to leave, I cannot get the kind of work that will help me have a life."
With tears streaming down her face, Berta Serrano Belot waved from the beach to a raft carrying her oldest daughter, 30, and her youngest son, 18.
"For a mother this is the biggest pain in my entire life, to see my children leaving," said Mrs.
Serrano, holding a granddaughter's hand.
Another daughter's husband was also on the boat, along with others from their town of San Miguel del Padron, about a three-hour bus ride from here.
They had come to Cojimar as a family 12 days ago, and had camped on the beach.
They spent their days scavenging for bits of lumber and other material to build their boat.
They bought what they needed with the money they got from selling many of their possessions back home.
They had only a few pesos each day to buy bread.
But finally today, those who wanted to go were on their way.
"I never thought my children would abandon me, but the ruin this country has fallen into has created such misery and hunger that it has forced them to go," Mrs.
Serrano said, her voice trembling.


Albertson's Inc.(ABS,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 4


Spending a Bad Day at the Black Box
ATTENTION: A serious disk error has occurred while writing to drive C. Retry (r)?
Of course, retry! Retry, retry again!


With Four Gay Men Slain, Texas Revisits Issue of Hate Crime
In Irving, near Dallas, three gay men have been brutally slain this last year in separate incidents, all involving repeated stabbings well beyond those that caused death.
A suspect was taken into custody last weekend and has been charged in one killing.
In Houston, the police recently arrested four football stars from a local high school and charged them with the July murder of a gay man outside a nightclub here.
The police said the teen-agers were looking for money to buy clothes and had decided that a gay man would be their easiest mark.


Scientist Out of Hospital After Virus Accident
THE Yale scientist who accidentally became infected with the Sabia virus with which he was working this month was discharged from Yale-New Haven Hospital yesterday.
No secondary cases have developed among 5 people with whom the scientist had close contact and 75 hospital and laboratory workers who examined him or handled his specimens, health officials said.


How U.S. and Russia Can Reduce Nuclear Peril; Steadfast on Smuggling
To the Editor:
"The Nuclear Black Market" (editorial, Aug. 22) charges that the Clinton Administration has been giving nuclear smuggling only "fitful attention." Far from it.
The Administration has identified stemming the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction as one of its key security priorities.
We have worked at the highest levels, and with our allies, to coordinate strategies for controlling the spread of nuclear material.


Cole National Corp.(CNJ,N) reports earnings for Qtr to July 30


On My Mind; For a China Boycott
On just one issue, President Clinton, American business and the Chinese Communist leadership have taught the people of the United States three nasty lessons.
The issue is human rights.
It is a pallid phrase for what it means: freedom, or at least some surcease, from torture, forced labor and deprivation of the right to speak and worship as we are moved.


Wachtler Returns to New York to a Halfway House


Wachtler Returns to New York to a Halfway House


Costly Airport to Be Opened Near Osaka
The world's most expensive airport, Kansai International Airport, was previewed today on a man-made island three miles offshore from the industrial center of Osaka.
The new $15 billion airport in Osaka Bay sits on a nearly perfect 1,300-acre rectangle of land with a single runway and an elegantly arched terminal that stretches a mile long.


INSIDE
Increasingly, Elderly Hire Health Aides for Home Care
Providers of home health care are in one of the country's fastest-growing occupations.
And as the nation ages, experts say, the demand for their services will only rise.
Page A14.
Bosnian Muslims Expelled
Bosnian Serbs have stepped up an ethnic cleansing campaign, forcing more than 2,000 Muslims to leave homes in Serb-held areas.
Page A8.
Prosecution in Copters' Loss
A panel has recommended court-martialing four radar-plane crew members in the loss of two American helicopters in Iraq in April.
Page A2.
A Gene Reverses Sex
Scientists have found a disruptive gene that can somehow reverse the sex of a fetus from male to female.
Science Times, page C1.


For Ex-Judge Wachtler, Real Estate by Day, Card Games and Meatloaf at Night
During the day, Sol Wachtler will broker real-estate deals from a glass high-rise in an affluent section of Long Island.
At night, he will head home to Myrtle Avenue in Bedford-Stuyvesant for a dinner of meatloaf, and maybe an evening of television or cards with the other inmates.
Mr.
Wachtler, the former Chief Judge of New York State, yesterday became a resident of the Brooklyn Community Correction Center, a halfway house at which he is to spend the next 30 to 60 days before being released on probation.


Lighthouse Signals a Storm at the Beach
IN the old days, Lighthouse Beach was for the birds.
No one can say, exactly, when the nude sunbathers discovered it.
But it made sense that they chose this quiet stretch of seashore to be left alone.
Who thought they would have company?
But they do, lots of it.
The restored Fire Island Lighthouse is bringing loads of visitors to the beach, including children.


InterTan Inc.(ITN,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Corrections
The crossword puzzle yesterday was printed in error.
It had been scheduled to be printed on Sept. 3.
The error temporarily rendered inoperative the "900" telephone number for answers.
The answer printed in puzzle form yesterday was for a puzzle that has not yet been printed.
The answer to the puzzle that was printed last Saturday, and the answer to the puzzle that was printed yesterday, appear today on Page C19.


Corrections
A front-page article yesterday about changes in retirement plans misspelled the surname of a top executive at the money management firm Sanford C. Bernstein &amp; Company.
He is Roger Hertog.
The article also misstated his position.
He is the president, not the chief executive.


Hudson's Bay Co. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Corrections
A report in the Off the Menu column in The Living Section on Wednesday about the Rainbow Room's plans for live radio broadcasts of dance music on Fridays from 10 to 10:30 P.M., starting Sept. 23, misstated the name of the station that will carry the broadcasts.
It is WQEW-AM.


No Headline
Bishop Vincent M. Leonard, who served from 1969 to 1983 as the ninth Bishop of the Roman Catholic Diocese of Pittsburgh, died on Sunday at the Little Sisters of the Poor Home in Pittsburgh.
He was 85 and a lifelong resident of the city.
The cause was complications of pneumonia, a spokesman for the diocese said.


Biologists Hot on Track Of Gene for Femaleness
WHATEVER their political leanings, and no matter how earnest their earlier insistence that they will be delighted either way, the first thing new parents want to know when the baby debuts is, boy or girl?
And most of the time, the doctor can confidently and joyfully boom out the verdict.
Every so often, however, the answer is not immediately obvious.
The infant may look as though it has a penis but there is little or no scrotum to be found, leading those in the delivery room to wonder whether they are seeing a boy with undescended testes or a girl with a greatly enlarged clitoris.
Or it may later turn out that a newborn with the external genitals of a boy has a female's ovaries inside.
As many as 1 in 1,000 babies are born with some sort of gender ambiguity, throwing the parents into an emotional maelstrom and forcing them to confront decisions like whether their child should be surgically modified and how, exactly, they should regard their androgynous offspring.


Dr. Joseph Di Leo Is Dead at 91; Expert on Drawings by Children
Dr.
Joseph H. Di Leo, a pediatrician who received international recognition for his studies on the interpretation of children's drawings, died on Aug. 16 at his home on the Upper East Side of Manhattan.
He was 91.
The cause was Parkinson's disease, his family said.


Rose's Stores reports earnings for Qtr to July 30


Mutual Fund Buyers Move Into Stocks
Mutual fund investors are leaping back into the stock market as the summer rally advances, mutual fund companies said yesterday.
"We have some very aggressive investors who are stampeding back into the market," said Neal Litvack, an executive vice president of Fidelity Investments, the nation's largest mutual fund company.
He said a net $750 million had flowed into the group's equity funds so far in August, up about $100 million from the previous month.


Reeves Blitzes and Nails Bailey to Giants' Bench
There is one thing you can say about Coach Dan Reeves: He's fearless.
He's not afraid to be wrong or to be criticized.
He plays no favorites.
He doesn't care whether you like him or not.
Get the job done, and you're in.
Don't get it done, and don't let the door hit you on the way out.
It's hard to argue with his decisions because he has been to three Super Bowls.
But the decisions are often emotional bombshells.
Just ask linebacker Carlton Bailey, who was benched today and asked to take a 50 percent cut in pay as part of a huge shake-up at the Giant camp.


In a Brooklyn School District, Greater Expectations in Math
Joyce R. Coppin has heard the naysaying before.
Not only this summer, in the months before a plan to raise New York City's high school math and science standards takes flight.
But four years ago, when she had the same vision in Brooklyn, on a smaller scale.
She was a new high school superintendent in February 1987, making the rounds of borough classrooms, when she noticed a disturbing trend.


TCG International reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


CHRONICLE
ISMAIL MERCHANT, the film producer, and JAMES IVORY, the film director, were hosts of a benefit concert and dinner on Saturday night for the Merchant &amp; Ivory Foundation, a four-year-old nonprofit organization that operates a film center in Claverack, N.Y.
It also gives grants to film makers, musicians, writers and artists.
Some 200 people heard a quartet play Corelli and Bach re-scored for flute, cello, tabla and sarangi (the last two are Indian instruments) and ate a French-Indian meal based on Mr.
Merchant's recipes.
The event raised $20,000 for the foundation, which has its headquarters in the Red Mills, a group of buildings from 1765 that were once part of a flour mill.
Now, they hold editing rooms, galleries, studios and storage space for films and video cameras.


Campaign by Turner Addresses Violence
Turner Broadcasting System Inc. is introducing a series of public service announcements addressing the issue of violence.
Turner's TNT cable network began the campaign last week with spots carrying the theme "Everyday people against violence." They were created by an in-house team with help from BFCS in Los Angeles and Dennis Hayes Associates in New York.
A second Turner channel, the Cartoon Network, will run spots carrying the theme "Take a beat," asserting that younger viewers can choose whether a conflict escalates into violence.
Those spots, created in-house, are scheduled to begin on Sept. 16.


Newt Gingrich: Leader of the PAC
Newt Gingrich has a secret.
The House Republican whip, outspoken when it comes to pointing out ethical lapses by Congressional Democrats, refuses to reveal the contributors to Gopac, the big political action committee that he heads.
Among the dozens of current and former lawmakers who maintain such "leadership PAC's," only the partisan fighter from Georgia does not disclose where he gets the money.
There is plenty to disclose, too, judging by recent reports in The Wall Street Journal and the Capitol Hill newspaper Roll Call.
Fund-raising documents obtained by these publications show that numerous wealthy donors with a stake in Federal legislation -- and more than an ideological interest in helping out the House minority leader-in-waiting -- contribute to Gopac in chunks of $10,000 a year or more.
Sixteen contributors have given at least $100,000 since 1985.


Coke and Nestle Revise Iced Tea, Coffee Accord
The long-simmering iced-tea wars heated up again yesterday when the Coca-Cola Company and Nestle S.A. announced an agreement to restructure their struggling three-year-old joint venture in ready-to-drink iced tea and iced coffee.
The world's largest beverage company and the world's largest food company, which have jointly distributed Nestea and Nescafe, have taken a pummeling in the most recent market surveys, placing a distant third to the Snapple Beverage Corporation as well as to a joint venture of Pepsico and Thomas J. Lipton.


New Game for Pequots: Party Politics
The Mashantucket Pequot Indian tribe, having earned millions from the gambling business at its Foxwoods casino in Connecticut, is investing its profits in a new game: politics.
As the November elections approach, Pequot money is flowing across the country in abundant and increasing amounts, to Albany and Hartford as well as Des Moines and Sacramento.
And virtually all of it is going to Democrats.
In just the last few months, the tribe -- whose roughly 300 members are expected to earn about $600 million from the casino this year -- has given $100,000 each to the Democratic Party organizations in New York and California and $50,000 to the state party committee in Iowa, all at the direction of national party leaders.
It has pledged $250,000 for other state campaigns still to be named.
And with total donations of $315,000 over the last two years, it has become one of the single largest contributors to the Democratic Party's National Committee, joining the ranks of huge corporations like Time Warner and big unions like the National Education Association.
What all this means, for the Pequots and the Democrats, is an open question.
Lobbyists and lawyers for the tribe say that Democrats have been good to the Pequots, and American Indians generally, and that across a broad spectrum of issues, from health care to education, the tribal council believes that the Clinton Administration is on the right track.
Local Democrats helped the tribe gain Federal recognition in the 1980's -- an old debt that can now be repaid -- and Mr.
Clinton held an American Indian summit at the White House in April that was viewed by the Pequots as symbolically significant.
And while some critics grouse that the tribe is only furthering its economic interests as the owner of a huge gambling enterprise, there is little evidence of a Pequot agenda.
The Republican National Committee has offered no comment on the donations or the tribe.
Democratic officials in the states getting money say they have had no contact with the tribe, and in the states closest to the casino -- Rhode Island and Massachusetts -- where the tribe would presumably have the keenest interest in influencing debate about gambling, the Pequots and Democrats say there have been no contributions at all.
But people in both parties say that the tribe has found a quick way to become a player in the game of politics.
While the size of contributions to individual candidates is limited, the tribe can give as much as it wants to the state and national parties, gaining the maximum good will from party leaders.
"I would imagine that all they're trying to do is expand their influence," said State Senator James T. Fleming, a Connecticut Republican and an opponent of casino gambling.
"As long as it's legal, I don't see anything wrong with it."
In Connecticut, the tribe formed a political action committee in July that could under state law give unlimited amounts to candidates.
Tribal lawyers said they were also considering forming a national PAC.
Earlier this month, Carrie Saxon Perry, a former Mayor of Hartford and a Democratic candidate for the State Senate, held a fund-raiser at the casino, on the tribe's reservation in Ledyard.
Lieut.
Gov.
Eunice S. Groark, a third-party candidate for governor, plans to do a star turn there next month, at a $250-to-$500-a-ticket fund-raiser in a hotel ballroom.
Expanded Lobbying Efforts
The tribe has expanded its lobbying efforts, too.
It opened a Washington office this year, and a in Hartford this spring its largess surpassed even that of Stephen A. Wynn, the Las Vegas casino developer who has spent millions in Connecticut over the last few years to try to end the Pequots' monopoly on casino gambling in the state.
The Pequots paid a Hartford public relations company $210,000 through mid-June, compared with the $152,000 spent by Mr.
Wynn on lobbying, according to the State Ethics Commission.
Experts in American Indian affairs said that many tribes have long had political action committees, and that political contributions have gone up in the last few years.
But the Pequots, if only by their grand scale of doing things, still get the attention.
And like all of their previous efforts to test themselves and their newfound economic sovereignty -- from the expansion of land claims to the development of a Pequot legal code -- the new flexing of political muscle is also sparking anxieties about where the tribe is going and what it will do when it gets there.
A lobbyist for the tribe, Charles J. Duffy, said that those "sensitivities" had led the tribal council to take what state elections officials say is an extraordinary step: the Pequots will limit contributions to local candidates from its new state PAC, even though it does not have to.
Mr.
Duffy said the tribe would consider donations to Democratic and Republican candidates, but will hold donations to the same maximum allowed for business PACs, which can donate only up to $5,000 to a gubernatorial campaign and $500 to an individual state legislative race, with a $100,000 cap on all contributions.
"We don't want people who are averse to the tribe to be making egregious claims about what the tribe is doing and what it intends to do," Mr.
Duffy said.
That has not stopped people from questioning, however, why a small tribe would ship its money so far from home.
"It is my belief that any sound-thinking person would ask why, in this case, an Indian nation would send a significant donation to a political party or elected official in another state," said State Senator Nicholas A. Spano, a Westchester County Republican who asked this month for a Federal investigation into the Pequots' $100,000 contribution to the New York Democratic Party.
Mr.
Spano, an advocate of casino gambling in New York, said in a letter to the United States Attorney General, Janet Reno, that the State Legislature's defeat in July of an amendment legalizing casinos came within days of the tribe's donation, and that the appearances and timing were questionable, though he had no direct evidence of any wrongdoing.
Chris McNeil, a tribal lawyer who heads the Washington lobbying effort, said the Pequots had had absolutely no contact with New York Democrats, and that the state committees that have received money were all suggested by the Democratic National Committee as places where Democrats could use extra help this year.
"There's no connection," Mr.
McNeil said, referring to the gambling issue in New York and the tribe's contribution.
Still, party officials in Iowa and California said that even though the Pequots' national political agenda is vague, their ability to write big checks has not gone unnoticed.
Keeping Track of Friends
Mike Monasmith, a spokesman for the California Democratic Party, said the money had come with no strings attached, but that, if only to protect itself, the party always knows who its friends are.
"We are sure to make sure we know where they money is coming from," Mr. Monasmith said.
In Iowa, Democrats said the Pequots had asked for nothing in exchange for their $50,000 donation.
"We have some good Congressional races and a good chance of knocking out a Republican governor, but how that ties in to the tribe's agenda, I'm not certain," said Ron Parker, a spokesman for the Iowa Democratic Party.
"We have no contact with the Indians."
Here in Connecticut, where the tribe clearly does have an established agenda -- to keep non-Indian gambling operations out of the state -- politicians said they hoped the new Pequot PAC would be low-key about any kind of loyalty pledge.
"It should not be a single-issue PAC and I don't think it will be," said Edward L. Marcus, the Connecticut Democratic Party chairman.
"I'm not sure that would make too many candidates all that comfortable."


Genovese Drug Stores Inc.(GDXA,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 12


Bosnian Serbs Force More Than 2,000 Muslims to Leave Their Homes
Using beatings and after-midnight round-ups, Bosnian Serbs have in the last week stepped up a six-week-old ethnic-cleansing campaign that has driven more than 2,000 Muslims from their homes.
Bijeljina, Rogatica and Banja Luka are among the towns that have been affected.
On Sunday night alone, Serbian gunmen under the command of a warlord in Bijeljina, Vojkan Djurkovic, forced about 430 Muslims -- mostly women, children and elderly, sick and handicapped people -- to cross in small groups over a battlefront near the village of Povrsnice, United Nations and International Red Cross officials here said.


A Project to Rebuild the Center of Beirut


Capriati Moves With Family
Jennifer Capriati, on the rebound from personal and professional problems, has relocated with her family from the Saddlebrook resort in suburban Tampa, Fla., to Rancho Mirage, Calif.
The 18-year-old Capriati hasn't played a match since her troubled first-round exit last year in the United States Open, a loss that precipitated her estrangement from tennis and a series of misadventures that culminated in her arrest May 16 in Florida on a marijuana possession charge.


Beyond the Body Count: Qualifying the Quantity Of On-Screen Violence
Watching "Kind Hearts and Coronets" and "The Ladykillers" recently, courtesy of Channel 13 and Bravo, I found myself musing over the use that the scholars dedicated to adding up incidents of violence on television could make of such comedic delights.
These beauties from Britain were never charged with fomenting assaults and batteries 40 years ago, but if accountings of mayhem had been in fashion, they would have made the accountants' day.
Violence is the essence of these movies, "Kind Hearts" being an inventory of murders committed in quest of a dukedom and "The Ladykillers" a crime spoof that ends with five of the six leading players being terminated in about as many minutes.
True, the rendering is understated by today's standards -- you don't get to see any gouts of blood -- but the quantifiers would still feel obliged to include the humorous send-offs in their dire compilations.


'The Chilean Agassi' Looks to Big Leagues
He has been called the Chilean Andre Agassi, and Marcelo Rios does not shy away from the comparison.
"I like Agassi a lot, how he plays, how he is," said the slight left-hander with the two-fisted backhand, shoulder-length hair, backwards-turned cap, untucked shirt and sizable hooped ring dangling from his right ear.


One Terrible Summer When Childhood Ended
Shelter  By Jayne Anne Phillips  279 pages. Houghton Mifflin/Seymour Lawrence. $21.95.
Jayne Anne Phillips's last novel, "Machine Dreams" (1984), was one of those remarkable works of fiction that both conjured up a wonderfully intimate portrait of a single family and magically unfolded to limn the spiritual yearnings and dislocations of an entire nation as it lurched from the certainties of the World War II years toward the confusions of the 1970's.


Delta Woodside Industrires Inc.(DLW,N) reports earnings for Qtr to July 2


Capriati Moves With Family
Jennifer Capriati, on the rebound from personal and professional problems, has relocated with her family from the Saddlebrook resort in suburban Tampa, Fla., to Rancho Mirage, Calif.
The 18-year-old Capriati hasn't played a match since her troubled first-round exit last year in the United States Open, a loss that precipitated her estrangement from tennis and a series of misadventures that culminated in her arrest May 16 in Florida on a marijuana possession charge.


Bolshoi's Battles Land on Yeltsin's Desk
For what appears to be the first time in the long, famously divisive history of Russian ballet, a jury here presented an award for bravery last week: to young Yekaterina Kovmir of the Maryinsky Dance Theater in St.
Petersburg.
Miss Kovmir received the prize for defying her autocratic bosses and entering the First International Maya Dance Competition.
Nobody who knows the histrionic and increasingly intrigue-ridden world of Russian classical dance, which above all means the world of the Bolshoi Ballet and its iron-fisted artistic director, Yuri Grigorovich, doubted that Miss Kovmir earned her award.
She participated in the competition named for and founded by Maya Plisetskaya, the Bolshoi's legendary ballerina, even though jealous officials of the Bolshoi expressly ordered Russia's leading dancers not to.


Fluor Corp.(FLR,N) reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Observer; In Wonder Land
What an amazing country.
We crossed 434 miles of it by land and 20 or 30 more by sea the other day and ended in a motel room for the handicapped, who are not called handicapped anymore.
Amazingly, almost everything is being renamed.
In Connecticut we resisted a chance to visit a new gambling hell where Indians, recently renamed Native Americans, were relieving the gullible paleface -- now renamed "the Caucasian sucker born every minute" -- of what used to be called plenty big wampum, but has been renamed "millions of bucks."


Suitable for Every Occasion


Hollinger Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


CHRONICLE
Courtroom Television Network (Court TV), which has shown the proceedings in the O. J. Simpson case live, has decided not to cover Heidi Fleiss's trial on charges of pandering and selling cocaine, STEVEN BRILL, the network's chairman, said yesterday.
The trial is scheduled to begin in Los Angeles at the end of this week or the beginning of next week.
"There's a big difference between something that gets a lot of publicity and something that's significant," Mr.
Brill said.
"Heidi Fleiss has gotten publicity, but she's not even going to lodge an interesting defense, like legalizing prostitution."


3 Executives Leaving in Wake of Macy Deal
In the first senior management change since the merger of R. H. Macy &amp; Company with Federated Department Stores was announced last month, three Macy executives said yesterday that they would leave at the end of the week to form their own consulting firm.
The three are Thomas C. Shull, 43, executive vice president, who joined Macy in June 1992 to create a five-year plan, and who was the company's lead negotiator with Federated; Gene Rohrer, 33, a senior vice president of corporate planning who helped Mr.
Shull create TV Macy, the plan to take Macy into electronic retailing, and Jim Kenney, 34, a senior vice president of corporate planning who assisted in the Federated talks.


No Headline
"We are in jail. We were in jail in Cuba and now we are in another jail. We want to go to Miami." -- DANIEL JARDIN, a Cuban teacher being detained at Guantanamo.  [ A1:5. ]


Kellwood Co. (KWD,N) reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Outspoken McCord Off The Masters
Bowing to pressure from a tradition-bound Masters golf tournament and the Augusta National Golf Club, CBS agreed yesterday to remove the announcer Gary McCord from next year's broadcast team because of his irreverent commentary.
CBS said in a statement that the action was taken because the tournament and club have "felt for some time that McCord's style of commentary was not consistent with that of the Masters on television throughout its history."


New Ideas on Sequence of Subway Shots
Investigators looking into last week's shooting of a transit police officer are exploring the possibility that the New York City police officer who mistakenly fired on his plainclothes colleague was himself wounded either before he opened fire or while he was shooting.
A senior law-enforcement official with knowledge of the investigation said yesterday that detectives believed a uniformed transit officer might have shot the city police officer in the arm before he had emptied his revolver into the transit officer, rather than afterward.


A Night (Becker) and Day (Ivanisevic) of Upsets at Open
Pushed to the brink of first-round extinction by Richey Reneberg, Boris Becker conjured up his best tennis when cornered late Monday night on the Stadium Court at the United States Open only to find it was not enough.
The seventh-seeded German was trailing by two sets, both of them crammed with self-inflicted errors, when he abruptly turned the tables on his diligent challenger and pushed them both to the brink of exhaustion with a five-set comeback manifesto in which he saved five match points only to surrender on the sixth.


Don't Judge New York Subway Fare Card After Only 3 Months; Lines Get Longer
To the Editor:
Subway magnetic fare cards are being offered for sale in competition with tokens.
When I finally make it to the head of the line to pay for my transportation, I have a choice: I can ask for tokens and get immediate service (attendants have been dispensing tokens for a long time, and hand motions are smooth and practiced), or I can ask for a card.


Guantanamo: Refugee Camps Fill With Fury
Swelling with thousands of Cuban and Haitian refugees, this sprawling training base has been transformed in the last week from a tranquil pocket of Americana in the Caribbean to a place of throbbing discontent.
Almost everyone here is unhappy, especially the Cubans and Haitians who fled their countries in flimsy rafts and rickety boats and who hoped or expected they would end up in the United States.


Circus Circus Enterprises Inc.(CIR,N) reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


New Game for Pequots: Party Politics
The Mashantucket Pequot Indian tribe, having earned millions from the gambling business at its Foxwoods casino in Connecticut, is investing its profits in a new game: politics.
As the November elections approach, Pequot money is flowing across the country in abundant and increasing amounts, to Albany and Hartford as well as Des Moines and Sacramento.
And virtually all of it is going to Democrats.
In just the last few months, the tribe -- whose roughly 300 members are expected to earn about $600 million from the casino this year -- has given $100,000 each to the Democratic Party organizations in New York and California and $50,000 to the state party committee in Iowa, all at the direction of national party leaders.
It has pledged $250,000 for other state campaigns still to be named.
And with total donations of $315,000 over the last two years, it has become one of the single largest contributors to the Democratic Party's National Committee, joining the ranks of huge corporations like Time Warner and big unions like the National Education Association.
What all this means, for the Pequots and the Democrats, is an open question.
Lobbyists and lawyers for the tribe say that Democrats have been good to the Pequots, and American Indians generally, and that across a broad spectrum of issues, from health care to education, the tribal council believes that the Clinton Administration is on the right track.
Local Democrats helped the tribe gain Federal recognition in the 1980's -- an old debt that can now be repaid -- and Mr.
Clinton held an American Indian summit at the White House in April that was viewed by the Pequots as symbolically significant.
And while some critics grouse that the tribe is only furthering its economic interests as the owner of a huge gambling enterprise, there is little evidence of a Pequot agenda.
The Republican National Committee has offered no comment on the donations or the tribe.
Democratic officials in the states getting money say they have had no contact with the tribe, and in the states closest to the casino -- Rhode Island and Massachusetts -- where the tribe would presumably have the keenest interest in influencing debate about gambling, the Pequots and Democrats say there have been no contributions at all.
But people in both parties say that the tribe has found a quick way to become a player in the game of politics.
While the size of contributions to individual candidates is limited, the tribe can give as much as it wants to the state and national parties, gaining the maximum good will from party leaders.
"I would imagine that all they're trying to do is expand their influence," said State Senator James T. Fleming, a Connecticut Republican and an opponent of casino gambling.
"As long as it's legal, I don't see anything wrong with it."
In Connecticut, the tribe formed a political action committee in July that could under state law give unlimited amounts to candidates.
Tribal lawyers said they were also considering forming a national PAC.
Earlier this month, Carrie Saxon Perry, a former Mayor of Hartford and a Democratic candidate for the State Senate, held a fund-raiser at the casino, on the tribe's reservation in Ledyard.
Lieut.
Gov.
Eunice S. Groark, a third-party candidate for governor, plans to do a star turn there next month, at a $250-to-$500-a-ticket fund-raiser in a hotel ballroom.
Expanded Lobbying Efforts
The tribe has expanded its lobbying efforts, too.
It opened a Washington office this year, and a in Hartford this spring its largess surpassed even that of Stephen A. Wynn, the Las Vegas casino developer who has spent millions in Connecticut over the last few years to try to end the Pequots' monopoly on casino gambling in the state.
The Pequots paid a Hartford public relations company $210,000 through mid-June, compared with the $152,000 spent by Mr.
Wynn on lobbying, according to the State Ethics Commission.
Experts in American Indian affairs said that many tribes have long had political action committees, and that political contributions have gone up in the last few years.
But the Pequots, if only by their grand scale of doing things, still get the attention.
And like all of their previous efforts to test themselves and their newfound economic sovereignty -- from the expansion of land claims to the development of a Pequot legal code -- the new flexing of political muscle is also sparking anxieties about where the tribe is going and what it will do when it gets there.
A lobbyist for the tribe, Charles J. Duffy, said that those "sensitivities" had led the tribal council to take what state elections officials say is an extraordinary step: the Pequots will limit contributions to local candidates from its new state PAC, even though it does not have to.
Mr.
Duffy said the tribe would consider donations to Democratic and Republican candidates, but will hold donations to the same maximum allowed for business PACs, which can donate only up to $5,000 to a gubernatorial campaign and $500 to an individual state legislative race, with a $100,000 cap on all contributions.
"We don't want people who are averse to the tribe to be making egregious claims about what the tribe is doing and what it intends to do," Mr.
Duffy said.
That has not stopped people from questioning, however, why a small tribe would ship its money so far from home.
"It is my belief that any sound-thinking person would ask why, in this case, an Indian nation would send a significant donation to a political party or elected official in another state," said State Senator Nicholas A. Spano, a Westchester County Republican who asked this month for a Federal investigation into the Pequots' $100,000 contribution to the New York Democratic Party.
Mr.
Spano, an advocate of casino gambling in New York, said in a letter to the United States Attorney General, Janet Reno, that the State Legislature's defeat in July of an amendment legalizing casinos came within days of the tribe's donation, and that the appearances and timing were questionable, though he had no direct evidence of any wrongdoing.
Chris McNeil, a tribal lawyer who heads the Washington lobbying effort, said the Pequots had had absolutely no contact with New York Democrats, and that the state committees that have received money were all suggested by the Democratic National Committee as places where Democrats could use extra help this year.
"There's no connection," Mr.
McNeil said, referring to the gambling issue in New York and the tribe's contribution.
Still, party officials in Iowa and California said that even though the Pequots' national political agenda is vague, their ability to write big checks has not gone unnoticed.
Keeping Track of Friends
Mike Monasmith, a spokesman for the California Democratic Party, said the money had come with no strings attached, but that, if only to protect itself, the party always knows who its friends are.
"We are sure to make sure we know where they money is coming from," Mr. Monasmith said.
In Iowa, Democrats said the Pequots had asked for nothing in exchange for their $50,000 donation.
"We have some good Congressional races and a good chance of knocking out a Republican governor, but how that ties in to the tribe's agenda, I'm not certain," said Ron Parker, a spokesman for the Iowa Democratic Party.
"We have no contact with the Indians."
Here in Connecticut, where the tribe clearly does have an established agenda -- to keep non-Indian gambling operations out of the state -- politicians said they hoped the new Pequot PAC would be low-key about any kind of loyalty pledge.
"It should not be a single-issue PAC and I don't think it will be," said Edward L. Marcus, the Connecticut Democratic Party chairman.
"I'm not sure that would make too many candidates all that comfortable."


Washington at Work; Clinton's 'Ms. Fix-It': A Friendly Link To Black Interests and Big Business
When the House of Representatives trashed President Clinton's anti-crime bill as the sun was going down on an otherwise quiet evening earlier this month, the news hit the White House like a bomb.
But less than 12 hours later, Bill Clinton was standing in front of rows of blue-uniformed police officers in Minneapolis, chiding Congress for inaction.
Two days later he took his family to a black church in Temple Hills, Md., to continue the pitch.


MCI Halts $1.3 Billion Investment in Nextel
MCI Communications canceled its plan today to invest $1.3 billion in Nextel Communications Inc., a wireless communications company that intends to create a nationwide network rivaling current cellular telephone systems.
The companies said they would still try to renegotiate the deal, which had been announced in February.
But today's move casts doubt on Nextel's ambitious effort to use use a digital technology developed by Motorola Inc. to modernize a small band of radio frequencies that were originally reserved for linking private fleets of trucks and taxi cabs.


TRANSACTIONS
Basketball  National Basketball Association  CLEVELAND CAVALIERS -- Re-signed Tyrone Hill, forward, to a multiyear contract.


Observer; In Wonder Land
What an amazing country.
We crossed 434 miles of it by land and 20 or 30 more by sea the other day and ended in a motel room for the handicapped, who are not called handicapped anymore.
Amazingly, almost everything is being renamed.
In Connecticut we resisted a chance to visit a new gambling hell where Indians, recently renamed Native Americans, were relieving the gullible paleface -- now renamed "the Caucasian sucker born every minute" -- of what used to be called plenty big wampum, but has been renamed "millions of bucks."


Lockheed and Martin Marietta Set to merge in $10 Billion Deal
The Lockheed Corporation and the Martin Marietta Corporation announced early today that they had agreed to a merger in an exchange of common stock valued at more than $10 billion.
The combined company, to be known as the Lockheed Martin Corporation, would have annual sales of about $23 billion, making it the nation's largest military contractor.


Ames Department Stores Inc.(AMES,N) reports earnings for Qtr to July 30


China Is Getting Ready for Another Big Splash
Embarrassed by the second drug disqualification of a swimmer this year, China has put together a younger and less experienced national team to send to the seventh World Swimming Championships in Rome this weekend.
With its come-from-nowhere rise in women's swimming and long-distance running over the last two years, China will be trying to stay at the pinnacle of world-class performance in Rome while also trying to convince the rest of the world that it is serious about stamping out the use of performance-enhancing drugs.


Buttrey Food &amp; Drug Stores Co. reports earnings for Qtr to July 30


Return Engagement, Without Regrets Or Broken Noses
It's been eight years since David Puttnam left Hollywood after a tumultuous reign as the chairman of Columbia Pictures.
No studio head in history had upset so many power brokers and defied so many stars so quickly.
"Oh, it got fairly hot and heavy," the British-born producer said with a slight smile as he sat back recently at the Bel Air Hotel before flying back to London.
"I'm both the victim and beneficiary of my character, which is fairly open. In the end you can't reinvent yourself. The problem is there was a fundamental misunderstanding between me and some members of this community."


Lockheed and Martin Marietta Set to merge in $10 Billion Deal
The Lockheed Corporation and the Martin Marietta Corporation announced early today that they had agreed to a merger in an exchange of common stock valued at more than $10 billion.
The combined company, to be known as the Lockheed Martin Corporation, would have annual sales of about $23 billion, making it the nation's largest military contractor.


Dole at a Familiar Crossroads for the G.O.P.
A White House aide was talking the other day about his boss, President Clinton, and the leader of the Republicans in the Senate, Bob Dole of Kansas, who is also about as close as his party comes at the moment to a national leader.
"They aren't really friends, but they aren't exactly enemies, either," the aide said.
"More like a couple of panthers, I guess you'd say, circling each other in a clearing in the jungle."


Boy Fatally Crushed Riding On Elevator
A boy riding atop an elevator in a Brooklyn housing project was crushed to death yesterday when the elevator reached the building's top floor, the police said.
The boy, Raheem Young, 8, was apparently 'surfing,' or riding on top of the elevator as it rose and fell in the Marlboro Houses in Coney Island, said Detective Sonia Burgos, a spokeswoman for the housing police.


Patterns
Strict Meets Sexy
The September cover of Harper's Bazaar has makeup so exaggerated that the model, Nadja Auermann, looks like Grizabella the Glamour Cat about to break into "Memory." The September issue of Vogue, arguably the creator of the look, defines it as "hard-edged glamour that manages to look simultaneously strict and sexy." A photo caption in Allure says, "No one can put on a knee-hobbling skirt and stiletto heels without feeling a little predatory."


Gendis Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to July 30


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; A Year Later, the Dave-ing of America
A year after David Letterman joined CBS and began transforming the landscape of late-night television, the success of his brand of sardonic humor is helping to reshape how consumers are being sold everything from automobiles to lingerie.
Or, as Mr.
Letterman might mockingly put it: Boys and girls, hold onto your wallets!
Lettermania is loose!


Blue Monday Closes Out Mixed Season at Saratoga
The 126th season at Saratoga ended in negative tones today with no replacement for the departed general manager of New York racing, Jerry Lawrence, no political peace with Albany and declines of 11.8 percent in attendance and 14.1 percent in betting handle.
The season also ended with Jerry Bailey beating out Mike Smith for leading jockey, Shug McGaughey beating out Gasper Moschera for leading trainer and one more upset in a long line of them.


At Tanglewood, a Late-Summer Study in Contrast
If Labor Day is the nonscientific dividing line between summer and fall, the end of the Boston Symphony's Tanglewood season is a kind of warning bell here in the Berkshires.
It has been an especially eventful summer here.
Apart from the orchestra's performances, the endeavors of the student musicians at the Tanglewood Music Center and the pop concerts that fill out the schedule, the newly inaugurated Seiji Ozawa Concert Hall was the subject of much curiosity and comment, most of it enthusiastic.
As warning bells go, the finale of this summer's festival was rousing in the most edifying way.
This afternoon, Christoph Eschenbach led an electrifying account of Beethoven's Ninth Symphony, with the Brahms Alto Rhapsody as a contrastingly introspective prelude.
On Friday evening, he had conducted a quirky but generally illuminating Mozart concert.


Daka International Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to July 2


METRO DIGEST
RAISING MATH AND SCIENCE REQUIREMENTS
In two weeks, New York City high schools will begin an ambitious effort to raise the math and science requirements for nearly all its students.
But there are so many hurdles -- from a lack of money for books and teacher training, to concerns about the readiness of most ninth graders for such a change -- that many parents and teachers believe the new requirements will be nearly impossible to meet.
A1.


Researchers Find a Diverse Face On the Poverty in New York City
Challenging the stereotype of the poor as single mothers on welfare who soak up more and more tax dollars, a new study has found that only one in four poor households in New York City is headed by a single parent and that spending on welfare in the city, when adjusted for inflation, has declined by 20 percent since 1975.
In fact, the report, released yesterday by the Citizens Budget Commission, found that Medicaid, not welfare, had been the prime engine of growth in public spending on the poor in the city, particularly in the exploding costs of medical care for the disabled and the elderly poor.


Mookie Gets Caught Up in Game He Loves
Mookie Wilson's timing used to be impeccable.
He joined the Mets in time to reap the benefits of a successful rebuilding of a franchise in the 1980's.
When he left the Mets, he did so just in time for another successful run at a division title in Toronto.


Luxury Car Fight Turns Uncivilized
Some blame the sport-utility vehicles, others the higher income taxes on the very wealthy.
Some claim "90's values" have made the rich self-conscious, while still others argue that fears of health care cost-cutting have made doctors miserly.
Whatever the reason, the luxury car market, roughly defined as cars costing more than $25,000, or about 13 percent of car sales in the United States, is in turmoil, and the calfskin gloves have come off.


Graphic Industries (GRPH,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Former Executive at CBS Is Expected to Join Sony Unit
Jeff Sagansky, who left CBS in June after leading it to leadership in the prime-time television ratings, will be named president of Sony Software later this week, an industry executive familiar with the negotiations between the two parties said yesterday.
The new job, which appears to be created specifically for Mr.
Sagansky, would involve long-range planning for the unit, whose divisions include Sony Pictures, Sony Music and Sony Electronic Publishing.
Mr.
Sagansky would report to Michael P. Schulhof, the president of the Sony Corporation of America, who would continue to oversee Sony Software and is expected to become its chairman.


Grim Commerce in China
While Secretary of Commerce Ron Brown is busy looking for business deals, his Chinese hosts are busy violating human rights -- not overzealous underlings, but the same people Mr.
Brown is meeting with, like Prime Minister Li Peng.
How can the Clinton Administration talk about moving relations beyond the human rights issue when repression, torture and police terror remain basic policy in labor camps, prisons and police stations across China?
Since the Administration "delinked" U.S. trade policy from human rights, Chinese repression has gotten worse.
Even Mr.
Brown's visit, with its see-no-evil theme of "commercial engagement," seems to have become the occasion for a new mini-crackdown, just in case anybody planned to publicize human rights abuses during his presence.


Sidetracking Rights, U.S. Aide Pursues Business in China
Commerce Secretary Ronald H. Brown, leading a high-level business delegation to China, has agreed to take human rights off the public agenda so he and the American corporate executives traveling with him can open a new era of "commercial diplomacy" in the world's fastest growing emerging market, American officials said today.
As the first Clinton Cabinet member to visit China since the President separated human rights concerns from trade policy, Mr.
Brown has publicly avoided any statement about the deterioration of human rights conditions over the last three months or about the security clampdown that has coincided with his arrival.


Jeweler Slain And Village Loses Friend
Alfonso Albrizio was a fixture in Greenwich Village for 35 years, partly because he operated a jewelry store on MacDougal Street that became a favorite of celebrities, but mostly because he had been able to keep a generous heart even as the streets around him grew more mean-spirited and dangerous.
He would buy Marlboros for Crazy Mike, who played guitar outside his shop, give food to the homeless and perform other kindnesses that earned him a reputation as a soft touch, people who knew him said.


COMPANY BRIEFS
ARROW ELECTRONICS INC., Melville, L.I., a distributor of electronic parts and components, has completed its acquisition of Gates/F.A.
Distributing Inc., Greenville, S.C., a distributor of computers and computer equipment.
FIDELITY FEDERAL BANK F.S.B., Glendale, Calif., a subsidiary of Citadel Holding Corp., Glendale, Calif., has finished the sale of assets worth about $418 million.
Under the equity offering, about 21.8 million common shares were sold at $5.25 each.


Squids Emerge As Smart, Elusive Hunters of Mid-Sea
SQUIDS, some of the smartest and most elusive of the sea's creatures, are beginning to give up their behavioral secrets as submarines and robots observe their unique ways of hunting, hiding and just hanging out in deep, cold waters where darkness reigns or only dim rays of sunlight can penetrate.
Little by little, tribal secrets from the earliest days of squid existence are being surrendered for the first time.
Previously seen as primitive and lethargic, deep-sea squids turn out to show surprising alertness and alacrity.
Most boast a range of bioluminescence and subtle coloration that can change quickly, often to elude predators and perhaps to attract mates as well.


Baker Firm Withdraws Counsel Plan
Baker &amp; McKenzie, the giant international law firm, is withdrawing an offer to represent investors in a failed partnership sold by Prudential Securities because of ethical concerns about the terms of the offer, a partner in the firm said yesterday.
The firm offered earlier this month to represent investors in the partnership, Madison Plaza Associates, in filing claims to a settlement fund established in October.
Prudential settled securities regulators' charges of fraud in the partnership sales.


Sizzler International Inc.(SZ,N) reports earnings for Qtr to July 24


Guide to Desktop Publishing Without Any Paper
IN less than half a century, computers have revolutionized the way we handle information and have enormously increased the amount of information we are able to deal with.
But "we still communicate mainly by smearing ink across dead trees," as Nathan Myhrvold, Microsoft's head of advanced technology, put it.
Mr.
Myhrvold is quoted in "Paperless Publishing" (Windcrest/McGraw-Hill; $27.95), by Colin Haynes, a "complete turn-key package to publish over the information highways, by modem, on floppies and CD's."


Leo Guzik, Lawyer, 90
Leo Guzik, a retired lawyer who was active in Jewish causes, died on Saturday at the Belmont Manor Nursing Home in Belmont, Mass.
He was 90.
The cause was a stroke, his family said.


Seaman Furniture Co. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Priest Who Aided President Is Killed by Gunmen in Haiti
A Roman Catholic priest who once saved the life of the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide, the fellow cleric who was later elected Haiti's President, was killed by automatic-weapon fire late Sunday a few feet from his order's house.
The Rev.
Jean-Marie Vincent, 49, the leader of a grass-roots peasant movement in Haiti's remote northwestern district, was a close friend of Father Aristide, now in exile after being ousted in a 1991 military coup.


Merger Talks Have Cooled
D'Arcy Masius Benton &amp; Bowles has been negotiating to acquire Eisaman, Johns &amp; Laws, an agency with offices in Los Angeles, Chicago and Houston, but the talks have died down.
"We've had discussions," Dennis R. Coe, president at Eisaman, Johns in Los Angeles, said yesterday, confirming a report of the negotiations this week in Adweek.
He added, however, that recently the talks "have cooled" and declined further comment.


Scott Paper to Pay Directors Shares
Shares of the Scott Paper Company traded at a record $65.875 on the New York Stock Exchange yesterday after the company announced that the nine outside members of its 11-member board would be compensated solely in company stock.
The action, believed to be the second such arrangement at a large corporation, is the latest development in the company's aggressive, high-profile restructuring by its chief executive, Albert J. Dunlap, who joined Scott in April when the stock was at its yearly low of $37.25.


Rosa Parks Robbed and Beaten
Rosa L. Parks, whose defiance of segregation in 1955 led to the bus boycott in Montgomery, Ala., and helped touch off the black civil rights movement, was robbed and assaulted in her house here this evening, the police reported.
Mrs.
Parks, 81, was treated at Detroit Receiving Hospital for facial injuries and had swelling on the right side of her face.
Initially listed in good condition, she was released without being admitted to the hospital.


Sexual Assault Occurs in Park
A 44-year-old woman was sexually assaulted in Prospect Park late Monday night by a man who had struck up a conversation with her and then threatened her with a box cutter, the police said yesterday.
The assault, which occurred in a wooded area near the tennis house off the West Drive about 10:30 P.M., was the fourth this year, said Sgt.
John Garrity, a supervisor in the Brooklyn Special Victims Squad.
There were nine sexual assaults in 1993.
Sergeant Garrity said the assault did not fit a pattern with the previous assaults.
Police Program Under Way
The incident occurred during the second week of a police program in which volunteers keep on the lookout for crime as they go about their recreation in the park.
The volunteers carry phones that connect directly to 911 and wear vests that identify them to other park users.
Most, though, have usually left the park for the night about 9 P.M.


Police Arrest 6 After Discovery of Stolen Cars
Tipped off by an informant who noticed that few repairs seemed to be made at Rodriguez &amp; Rodriguez Auto Repair on Flushing Avenue in Maspeth, Queens, detectives went inside yesterday and found 10 stolen cars, the police said.
Six men were arrested, including the owners, Juan and Thomas Rodriguez, who were accused of running a small but sophisticated car theft ring that cleared more than $200,000 a week.


When Will Woods Take Talent on Tour?
If he were a tennis player, there would be no decision for Tiger Woods to make.
If he belonged to that fraternity of the self-absorbed, unappealing athletes performing over at Flushing Meadows for the next two weeks, he would go to college for a year, maybe, and then he would be rich and on the road to bored.
He would have an agent at International Management Group and there might even be a clothing line in the works.
Limos?
Private jets?
Sure.
Since he is a golfer, these things will have to wait awhile.
The question is, how long?
How long until Tiger Woods, at 18 years of age the youngest winner in the history of the United States Amateur, turns pro?


Corrections
Two recipes in The Living Section last Wednesday with an article about Faith Heller Willinger, an American who leads food tours in Italy, misstated the fat content in their nutritional analyses.
Pasta With Raw Tomato Sauce contains 10 grams of fat, and Spaghetti With Green Tomato Sauce contains 12 grams.


German Resistance Coin
To the Editor:
At a time when neo-Nazism is resurgent in Germany, one must applaud the German Government.
It has just issued a new 10-mark coin commemorating the German resistance of 1933-45 and, more particularly, the attempt by German patriots in July 1944 to overthrow the Nazi regime.
Such courage under current world conditions must not go unnoticed.
JOSEPH WINSTON  Rye, N.Y., Aug. 26, 1994


Savion Glover and a Fusillade of Tap, in the Park
"Dancing Under the Stars," a program of tap dancing presented on Monday night at the Delacorte Theater in Central Park, was a dance lover's dream.
It was a sad day when free summer dance departed from the Delacorte some years ago, for the theater's sightlines and natural backdrop are unrivaled among outdoor performing spaces.
Monday's program, part of a Shakespeare Festival series of free events, offered a chance to enjoy some of the best young and older stylists in tap today, among them Savion Glover, James (Buster) Brown and Lon Chaney.
The trend is now toward large tap ensembles and large-scale choreography, and much of the individuality of the form is getting lost.
Tap dancers once learned the art on city street corners, not in studios, and it was everyone for himself.
Out of a root fund of tap steps and combinations came improvisations and elaborations that then became part of the body of tap, spurring others to take the form where they would.
To see Mr.
Glover dance is to see a virtuosic and authentic artist at work.


In 1991, a Drug That Killed 17
Three years ago, in one of the worst cases of multiple overdose in the New York area, 17 people died from a powerful synthetic drug that was being sold as heroin.
An additional 200 users were hospitalized.
The drug, a depressant called fentanyl, is used to sedate patients undergoing surgery.
An overdose of the drug causes nausea and tightening of the chest muscles and can lead to cardiac arrest.


Walter Raines, 54, Dancer and Choreographer
Walter Raines, a dancer and teacher who was a charter member of Dance Theater of Harlem and the director of its school, died on Sunday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 54.
The cause was AIDS, said Jeffrey Hankinson, his cousin.


New York City's Investigation Dept. Needs More Independence
To the Editor:
To understand the institutional problems of a Department of Investigation directly under the control of City Hall, one need merely apply Federal analogies to the Investigation Department inquiry into the alleged free-rent problem of Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani's election campaign.


On Bullfighting as Ritual and Code of Machismo
"Only the Brave," Sonia Herman Dolz's handsome documentary film about bullfighting, scrupulously avoids taking sides in the controversy over the spectacle that is more than Spain's national sport. .
Opponents of bullfighting, none of whom are addressed in the film, regard the it as a form of animal torture.
To its legions of supporters, including the breeders of the animals that are slain in the ring, it is a time-honored ritual that conflates religious and esthetic ideals with a lofty code of machismo.
The movie, which opened today at the Film Forum, lets its images speak for themselves.
It shows how the bulls used in combat are bred to be hot-tempered and aggressive.
Long before they enter the ring, they are confined in pens where they are teased and prodded in order to make them more short-tempered.
Once in the ring, they are goaded to charge by toreros waving capes and later by horsemen who implant barbed ornamental sticks in their withers.


Bert Knapp; News Broadcaster, 76
Bert Knapp, a news broadcaster for the radio station WMCA in New York City, died last Wednesday at Branford Hospital in Connecticut.
He was 76 and lived in Wallingford, Conn.
The cause was cancer, his family said.


And Still Cubans Flee: 1,300 More Picked Up
Cubans continued their steady exodus from their homeland on handmade rafts today, making haste before political changes here and in Washington that they fear could prevent them from leaving.
The United States Coast Guard said that it had picked up more than 1,300 refugees by nightfall, a sign that the exodus was expanding after a weekend lull in which bad weather kept many from leaving.


An August Fizzl To Summer Sizzle
The sky was a stubborn blue and the few bodies on the sand here this afternoon were roasting quite nicely, but Michael Brown was hardly festive.
Even though it was a great day, a great beach day, the sunshine was not going to rescue his rental business after a chilly, waterlogged August that seemed to slam the door shut on summer a month early.
Across the New York region, people with fantasies of cocoa-buttered vacations on local beaches, lazy weekends concocting feasts on the backyard grill or, like Mr.
Brown, cash registers stuffed with profits, have often been disappointed.
August, they have discovered, has borne only a faint resemblance to its recent cousins, the flamboyantly tropical July and June.


Conde Nast Official Is Headed for Hearst
Anne Sutherland Fuchs, a longtime executive with fashion and women's magazines, is leaving Conde Nast Publications for a new top position at Hearst Magazines as executive shuffles between the two competitors increase.
Hearst said yesterday that Ms.
Fuchs, 47, will become senior vice president and group publishing director in New York, effective Tuesday.
She will have principal operating responsibility for two of Hearst's oldest titles, Harper's Bazaar and Town &amp; Country, as well as its newest, Marie Claire, a joint venture with Marie Claire Album that published its first American issue on Aug. 16.


Lockheed-Marietta Merger Aims to Survive Lean Times
In one sweeping stroke, two leading military contractors, the Lockheed Corporation and the Martin Marietta Corporation, have reordered the landscape of their industry by proposing a $10 billion merger -- the largest ever in their industry -- that signals that survival in the military industry will require the power of a behemoth.
The proposed merger, announced yesterday just after midnight, continues a steady drumbeat of takeovers, combinations and mergers in the military industry that has only grown louder as the Pentagon's budget has declined.


U.S. Backed on Possible Invasion of Haiti
Intensifying the pressure on Haiti's military rulers to step down, the United States won support today from Caribbean nations for a possible invasion if economic sanctions and diplomatic entreaties fail.
Foreign ministers and military commanders from the 13-member Caribbean Community and Common Market backed a United Nations-approved invasion to restore the exiled President, the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide.


Cruise Line Fined For Discharging Oil
A Federal judge fined a cruise ship company that pleaded guilty to dumping oil in the Atlantic $500,000 and ordered it to establish an environmental program to prevent another such spill.
The case was the first criminal prosecution under a law approved by Congress after the tanker Exxon Valdez spilled more than 10 million gallons of crude oil off Alaska in 1989.
In May the company, Palm Beach Cruises, S.A., and its main owner, the Grundstad Group, agreed to plead guilty to two felony counts of oil dumping, and today Judge Stanley Marcus approved the agreement between the company and the Justice Department.


BUSINESS TECHNOLOGY: Reporter's Notebook; On-Line Ads to Tempt the Hungry Computer Nerd
McDonald's advertisements began appearing on the America Online consumer information network earlier this month.
While McDonald's is the epitome of fast food, its ads on line take a long time to digest.
On-line advertising has been risky for companies hoping to reach new markets through computer networks.
McDonald's recognized that even computer geeks have to eat, however, so it created a "McDonald's Interactive" area on the country's fastest-growing consumer network.


British Petroleum Finds Gas in Colombia
British Petroleum P.L.C. said yesterday that it had made an important discovery of natural gas near its huge Cusiana and Cupiagua oilfields in Colombia.
The company estimated that the recoverable reserves were about five trillion cubic feet of gas, the energy equivalent of one billion barrels of oil.
The Cusiana and Cupiagua fields, which are some 120 miles northeast of Bogota, have been the industry's only huge oil find since the Prudhoe Bay reserves in Alaska were identified about 30 years ago.


Gold Mine of Psychiatric Data Discovered in Danish Registry
DENMARK, known for its superbly crafted furniture, stereo systems and silverware, also offers state-of-the-art psychiatric epidemiology.
Denmark's unparalleled combination of a universal social welfare system and obsessive record keeping has made the country a world laboratory for teasing out subtle patterns in psychiatric data, particularly for severe disorders like schizophrenia, that can be detected only in studies of thousands of people.


Military Mega-Merger
Yesterday's announcement that two giant defense contractors -- Lockheed and Martin Marietta -- plan to merge into a single huge company is the most dramatic evidence yet of the changes now roiling the defense industry.
Such mergers appear almost inevitable as companies struggle to survive in a sharply declining market for military procurement.
Done carefully, consolidation may be the best way to preserve a strong defense industry.
The only concern is whether the company will become so dominant that it can dictate prices and terms to the Pentagon without fear of competition.
The proposed merger deserves the strongest possible scrutiny by either the Federal Trade Commission or the antitrust division of the Justice Department, which needs to show it has recovered from somnolence during the Reagan and Bush Administrations.


Giants Send Calloway To the Starting Line
Mark Jackson was not stunned by the news, just a bit surprised.
He was no longer starting, something he had done quite well for five of his eight National Football League seasons.
"I think I had a good camp, but I think the Giants are looking toward their future," he said Monday, explaining better than anyone the emergence of Chris Calloway, the fifth-year wide receiver.
"He was in some good situations when he's been in, and he's made the plays."


Castro's Resilient Masses
The 9-year-old Cuban boy with the cataract in his eye showed me the condoms he had used as balloons at his birthday party.
He pulled out the single stick of gum he'd been chewing for a week.
He brought over the two tattered photo albums he'd stuffed with pieces of Carnation labels, stickers that said "Knorr's Soup" and ads for Nescafe -- status symbols in the Havana fourth grade.
His mother, a policewoman and a staunch Fidelista who refused to accept gifts from a visitor, proudly pointed out photos of her cousins' suburban home and Nissan in Miami.
Everyone in Cuba knows that the country is bankrupt; everyone knows that almost anything must be better than the steady supply of nothing that the Government offers.
Everyone can see that the whole island is shuddering to a halt, like the 40-year-old Plymouths that line the streets of a city where gasoline is illegal.
Prostitution, which was scarcely visible (if only for security reasons) five years ago, is pandemic now: the tourist hotels are filled with Cuban teen-agers reddening their lips with children's crayons.


Ruling in Abortion Protest
A judge today refused to dismiss two prior misdemeanor charges against the man accused of murdering an abortion clinic doctor and his volunteer escort on July 29.
Six weeks before the shotgun slayings of Dr.
John D. Britton, 69, and his escort, James H. Barrett, 74, the man charged with their deaths, Paul J. Hill, was charged with disorderly conduct and violating the city's noise ordinance while protesting in front of an abortion clinic here.


In Crisis Over Cuba, Moderates and Castro Supporters Cry Out to Be Heard
In meetings with the White House and in large demonstrations here, the message heard from Cuban exiles has mostly been the same: no negotiations with Cuba, out with Fidel Castro.
But heard less often are voices from other parts of the broad political spectrum among the exiles, voices often overwhelmed by the political and economic power wielded by conservative groups opposed to any dealings with Mr.
Castro.
They are the voices of other representatives of the Cuban-American community who advocate talks with the Cuban leader and oppose harsh measures like a naval blockade of the island, saying they want to avoid further hardship for those in Cuba.


Metropolitan Diary
DEAR DIARY:
While strolling recently in the vicinity of New York University in Greenwich Village, I saw several young girls jumping rope.
I thought jump ropes, together with marbles and hopscotch, had long ago disappeared.
So, remembering my childhood, I approached with curiosity, hoping to hear my favorite:


Quest for the Delights Of Jamaica
THE section of Flatbush Avenue near Church Avenue in Brooklyn is known as the Caribbean heartbeat of America.
If Flatbush is the heartbeat, the side streets are its arterial pulses, where small storefront restaurants, seating 12 to 30 people, make some of New York City's tastiest Jamaican food.
The cuisine is a homage to the deep flavors elicited when food is marinated for at least 24 hours and braised slowly.
It is food that will seduce anyone who is in Brooklyn over the Labor Day weekend for the annual West Indian festival, which culminates on Monday with a parade.


Japan Plans Payment for Forcing Women Into Brothels During War
Seeking to resolve an issue that still haunts its dealings with its neighbors, Japan has decided to commit $1 billion to programs intended as symbolic compensation to tens of thousands of women from Korea and other nations who were forced to have sex with Japanese soldiers during World War II.
Under the plan, which the Goverment will announce today, the money would be spent over 10 years on programs such as youth exchanges with other Asian nations and on support for historical research on Japan's wartime activities, officials said.
Japan is also planning to build a vocational training center for women in the Philippines.


Rape Victim's Sisters Make Television Ad for Koppell
In a television advertisement that began airing today, the first of his campaign, Attorney General G. Oliver Koppell uses the sisters of the victim in a highly publicized rape case to help depict him as a skilled and dogged lawyer with a passionate commitment to justice.
An aide to one of Mr.
Koppell's three opponents in the Sept. 13 Democratic primary quickly branded the commercial as political exploitation.


McNeil Is Swiftly Escorted To Exit
Some incipient signs of a changing of the guard in women's tennis were evident yesterday afternoon at the National Tennis Center.
If you consider Lori McNeil to be a member of the guard, that is.
The 30-year-old McNeil, the conqueror of Steffi Graf in the first round at Wimbledon earlier this summer and a longtime resident in the women's top 20, was ousted in an opening-round match yesterday, a short stroll away from all the clatter and din of the Stadium, out on Court 18.


13 Heroin Deaths Spark Wide Police Investigation
They call it China Cat, an exotic name for a blend of heroin so pure it promised a perfect high, but instead killed 13 people in five days.
The victims included a piano tuner from TriBeCa and a man found dead in his Upper East Side apartment.
Although they came from all across Manhattan, the police say they believe all the victims bought the heroin where undercover officers bought it, on the Lower East Side.
The latest body was discovered on Monday in midtown near a railroad track bed with sloping hills on either side.
The man, in his 40's, was found on 51st Street between 10th and 11th Avenues, said Ellen Borakove, a spokeswoman for the city Medical Examiner's Office.
The area, dense with ferns, pine scrubs and abandoned tires, is frequented by homeless people, some passers-by said yesterday.


Hornsby Wasson, 89, Executive For Bell Telephone Companies
E.
Hornsby Wasson, a senior telephone company executive who became embroiled in a government lawsuit over interlocking corporate directorates, died on Saturday at a nursing home in Chattanooga, Tenn.
He was 89 and lived in Chattanooga.
The immediate cause of death was "natural causes due to advanced age," a Pacific Bell spokeswoman said.
She said no further details were available from the family.


Knowledgeware
The share price of Knowledgeware, a computer software company whose chairman is Fran Tarkenton, the former football star, dropped sharply yesterday, after it reiterated that it would have a large loss for the quarter and the year.
Knowledgeware also said that Sterling Software was renegotiating its deal to acquire Knowledgeware.


Dole Urges Postponement For Approval Of Trade Pact
Only a few days after helping turn back President Clinton's vision of universal health care coverage, Senator Bob Dole has begun urging that Congress not act until next year on another issue important to the Democratic White House, a global free trade pact.
Mr.
Dole, the Senate minority leader, said in an opinion article that appeared in The Wichita Eagle on Sunday that while he supported the 117-nation pact, he and his constituents in Kansas had many questions about its cost and its effects on American labor and environmental laws.


U.N. Gives Up on Talks to Resolve Haiti Crisis
United Nations Secretary General Boutros Boutros-Ghali said today that he was giving up trying to persuade Haiti's military leaders to step down peacefully after they refused to accept the high-level mission that he considered his final attempt.
In turn, the Security Council promptly issued another blistering condemnation of the junta.
By ending his mediation efforts, the Secretary General has now effectively left the Clinton Administration with a choice between two policy options, diplomats here say.


All-Time Team Shares the Memories
One by one, they walked you through their careers, guided only by memory and a mangled finger or two.
There was Ray Nitschke's separated shoulder and Ronnie Lott's partly amputated pinkie.
"We all played with pain," Lott said. "Especially the throwback guys."


Personal Health; Helping the depression-prone to quit smoking.
NOW that only one American adult in four smokes cigarettes and now that smoking, the nation's leading health hazard, has become a public nuisance largely restricted to the outdoors, many people cannot understand why any intelligent person would continue to smoke.
Knowing that many long-term smokers may be addicted to nicotine does not fully explain their failure to quit, especially since many other addicted smokers, as well as people addicted to alcohol and other mind-altering drugs, have managed to become former addicts.


No. 1 Traffic Headache
To the Editor:
Although any efforts by the traffic authorities that would help relieve the auto congestion in New York City are welcome, it is important to put things in proper order of priority.


A Cartoonist Feasts on a President. So?
SORRY, "Doonesbury," President Clinton is not the first world leader to be caricatured as an item of food: a century and a half ago, the hated King Louis Philippe of France was savaged as an overripe pear.
The image stuck, and in French "pear" became slang for "fathead."
If you read a newspaper that doesn't have comics like "Doonesbury" and wonder what this is all about, for 10 days the strip has been portraying the President as a breakfast waffle.
Straight-cornered, not soggy from syrup, the waffle at first chatted with a well-dressed aide who appeared to be Joshua L. Steiner, the Treasury Department functionary who disavowed his damaging diary about the White House's handling of the Whitewater affair.


When Hospitals Cut Nurses, Patients Suffer
To the Editor:
When there are not enough nurses in hospitals, patients suffer.
Infections rise; surgical complications increase; changing vital signs are not quickly noted; side effects of medications are not discovered as early; patients are not instructed in the correct use of their medications and other therapeutics; and patients do not receive general comfort and caring attention in a protected way.


Romping, Writhing, Howling: The Usual
Arena rock is the realm of excess, a sphere of larger-than-life gestures and cartoonish exaggeration.
After two decades as a hard-rock hit maker, Aerosmith is perfectly at home in that realm, perfectly familiar but by no means stale.
Aerosmith has enough commercial clout to have been a headliner at Woodstock '94; in the movie "Wayne's World 2," it had already headlined the fictional rock festival Waynestock, proving it doesn't take itself too seriously.
While Aerosmith has held on to some old fans, its songs about unbridled lust keep drawing new throngs of teen-agers; Steven Tyler, its 46-year-old lead singer, mocked his high-school principal at one point.
Yet between, and sometimes during, its leers, Aerosmith brings intelligence and wit to music that never forgets to be stupid fun.


Girl Who Thinks She Has AIDS To Stand Trial in Biting of Guard
A teen-ager who believes she has the AIDS virus, prosecutors say, was ordered today to stand trial as an adult on charges of attempted murder and aggravated assault for biting a juvenile-detention officer.
Judge J. Wilson Noden of Family Court here granted a motion by the Mercer County Prosecutor's office to have the teen-ager, Nilieta Bethea, 17, tried as an adult in Superior Court.
Miss Bethea, of Trenton, is accused of biting a guard on March 18, 1993, at the Mercer County Youth House, where she is still detained.


Corrections
An economic analysis in Business Day yesterday about the Clinton Administration's efforts to curb mortgage discrimination misstated the current position of Alicia Munnell, the former chief economist at the Federal Reserve Bank in Boston.
Ms.
Munnell is now the Assistant Secretary of the Treasury for Economic Policy, not the deputy director of the Office of Management and Budget.


'Surf Kings' Make Comeback Along the New Jersey Shore
Northern kingfish largely disappeared from our waters by the mid-1960's, and with them went a whole culture of summertime surf casters who would fill seaweed-lined baskets and steel pails with the delicious "kingies." Known for decades as king whiting or surf king, the fish still evokes faded, black-and-white images of cigar-chewing fishermen clad in porkpie hats, long khaki pants and madras camp shirts.
But now the kingfish seems to be making a comeback in parts of its range, particularly along the Jersey Shore.


China Agrees to Resume Talks With U.S. on Human Rights
Claiming both diplomatic and commercial victories today, Commerce Secretary Ronald H. Brown said he had won a commitment from Chinese leaders to resume a high-level dialogue with the United States on human rights.
At the same time, Mr.
Brown said that his trade mission to China had led to the signing of agreements totaling $4.9 billion with Chinese Government industries.


Slaying of Priest Heightens the Fear in Haiti
The blood-stained place on the street where the Rev.
Jean-Marie Vincent was killed has been anointed with burning candles and wilted flowers, but it is hard to tell whether faith or fear is stronger in Haiti today.
Followers and admirers of Father Vincent, 49, the close friend of President Jean-Bertrand Aristide who was shot to death on Sunday night, said the slaying was a clear message from the military-backed Government and the uniformed and civilian thugs who serve it.
The message: We can do anything we want to now.


Wolf Takes Options Instead of Cash
The Wolf Group in Toronto said yesterday that it had agreed to be compensated by a client, Medical Polymers Technologies in Austin, Tex., with an option to buy stock in the company rather than be paid in cash.
Larry Wolf, Wolf's chairman, said he believed the agreement would eventually pay off because of the products that Medical Polymers was developing in areas like denture adhesive film seals.
Under the agreement, Wolf has a four-year option to purchase up to 500,000 shares of Medical Polymers common stock at 20 percent above its price at the end of June, which averaged 62 cents a share.
That option comes in lieu of a $300,000 cash payment, Mr.
Wolf said.


Cologne Journal; Germanist and Optimist (About the 21st Century)
Lev Z. Kopelev's friends knew he was not through with politics when he moved to Cologne 13 years ago and settled in to devote himself to the study of German culture, which he had made his life's work.
At age 82, he has outlived the Soviet Union, which forced him to spend years as a political dissenter.
He was cast into Stalin's prisons and ultimately was forced to leave the country before the authorities deprived him of his Soviet citizenship.


Galeries Lafayette to Close Its Doors
Galeries Lafayette, considered one of the world's premier purveyors of French fashion, said yesterday that it was closing its store on 57th Street and Fifth Avenue in Manhattan, withdrawing from its initial attempt to crack the American retail market less than three years after opening the outlet.
On the heels of the announcement, Donald J. Trump, the store's landlord, said that the space, which is adjacent to Trump Tower, would be replaced by Nike Town, a multimedia retail extravaganza created by one of world's most successful marketers of American fashion.


Krajicek Survives Nightmare on Court 16
The match points kept passing, one after another.
Richard Krajicek, who had six lined up, whose mind was already drifting to a shower and back rub in the locker room, couldn't win any.
First, Jan Siemerink clocked a service winner off his racquet.
Then Siemerink rifled a passing shot by him.
Krajicek tapped a volley wide.
Siemerink served and volleyed for6-4.
He served and volleyed again for 6-5.


No Comeback This Time


Christine Potts, 36, Specialist on Russia
Christine Lynn Potts, a Russian affairs expert on the staff of the National Security Council at the White House, died on Thursday at her home in Arlington, Va.
She was 36.
She died of cancer, her family said.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-11  HAVENS OFFERED FOR CUBANS  Panama and Honduras said they would offer safe haven to 15,000 Cubans, the first countries to offer more than a token response to the Clinton Administration's plea for help with Cuban refugees.
A1  CUBAN EXODUS CONTINUES  Cubans continued to leave, fearing political changes that could end their chance to emigrate, with the United States Coast Guard estimating that the total for the day would be around 1,000.
A10


Avon Williams, 72, Lawyer Who Fought To End Segregation
Avon N. Williams Jr., a civil rights lawyer and former State Senator in Tennessee, died on Monday at Meharry-Hubbard Hospital in Nashville.
He was 72.
The cause was complications from amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, also known as Lou Gehrig's disease, said his daughter, Wendy Williams.


Sports of The Times; New Suits' Guideline: Do No Harm
ONCE again there will be new suits in Madison Square Garden.
Before they make any more chomping noises, the two new suits (sharkskin, we assume) should ask themselves just exactly what led the Rangers to the Stanley Cup and Knicks to the seventh game of the finals.
Only a mindless tyrant would expect the two Garden teams to match that next season.
The real mission for the new suits is to observe the philosophy attributed to the Greek healer, Hippocrates: Above all else, do no harm.


Owners and Players Agree on One Point
Baseball's club owners made a decision yesterday that was not unexpected: They postponed their quarterly meetings that had been scheduled for next week in Detroit.
But in a development that has been rare in the 20-day-old strike, labor and management actually agreed on something.
The commissioner's office proposed and the union agreed that today would not be the day, unlike every other season, that post-season rosters had to be set.
Of course, there may never be a post-season this year, but the agreement does represent the most progress the two sides have made since the players walked out Aug. 12.


Bailey Gets Second Chance To Win Back Starting Job
After a sleepless night, Carlton Bailey showed up for work this morning at Giants practice.
Bailey found that his coach, Dan Reeves, was a bit more understanding, and that he now will have a fair opportunity to regain a starting position.
"I found out today that the job was still open," said the 29-year-old Bailey, who was benched in favor of Corey Widmer on Monday and asked to take a 50 percent cut in salary.
"At the beginning of yesterday, I was told that he Widmer was going to be the starter and that was it. I felt that wasn't fair and so I told Coach Reeves. But we talked about things today and Coach Reeves has given me the opportunity to win the job back. All I want to do now is just go out there and take back what I feel is mine."


Never Mind the Mess
Less than two weeks after the Clinton Administration vowed it would never let Fidel Castro dictate a change in U.S. immigration policy, Washington is ready to offer Mr.
Castro the policy change he seeks.
In talks beginning tomorrow in New York, the Administration will propose a sharp expansion in legal immigration from Cuba if the Castro regime agrees to halt the mass exodus of raft people it began permitting earlier this month.
The shift is embarrassing for an Administration already famous for its serial flip-flops in foreign affairs.
But the proposal makes sense for both Governments and could prevent desperate Cubans from risking their lives at sea.
It is a case of a messy process lurching toward a worthy goal.


Reinforcements for an Endangered Species


U.S. Petroleum Data
In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
Aug. 26
Aug. 19
Aug. 27
1994
1994
1993
Gasoline production, daily
7.2
7.4
7.3
Distillate production, daily
3.4
3.3
3.1
Gasoline stocks
209.4
207.5
200.4
Distillate stocks
132.6
134.7
124.6
Crude imports, daily
7.2
7.5
7.9
Product imports, daily
2.1
2.7
1.8
Crude stocks
322.9
325.7
347.0
Crude production, daily
6.5
6.5
6.8
Refinery utilization (%)
95.6
95.0
93.7
Source: American Petroleum Institute


How Tanglewood's New Hall Sounds
"A modern concert hall is considered a success if it's not an abject failure," said Douglas Yeo, a trombonist in the Boston Symphony Orchestra, when asked his opinion of the new Seiji Ozawa Concert Hall here at Tanglewood.
"But this hall actually sounds good. Not that there isn't some tuning to be done. But when you consider that the hall was designed to function both as an enclosed space and with its back open to the lawn, you can see how great the potential for disaster was. And they've staved it off."
Ever since the Boston Symphony opened the new hall on July 7, it has been a topic of conversation among both concertgoers and musicians here.
Its 1,200-seat hall has been well packed on evenings when concerts (mostly recitals, chamber music and choral programs) were offered, and most performances have drawn several hundred concertgoers happy to listen from the lawn, which affords subtly amplified sound and a view of the stage.
And at the height of the summer, there were so many visitors to the hall during the day, when students from the Tanglewood Music Center rehearsed there, that the musicians complained that they were distracted and signs were posted saying that the rehearsals were private.


The Fracturing of the Middle Class
Since last Labor Day, the economy has generated more than 2.5 million jobs for Americans.
But despite this progress, long-term trends are splitting the old middle class into three new groups: an underclass largely trapped in center cities, increasingly isolated from the core economy; an overclass, those in a position to ride the waves of change; and in between, the largest group, an anxious class, most of whom hold jobs but are justifiably uneasy about their own standing and fearful for their children's futures.
The fundamental fault line through the labor force divides workers by education and skills.
As recently as 1979, a male college graduate earned 49 percent more than a man with only a high school diploma -- a sizable difference, to be sure, but not too much for the two to share the label "middle class." By 1992, the gap had widened to 83 percent, and the notion of common prospects had faded considerably.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Guerlain of France is working to raise its profile in the U.S.
AS a marketer of premium-priced fragrances, cosmetics and skin-care brands, Guerlain is formidable in its native France but no larger in this country than the mole on Cindy Crawford's face.
So the venerable company hopes to raise its profile here with advertising that asserts a somewhat heretical notion: each woman is beautiful in her own way -- with a little help from Guerlain, of course.


Missing Baseball? Try Cricket
SUFFERING baseball deprivation, we went to Van Cortlandt Park to watch cricket.
In point of fact, we have not been driven as loopy as those of our neighbors who are actually attending Little League games involving other people's children or watching minor league games on television.
Still, we do miss Phil Rizzuto, and we keep wondering whether the birth rate is going to go up next April, as it supposedly did nine months after the blackouts that darkened New York City in 1965.


Funds for Youth Programs Are Shifted to New Groups
The Giuliani administration has stopped providing money to nearly 150 community organizations that offer youth programs in New York City, while signing contracts with nearly 100 similar groups that had not previously provided services for the city, officials said yesterday.
Testifying before a City Council committee, officials of the Department of Youth Services said the changes reflected a shift in policy on how contracts were awarded, taking into account the strength of the proposals submitted by the community organizations.


Former Congressman Sets the Pace on the Road to Hartford
John G. Rowland has been traveling across Connecticut for months now, hammering away at the four issues that he says residents want their next governor to address: jobs, crime, education and welfare.
His message is relentless.
Mr.
Rowland, a 37-year-old Republican who narrowly lost the 1990 election to Lowell P. Weicker Jr., is far and away the best-known candidate this time, and he wants very much to shape the race while he can.


CUTS IN MEDICARE ARE ON THE TABLE, BUT PERIL IS SEEN
Even while spurning most of President Clinton's health care plan, members of Congress have eagerly accepted one part of the original proposal, which would take money from Medicare and Medicaid to help finance health insurance for people without coverage.
The President's dream of universal health insurance appears to be dead in this Congress.
But his proposal to set stringent limits on the growth of Medicare and Medicaid is very much alive in the more modest proposals still being considered in the Senate and the House.


Top Officials Share Skill And Vision
When Norman R. Augustine, chairman and chief executive of Martin Marietta, published "Augustine's Laws," a collection of aphorisms about business and bureaucracy, his first law was this:
"The best way to make a silk purse from a sow's ear is to start with a silk sow."


Subway Rape Victim Tries to Prove Agency Was at Fault
Adjusting the earphones of her Walkman, the young administrative assistant entered the subway at 40th Street and the Avenue of the Americas during rush hour to go home to New Jersey.
She started down the long pedestrian tunnel, toward the PATH train at 33d Street.
As she passed a stairway at 38th Street, a man grabbed her from behind and dragged her to a large metal plate that had been propped against the wall by construction workers.
Shielded from rush-hour commuters, he raped and robbed her.
Although she and transit police officers chased him, he escaped and was never caught.


A Diversified 3Com Rides Technology Rally Cautiously
As information technology stocks continued their recent surge yesterday, shares of one of the companies riding the rally, the 3Com Corporation, reached an all-time high.
For a midsized computer networking company with a name little known beyond Silicon Valley, the milestone might seem to deserve only passing mention.
But for 3Com, which less than four years ago was teetering on the brink of extinction, with its shares trading below $6, yesterday's closing stock price of $68.25 and its intraday high of $69.125 signified a remarkable technological turnaround.


For a Colorful and Cool Salad, Call On the Tomato
SUMMER'S beautiful red, yellow and green tomatoes -- yes, even ripe green tomatoes -- are at their peak, and with the season's heat and humidity, a cold meal featuring tomatoes sounds just right.
One recent evening at the Markham, a restaurant in Greenwich Village, a salad of tomatoes, grilled bread and greens -- sort of a bruschetta salad -- hit the spot.
Two orders made the perfect meal.


Goodhue Livingston, City Planner, Dies at 97
Goodhue Livingston Jr., an independent investor and a former member of the New York City Planning Commission, died on Sunday at his home in Wainscott, L.I.
He was 97 and was active as an investor until shortly before his death.
Mr.
Livingston, who described himself as "for the most part an enrolled Republican," was a member of the Planning Commission from 1945 to 1960.
He once recalled that Mayor Fiorello H. La Guardia had said that he chose Mr.
Livingston for the commission because he thought Mr.
Livingston would stand up to the master builder and planning titan Robert Moses.
And indeed, Mr.
Livingston recalled that the two men differed often.


No Headline
"The potential now exists to move the situation toward a democratic and peaceful settlement." GERRY ADAMS, speaking for the Irish Republican Army.  [ A1:5. ]


Knicks Re-sign Williams
Herb Williams, the 36-year-old reserve center who was shopping his services as a free agent, has re-signed with the Knicks, the team said yesterday.
"Several contending teams were also interested in Herb, and we are happy to have him back," said Ernie Grunfeld, the Knicks' general manager.
The contract is for two seasons, according to a person familiar with the deal, but financial terms were not announced.


Off the Menu
Return From Judson Grill
For six years, Tropica, owned by Restaurant Associates in the Met Life Building, was a showcase for Ed Brown's cooking.
Last winter, Mr.
Brown left to become the chef at Judson Grill, 152 West 52d Street, an affiliation that lasted only six months.
Now, Restaurant Associates has welcomed him back.
He has become the chef at the Sea Grill, 19 West 49th Street, in Rockefeller Center, a job that seems to be tailor-made for someone who prefers to cook seafood.
"He wants to be known as the foremost seafood chef in the city," said Nick Valenti, the chairman of Restaurant Associates.
"I think it's a perfect match."


A Louder Katydid? Not in My Backyard
To the Editor:
Living in the area of New Jersey known as the Highlands and being a nature observer myself, I was surprised to read that this year's nightly chorus of katydids is "Louder, definitely louder," the conclusion you reach in "A Bumper Year for Bugs" (editorial, Aug. 24).
While I agree with your assessment for mosquitoes and cicadas, I beg to differ with regard to the katydid.


Rosh ha-Shanah is international in Israeli kitchens: C6


Megan's Legacy
New Jersey's State Assembly acted unwisely and hastily this week when it rushed through legislation responding to the death last month of Megan Kanka.
The little girl was lured by a man who had served six years in a facility for sex offenders into his home in Hamilton Township, N.J., where he raped and strangled her.
Like Megan's family and neighbors, the legislators were properly outraged to discover that Jesse Timmendequas, twice convicted of sexually assaulting young girls, had been living undetected in Megan's neighborhood.
But the bills they passed to appease that rage were approved without public hearings.
Indeed, two of the bills may be constitutionally shaky.


For 2 Youths, No Indictment In a Killing
A grand jury yesterday decided not to indict two Brooklyn teen-agers in the death of a man they killed after he robbed their cousin at knifepoint.
People familiar with the case said that the grand jury found that the teen-agers, who hit the man with a metal fence post, had justifiably used deadly physical force to keep the robber from fleeing and to hold him for the police.


Katherine Zierleyn, Headmistress, 87
Katherine Zierleyn, headmistress of the Greenwich Academy in Connecticut from 1955 to 1975, died on Aug. 17 at the Porter Hills Presbyterian Village in Grand Rapids, Mich.
She was 87.
She suffered a long illness, the academy said.


Buying by Fed Raises Treasury Issues' Prices
Prices of Treasury securities rose moderately yesterday, as the Federal Reserve went into the open market to buy securities of various maturities, easing a seasonal shortage of money in the banking system.
The central bank said it was buying Treasury issues with maturities beginning with February 1995.
Securities dealers are usually happy when the Fed comes to market to buy, traders say, because it gives them an opportunity to lighten their inventory of securities.
And because some market participants had expected the Fed's action, it was not surprising to see prices pushed higher.


The Sudan Withdraws From U.N. Cairo Conference on Population
The Sudan has decided to boycott a United Nations population conference that is to open here next week and will organize a forum to fight the conference's recommendations, the official Sudanese radio said today.
The decision was announced a day after United Nations officials said that Saudi Arabia had pulled out of the conference, stirring wide concern about a potential boycott by Islamic nations.


CHRONICLE
Forget Woodstock.
Wigstock '94 rears its little Dynel head on Sunday in Greenwich Village with a new venue, new headliners and new outfits for LADY BUNNY (John Ingle) a founder of the 10-year-old drag festival, which bills itself as "one big party of love, peace and wigs."
"We're carrying on the rich tradition of wearing wigs in this country," said Lady Bunny, who presides at the all-day stage show in high hair and much marabou.
"Remember, our forefathers wore wigs."


A Folk Veteran Familiar With the Dark Side
On Monday night at the Bottom Line, Maddy Prior, a singer best known for her work with the 25-year-old British folk-rock band Steeleye Span, interspersed solo songs with short poems.
One poem, "Spirits," began, "In the morning I am spiritual and meditate on life," and ended with a description of the evening, when the narrator succumbs to a combination of futility and brandy.
Like this poem, Ms.
Prior's set moved from hope to despair.
At the beginning of the show, in "Somewhere Along the Road," a song written by her husband, the former Steeleye Span bassist Rick Kemp, Ms.
Prior sang of a future filled with love and happiness.
But by the time she sang her final song, "Twa Corbies," a traditional Scottish ballad about two carrion crows preparing to dine on a freshly killed knight, Ms.
Prior had replaced her optimism with nihilism.


Hostility to Castro Won't Solve Cuba Problem; A Human Chess Game
To the Editor:
Fourteen years ago, we in Miami absorbed more than 100,000 refugees over a very short time.
Our social services network was overwhelmed, and the very fabric of our community was put at risk.
Our Governor had to sue the Federal Government to force Washington to shoulder its share of responsibility for this influx.


A Perilous Journey Across the Waves


Courier Is Resurgent After His Brief Respite
Perhaps Jim Courier should kick off his sneakers, stuff his racquets in his gear bag and wave goodbye to tennis on a periodic basis.
If the hardnosed, unforgiving and evidently revitalized strokes he used to crush Aaron Krickstein last night at the United States Open are any indication, Courier's temporary break-up with the sport he claims to love has apparently made his heart grow fonder.
Exactly two weeks ago, Courier described his Open plans as uncertain following a second-round loss to Alex Corretja in Indianapolis.
Overwrought and emotional -- not to mention overtired after a vacationless 1994 where all of his hard work had done nothing to remedy a 21-event drought without a title -- the 12th-ranked Courier vowed to walk away from his sport for as long as it took him to like it again.


Schumacher's Ban Is Upheld
MICHAEL SCHUMACHER met his match on the Formula One circuit yesterday when the International Automobile Federation's court of appeals, meeting in Paris, upheld his two-race suspension, forcing the runaway Grand Prix points leader to the sidelines for the next two races.


STORYTELLING WITH: Sara Lawrence-Lightfoot; The Black Bourgeoisie: A 90's View
OUTSIDE, Sara Lawrence-Lightfoot's town house looks like the one on "The Cosby Show." Inside, its rooms are full of the accouterments of middle-class life: books, paintings, artifacts from traveling.
A golden-brown woman with perfect posture and comb-pinned hair, Dr.
Lawrence-Lightfoot, a Harvard University sociologist, stands in the living room next to the piano, on which sits a sculpture of her daughter, Tolani, 13, and son, Martin, 11.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  *
Del Monte Corp., San Francisco, filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission to sell $150 million of senior notes through Salomon Brothers.


Deal's Antitrust Issue Is Test for White House
The proposed merger of the nation's second- and third-largest weapons makers is bound to test how the Clinton Administration can reconcile two conflicting policies: encouraging the consolidation of the military industry while aggressively enforcing Federal antitrust laws.
The combination of Lockheed and Martin Marietta -- the largest military-industry merger in American history -- would produce the second-largest aerospace company, behind Boeing, and the largest military contractor.
It may also force still more mergers in an industry that has responded slowly and painfully to the end of the cold war and the rapid decline in military spending.


Hostility to Castro Won't Solve Cuba Problem; Baltic Boat People
To the Editor:
The efforts of Haitians and Cubans to reach the United States brings to mind another similar wave -- the desperate voyages of people from the Baltics trying to reach the United States in small boats just after World War II.
Their stories, now nearly forgotten, add long-term perspective to today's situation.


A Hooker Who Yearns For the Simple Life, And Finds a Simpleton
For 10 sniggery minutes, "Milk Money" actually has something to do with pre-adolescent sexuality.
It tells what happens when three sex-obsessed junior high school boys pool their money to raise $100, which they plan to pay some woman -- any woman -- for taking off her clothes.
In search of a candidate, they bicycle from their suburb to a nearby city, their faces flushed with the thrill of adventure.
Richard Benjamin, laboring under the idea that this is an enchanting premise, directs such episodes as if he were Norman Rockwell in a trenchcoat.


N.B.A. Rejects Dudley Pact
As expected, the National Basketball Association yesterday disapproved the contract that center CHRIS DUDLEY signed with the Portland Trail Blazers on the grounds that it violates league salary cap rules.
On Monday, the Trail Blazers announced that Dudley had opted out of the seven-year, $11-million contract he signed last season and signed a new six-year deal with an average salary of $4 million per season.


Digging Up a Tale of Terror Among the Osages
The Deaths of Sybil Bolton
An American History
By Dennis McAuliffe Jr.
Illustrated. 337 pages. Times Books. $23.
"The Deaths of Sybil Bolton" is about murder, money and mixed blood in the lethal, wild West.
It starts in the 19th century and takes a sharp turn in the 20th, one we have never taken in all the westerns that fill our dreams and our movie screens.
We find ourselves in Pawhuska, Okla., in the 1920's, and it is not a sleepy one-horse town.
It is an oil-rich jazz age town with marble buildings and smart shops.
The richest people in Pawhuska are Osage Indians: they lease their land to aspiring oil barons with names like Getty and Sinclair; they employ thousands of itinerant oil field workers. (One of them is a young roustabout named Clark Gable.)


U.S. Pins Its Hopes on Dividing the Serbs' House
The United States, frustrated in its attempt to engineer a Bosnian settlement, is eyeing a new policy for ending the war: defeat or ouster of the Bosnian Serb leaders with the help of their former patron, the Serbian President, Slobodan Milosevic.
It is a high-risk policy -- for the Clinton Administration and for President Milosevic.
But after the Bosnian Serbs' crushing rejection of an American-backed peace plan for Bosnia in a referendum, it has emerged as the only alternative to an increase in the fighting.


It's a Burning Issue: Owners Are Losing In Game's Fire Sale
What they now call the marketing of baseball might better be called a fire sale.
That's how attractive the product of major league baseball is, with the lords burning down the house while trying to figure out ways to sell the sport, if and when the strike of 1994 ends.


Corrections
Because of a production error, an article on the Media Business page on Monday about Steven Hewitt, the executive vice president of the Showtime Entertainment Group, included several scrambled passages in some copies.
Readers wishing corrected copies of the article may write to Production Quality Control, The New York Times, 229 West 43d Street, New York, N.Y. 10036.


2 More Hints Of Economic Slowdown
More signs of economic slowdown emerged today as surveys showed lower confidence among consumers and business executives.
And although the Government reported that sales of new houses rebounded more sharply than expected in July, the outlook in the industry is still for little or no growth in sales in the months ahead.


California Trying to Close Worthless-Diploma Schools
Since its founding in 1977, More University has had an eccentric vision of higher education.
It has no campus and no library.
Classes like Basic Sensuality and Basic Hexing are taught in people's homes.
Instructors must be More alumni.
Students can get a Master of Humanities in communication for $30,000, a doctorate in philosophy and sensuality for about $50,000.


Fujitsu Wins Chip Patent Case in Japan
In a blow to Texas Instruments Inc., a court in Japan ruled this morning that Fujitsu Ltd., Japan's largest computer company, was not infringing the American company's patent covering the basic invention of the integrated circuit.
The decision could hurt the efforts of Texas Instruments to profit from its patent portfolio.
During the last few years, Texas Instruments, based in Dallas, has earned hundreds of millions of dollars a year by aggressively seeking royalty payments from other companies.


Borland's Board Re-elected Despite 2 Funds' Opposition
Borland International Inc.'s board was re-elected at a shareholder meeting today, despite the opposition of two leading pension funds that charged that the board, and specifically Borland's chairman and chief executive, Philippe Kahn, had failed to protect shareholder value.
The California Public Employees' Retirement System, known as Calpers, said today that it voted to oppose the re-election of Borland's board at the meeting, which was held in Redwood City, Calif.
Last week, the College Retirement Equities Fund -- a component of the TIAA-CREF pension system -- said it would oppose the board.


METRO DIGEST
13 HEROIN DEATHS IGNITE POLICE INQUIRY
They call it China Cat, an exotic name for a blend of heroin so pure it promised a perfect high, but instead killed 13 people in five days.
The victims included a piano tuner from TriBeCa and a man found dead in his Upper East Side apartment.
Although they came from all across Manhattan, the police say they believe all the victims bought the heroin where undercover officers bought it, on the Lower East Side.
A1.
NEW YORK CITY


2 LATIN NATIONS PLAN TO ACCEPT CUBAN REFUGEES
As the number of Cubans sailing toward Florida jumped sharply, Panama and Honduras today gave the Clinton Administration a boost in its struggle to handle the refugees by announcing that they would provide "safe havens" for a total of 15,000.
Panama and Honduras are the first countries to offer more than a token response to Washington's strenuous efforts to persuade Caribbean countries to help provide for the flood of boat people.


F.C.C. Is Investigating Defaulters in Auction
The Federal Communications Commission said today that it was investigating possible misrepresentation and gross misconduct in the recent auctions of radio licenses for interactive video services.
The commission sold about 598 licenses last month for $217 million as part of its first attempt to auction part of the airwaves.
But 17 percent of the winning bidders, including the two largest, defaulted on their down payments.


Food Notes
For Labor Day Picnics
If Labor Day signifies a respite from kitchen chores, it pays to take advantage of the picnic baskets that many carryout shops and restaurants are assembling.
The baskets come equipped with plates, utensils and napkins.
Orders should be placed by Saturday at the latest in order to pick up for Monday.
Here is a sampling:
9 JONES STREET , which is a restaurant at that address (near Bleecker Street), packs a durable canvas picnic bag with a particularly copious assortment of well-seasoned foods.
Included are fried chicken, sliced steak, tamarind shrimp, lentil salad, roasted tomato, cheese, cookies, water and breads.
The food serves two for $36.
Telephone: (212) 989-1220.


Hostility to Castro Won't Solve Cuba Problem
To the Editor:
While I fully agree with Anna Husarska's primary plea that we not "set Cuba adrift" (Op-Ed, Aug. 23), I must take vigorous exception to both her logic and the underlying animus in her position.


Dow Gains 18.45 and Tops 3,900 First Time Since Feb. 22
Cautious stock traders pushed stock prices slightly higher yesterday, as bond prices rose and the dollar fell ahead of today's scheduled report on factory orders for July.
The Dow Jones industrial average closed above 3,900 points for the first time since Feb. 22, when the Dow hit 3,911.66 after the Federal Reserve Board on Feb. 4 knocked stock prices askew with the first of its five increases in short-term interest rates.


Indian Boys' Exile Turns Out to Be Hoax
When two young convicted robbers were released last week to a man who said he was an Indian tribal judge empowered to punish the boys by banishing them to a pair of remote islands in Alaska, the case drew international attention.
Never before had an American court allowed defendants to be punished by banishment.
But a judge here in Snohomish County, north of Seattle, was assured that it was a traditional form of Tlingit justice, and it was hailed by some as a bold and innovative move in a criminal justice system gone awry.


Reeves's Demands of Giants Are Not for Fainthearted
In the movie "Clear and Present Danger," in between the handsome hero Harrison Ford's outrunning drug dealers and grenades, he gets some good advice from James Earl Jones, his C.I.A. cohort, as the walls begin closing in: "Watch your back, Jack."
No one will ever confuse football players with Central Intelligence Agency agents, but the advice holds true in the Giants' locker room.
Get the job done, or Coach Dan Reeves will be a clear and present danger.


Gorillas, Still in Rwanda's Mist
War is indiscriminate, greed is a human constant, and mountain gorillas are prized by poachers as well as zoologists.
As Rwanda succumbed to genocide this spring, dooming as many as 500,000 people, it seemed sadly likely that the slaughter would also doom 60 rare gorillas that have drawn tourists to the Virunga Mountains for the past 15 years.
For the moment, however, Rwanda's gorillas have escaped harm, which is splendid news.
Still, the widespread sigh of relief will be muted.
Amid so ghastly a human catastrophe in Rwanda, one may feel an uneasy twinge of guilt in worrying about the fate of non-humans.
In truth, all living things are bound together in this calamity, and gorillas are a small evolutionary link away from Homo sapiens.


A Sociological Look at Modern Life in Beijing
"The Days" was shown as part of this year's New Directors/New Films series.
Following are excerpts from Caryn James's review, which appeared in The New York Times on March 29.
The film opens today at the Papp Public Theater, 425 Lafayette Street, East Village.
Who knew there were slackers in China?
"The Days" examines the personal boredom and professional frustration of two painters in their 20's, an unmarried couple who have been together since art school.
Now teachers, they still live in a tiny apartment in Beijing more suited to students than to adults, and are stymied about the future.
Xiaodong is an intense-looking man, with large glasses and a roomful of paints and canvases.
But as the narrator says, "He dreamed of nothing but being rich," and the fantasy paralyzed him.
"He couldn't even paint." Xiaochun is so ready to leave the relationship and the country that she writes to relatives in New York and hopes to join them.


In America; A Season Of Service
Think of it as an antidote to cynicism, a rejection of the rampant selfishness that managed somehow to become fashionable in the 1980's.
Think of it as a return to the can-do spirit of the 50's and 60's, when large numbers of Americans believed it was possible to find remedies for violence and injustice, for poverty and ignorance, for the buffoonery and corruption of politicians, and for the wholesale degradation of the environment.
"I challenge a new generation of young Americans to a season of service," said Bill Clinton in his inaugural address.
"There is so much to be done -- enough, indeed, for millions of others who are still young in spirit to give of themselves in service, too."


INSIDE
A Vanishing Banishing Judge
A man who claimed to be a tribal judge was a fraud, Indians say, and he and the robbers he promised to banish have disappeared.
Page A12.
French Retailer's Retreat
Galeries Lafayette will close its store in Trump Tower in Manhattan, marking the French retailer's retreat from the American market.
Page D1.
It's Definitely Not the Heat
A generally chilly, waterlogged August has seemed to slam the door shut on summer a month early in the New York region.
Page B1.


Management and Labor Shed Some Light
Hockey's labor picture brightened a bit yesterday, when executives from the National Hockey League and the Players Association negotiated for five hours in Toronto over terms of a new collective bargaining agreement.
Commissioner Gary Bettman and Bob Goodenow, the executive director of the players association, led their respective groups in the first face-to-face bargaining session since Aug. 18.


Wine Talk
THERE has been much talk in recent years about something called "the wine lake." Of course, there is no such thing; not literally, anyway.
There have been wine-filled swimming pools, even a few water towers.
Or so they say.
But no lake.


Market Place; A 'merger of equals,' with Martin Marietta the most equal.
LOCKHEED initiated the merger, the largest ever in the American military industry.
And Lockheed's chairman will be the chairman and chief executive of the new company, Lockheed Martin.
But make no mistake -- Martin Marietta is taking over Lockheed.
It is Lockheed shareholders who are getting the premium, and it is the Martin Marietta management that is getting the key jobs in the combined entity.
The new company will be based at Martin Marietta's headquarters in Bethesda, Md.


I.R.A. Said to Be Close to Truce To End Violent Ulster Campaign
The Irish Republican Army was widely reported today to be ready to announce a cease-fire in a move that might end its violent 25-year campaign to expel British troops from Northern Ireland.
Reports of the I.R.A.'s likely move came from people close to the outlawed organization and from officials in the Irish Government, which has been pressing a peace initiative in the North.


Five Charged In Plot to Sell Phony ID's And Licenses
An employee of the State Motor Vehicles Department and four other people were charged today with selling fraudulent drivers' licenses and other documents used for personal identification.
Authorities said the five sold or conspired to sell more than 200 fake documents for $600 to $800 each.
Such documents are used for a number of purposes, including creating new identities, applying fraudulently for government benefits and creating the appearance of false citizenship.


Schools Getting Tough on Guns in the Classroom
When students in Corpus Christi, Tex., report for school this fall, they will be greeted by dogs trained to sniff out guns.
In San Diego, students are reporting to new schools built without lockers, eliminating what school officials say is the most common hiding place for guns.
And in Charlotte, N.C., students in some schools will not be able to carry book bags from class to class because they can conceal firearms.
Driven by an increasing number of shootings in classrooms, hallways and on and near campuses, school systems across the country this summer enacted tough and often hotly debated anti-gun regulations to eliminate weapons from most public high schools and some junior high schools.


A Welder's Hand Helps Keeps History Alive


Deaths Won't Halt Anti-Drug Flights in Peru
As grieving United States drug agents left here this morning to retrieve the bodies of five colleagues whose surveillance plane crashed Saturday in the Andes, American officials said the tragedy would have no effect on their anti-drug efforts in Peru.
Thomas Constantine, administrator of the Drug Enforcement Administration, said in an interview from Washington that while more agents died in the crash than in any other incident in the agency's history, reconnaissance flights over the Andes, where most of the world's cocaine is produced, were necessary to provide information to Peru, Bolivia and Colombia about drug trafficking.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Reshaping the Arms Industry
A merger of Lockheed and Martin Marietta would reshape the arms industry.
The $10 billion deal continues a steady drumbeat of takeovers and mergers that has grown only louder as the Pentagon's budget declines in the post-cold-war era.  [ Page A1. ]


Simpson, the Court Case. Simpson, the Curriculum.
While O. J. Simpson's lawyers are constructing a case that they hope will set him free this fall, teachers of law and other disciplines will be deconstructing the case in their classrooms.
A biology professor in Buffalo is using the case to draw students into a section on DNA fingerprinting.
A statistics professor in Baltimore is collecting data from the case to teach students about probability in blood analysis.
And law teachers in Vermont and California plan to use the case in their criminal law courses.


Caribbean Pressure on Haiti
The 13-member Caribbean Community and Common Market supported a United States plan for a possible invasion of Haiti if economic sanctions and diplomacy fail to remove its military leaders.
Page A8.


COMPANY BRIEFS
BNF BANCORP, Decatur, Ala., said its shareholders had approved its acquisition by Union Planters Corp., Cordova, Tenn., a multibank holding company, for about $48.8 million in stock.
FRONT ROYAL INC., Cary, N.C., signed a letter of intent to acquire three insurance companies from Waite Hill Insurance Group, a unit of Figgie International Inc., Willoughby, Ohio, for an undisclosed price.


Transit Officer Gets Surgery
Officer Desmond Robinson of the transit police, critically wounded by a New York City police officer last week in a shooting incident in the subway, underwent three hours of surgery yesterday to repair damage to one of his kidneys.
Friends of Officer Robinson and the lawyer representing his family said the operation -- microsurgery to reconnect his kidney with his urethra -- had been termed successful by doctors at Bellevue Hospital Center.
A spokesman for the hospital said yesterday evening that Officer Robinson's condition remained stable.


Junk Loans, Not Bonds, Are Hot on Wall Street
As the underwriting of junk bonds has begun to cool this year, some Wall Street firms are aggressively moving into a business that until now has been the preserve of commercial banks.
Call it junk loans.
In recent months, Merrill Lynch &amp; Company, Lehman Brothers Inc., CS First Boston and Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company have raided the ranks of the commercial banks, hiring away executives experienced in the art of putting together corporate loan packages and assembling groups of banks to put up the cash.


No. 3 Is Good Enough For Foley
Glenn Foley was at his home in Cherry Hill, N.J.
It was Sunday, the day all National Football League teams had to trim their rosters to the regular-season limit of 53 players.
The Jets seemed sure to drop one potential No. 3 quarterback: Foley, the heralded rookie from Boston College, or Jeff Blake, a third-year pro.
But which one?
Foley's phone rang.
It was a friend who said he had just heard on the radio that the Jets had waived Blake, meaning Foley had made the team.


Mansell Back to Formula One
NIGEL MANSELL, the former world champion, is returning to Formula One racing with the Williams-Renault team for the last three races of this season.


Pride Overcomes the Pain as Martin Storms Back
Just last week, Todd Martin, seeded ninth at the United States Open, admitted that a stubborn injury was threatening his self-esteem by making him too sore to display the pride and joy of his game: his dogged accuracy whether under pressure or safely ahead on cruise control.
Without those reliable strokes, said Martin, he couldn't be proud of himself or his game.


Hostility to Castro Won't Solve Cuba Problem; Everybody's Business
To the Editor:
Pamela S. Falk's recommendations (Op-Ed, Aug. 25) for admission of Cuban raft people and negotiations with Fidel Castro show two dangerous assumptions that have confounded United States management of immigration in recent decades.


TRANSACTIONS
Football  National Football League
ARIZONA CARDINALS -- Signed Kevin Knox, wide receiver; Chris Swartz, quarterback; Perry Carter, cornerback, and Darryl Hardy, linebacker, to the practice squad.


Report Urges Better Safety for Blimps
Federal investigators examining the Fourth of July crash last year that left a deflated blimp draped over the side of a mid-Manhattan apartment house said yesterday that rip-resistant fabric and improved safety devices on blimps might help prevent such crashes.
The National Transportation Safety Board recommended that "rip-stop" fabric be required in all blimps, and that better warning devices be installed to alert pilots to changes in pressure.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
7.75
7.75
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
4.00
4.00
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
4.63
4.78
3.19
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.57
4.61
2.99
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.88
4.93
3.10
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.19
7.23
5.44
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.46
7.49
6.09
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.29
8.34
7.00
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.36
6.37
5.60
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


CHRONICLE
Until now, the New York Landmarks Conservancy has always honored historic buildings at its annual benefit.
But this year the conservancy is giving citations to six notable New Yorkers as the city's "first living landmarks." Presumably, the citations will prevent the facades of the honorees from being altered.
PEG BREEN, the conservancy's president, came up with the idea last winter when she bumped into former Gov.
HUGH L. CAREY at a political dinner.
Ms.
Breen used to cover the Carey Administration when she worked for "Inside Albany" on public television.
So they go way back.


Compuserve To Offer Link To Internet
Compuserve Inc., one of the world's largest commercial information services, said yesterday that it planned to become a global service provider for businesses and individuals wanting to connect to the Internet.
The company, a division of H &amp; R Block based in Columbus, Ohio, already has the computer network infrastructure in place to compete in the small but rapidly growing business of providing Internet access, Maury Cox, president and chief executive of Compuserve, said.


Jordan Looks to Fall League
MICHAEL JORDAN may go on playing baseball until December.
The Chicago White Sox yesterday asked the Arizona Fall League for permission to allow Jordan to play in its coming season.


Daly Is Out Following Scuffle
The fallout from JOHN DALY's scuffle in a parking lot at the World Series of Golf has begun.
Daly, 28, who was already nursing back problems, has been forced to withdraw from a PGA European Tour event this week because he injured his back further on Sunday after being wrestled to the ground from behind.
"He's hurt bad," Daly's agent, JOHN MASCATELLO, said yesterday.
"It's bad enough that he isn't going to be able to play this week and we're not sure when he might be able to get back."


